Sino-Indian Border Clashes

The latest clashes between Chinese Communist and Indian troops along the Assam border may be the result of Chinese operations against remnants of Tibetan rebel bands seeking refuge in the rugged hill country. The clashes occurred in territory claimed by both Peiping and New Delhi; the Chinese seem determined to stand firm on their claims in this area, and further incidents are likely.

Reporting the incidents to the Indian Parliament on 28 August, Nehru said that an Indian outpost on the northeast frontier was taken by the Chinese on 7 August. It was later recovered, but 12 Indian soldiers were captured in a more serious engagement on 25 August. In replying to New Delhi's protest over these incursions, Peiping said the Indians fired first and accused India of "collusion" with Tibetan rebels.

Nehru has declared repeatedly since 1950 that his government would defend the territory lying south of the Mac-Mahon Line in Assam in which the Chinese incursions have taken place. He has placed the entire northeast frontier area under military command, commenting that "there could be no alternative policy for us but to defend the country's borders and integrity." He cautioned, however, against panic and resort to any "wrong action."

The Indians have also reported Chinese troops in the disputed Ladakh area of Kashmir. The Chinese have built a road through the Indian-claimed portion. An Indian patrol sent into the area was captured in July by Chinese troops and later released.

Nehru’s detailed account of the "continuing cases" of "Chinese aggression" in Assam and Ladakh will be regarded by most Indians as confirmation of the recent spate of press stories warning of Chinese "expansionist" aims. The government is likely to be under heavy pressure from Parliament and press to make good on its pledge to resist any Chinese encroachment along the Tibetan frontier.

Nehru apparently is willing to negotiate minor questions of border demarcation, but is not prepared to discuss the

29 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
