[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

13 February 1960

Copy No. C 67
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
13 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

New Indian note to Peiping does not advance prospect of negotiations on border dispute.
Israel asks US for military aid.
Iranian foreign minister dissatisfied with lack of progress in improving Iranian-Soviet relations and concerned over continuing Soviet radio attacks on Shah.
Tunisia recalling its ambassadors to NATO countries, presumably for discussion of Bizerte issue.
French forces in Cameroun, in response to prime minister's request for aid, planning military action against dissidents in southwest on 15 February.

III. THE WEST

Panama--New demonstrations against US Canal Zone policies planned.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sino-Indian Border Dispute: Strong conservative pressure and fear of probable adverse public reaction apparently have caused Nehru to modify his previously reported intention to invite Chou En-lai to New Delhi for talks on the Sino-Indian border dispute.

Nehru also told Parliament on 12 February--the day after Khrushchev addressed that body--that there is no bridge between the Chinese and Indian positions and therefore no room for negotiations on the basis of present positions.

Israel: The United States has been asked by Israel for military aid, including jet fighters, tanks, artillery, and missiles, in order to "restore" the balance of power in the Middle East which it says has been upset by Soviet arms deliveries to the UAR. The Israeli note suggested increased US economic assistance, which would enable Israel to obtain weapons elsewhere, as a possible alternative to direct military support. Israeli armed forces at present are regarded as superior to those of the Arab states, but the Israelis claim their "deterrent capability" could disappear within three years. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
*Iran-USSR:
the "abnormal" state of Iranian-Soviet relations so that he might "confer with the influential Soviet authorities," expressed concern over the continuing sharp personal attacks against the Shah in Soviet radiobroadcasts and over the absence of Ambassador Pegov from his Tehran post.

had seen Khrushchev twice and that the Soviet premier complained that Iran's foreign policies do not "make it possible to stop the broadcasts," but repeated previous assurances that he is "opposed to offensive statements." In a subsequent interview with A. P. Pavlov, head of the Soviet Foreign Ministry's Middle East section, who reportedly stated that Khrushchev had given orders "to stop the offensive broadcasts." Pavlov charged Iran's bilateral defense pact with the United States violates Tehran's treaty obligations with the USSR and that Pegov had been "ignored" by Iranian authorities. Pavlov also reiterated Moscow's demand, which had led to an impasse last December, that Iran agree to ban foreign bases of all types. The Shah, in a recent talk with Ambassador Wailes, indicated that Iran would not go beyond its offer to give the USSR a written guarantee not to allow foreign long- and intermediate-range missile bases in Iran.

Tunisia: The government is recalling its ambassador to all NATO countries, presumably for consultation on the issue of the French base at Bizerte. Even though President Bourguiba, in deference to President de Gaulle's preoccupation with Algeria, postponed his popular "battle for Bizerte" which was to have commenced on 8 February, Tunisia remains determined that French troops shall be withdrawn. The Tunisian ambassador to Washington anticipates that the Bizerte question will be submitted to the UN Security Council. Bourguiba's consultations with these ambassadors may indicate that he hopes to enlist NATO assistance in persuading France to meet Tunisia's demands.

Cameroun: French forces in Cameroun, in response to Prime Minister Ahidjo's recent request for assistance, are reported planning to begin concerted military action on 15 February against terrorists and rebellious tribesmen who control areas of

13 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
southwestern Cameroun. British security forces based in neighboring British Cameroons are to support the new offensive by tightening border controls. This resort to overt French military support is likely to set back Ahidjo's campaign to gain acceptance within the growing bloc of independent African states and will probably inspire new denunciations by the USSR, which has already publicly condemned Ahidjo's decision to request French military assistance. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Panama: New demonstrations against US Canal Zone policies are being planned and could take place as early as 15 February by the instigators of the anti-American disturbances in November 1959. Some American officials in Panama believe that recent US Congressional criticism of Panama's desire to fly its flag in the Canal Zone have induced a "state of widespread ferment" exceeding that which preceded the November demonstrations. Panamanian Government spokesmen have commented that National Guard forces would not intervene in any anti-US outburst unless Panamanian property were damaged. The US ambassador feels that a new demonstration at this time would be "on a vaster scale and more violent than the November incidents, probably involving bloodshed." (Page 4)

13 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel Requests US Military Aid

Israel has asked the United States Government for military aid to "restore" the balance of power in the Middle East which it says has been upset by Soviet arms deliveries to the UAR. If the equipment sought is not obtained, Israel's "deterrent capability" will be completely annulled within two or three years. At present Israel's armed forces are regarded as superior to those of the Arab states.

requested the US either to supply Israel with listed items of military equipment without requiring payment or, as an alternative, to extend Israel enough additional economic assistance to enable it to acquire the desired materiel elsewhere. The Israelis want jet fighters and fighter bombers, transport aircraft, tanks, artillery, missiles, and a large quantity of electronic equipment.

The Israeli request may have been hastened by recent UAR negotiations,

the Soviet Union now is willing to provide the UAR an additional 15 aircraft by the end of September 1960. The aircraft involved apparently are more advanced models than either the MIG-17 jet fighters or IL-28 jet bombers the UAR already has.

Israel arms procurement problems may now be more difficult in view of the reluctance of France, long Israel's chief source of weapons, to make new military aid commitments to

13 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
Tel Aviv. De Gaulle's regime has been less responsive to Israeli arms requests than were previous French governments because De Gaulle hopes to improve French relations with the UAR.

13 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
CAMEROUN

Department boundary
UNCLASSIFIED
[PAGE 10]
French Offensive Against Terrorists in Cameroun Reported Near

Direct and concerted military action by French forces against rebellious tribesmen and politically motivated terrorists in southwestern Cameroun will begin on 15 February, according to the British charge in Yaounde. Heretofore French Army units based in Cameroun were officially confined to border control activities. Last month, however, Prime Minister Ahidjo formally requested their tactical deployment in direct support of operations against the dissident elements, which include followers of the exiled extremist leader Felix Moumie.

French forces remain in Cameroun, the former French-administered UN trust territory which became independent on 1 January, under a military accord signed with the Ahidjo government last December. They were recently reinforced to an estimated strength of 2,200 men.

The main thrust of the projected offensive, which British officials in the area have agreed to support by tightening controls on their side of Cameroun's frontier with British Cameroons, will be aimed at Bamileke Department, most of which now is apparently controlled by the dissidents. French General Briand, who is in effective control of the entire operation, has stated his forces would act as "gently" as possible in the hope of rallying the people--many of whom are reported aiding the dissidents either voluntarily or as a result of pressure tactics by terrorists.

This resort to overt French military support seems likely to set back Ahidjo's campaign to gain acceptance within the bloc of independent African states. The militant leaders of Ghana and Guinea, in particular, will claim it proves their contention that Ahidjo is a French puppet maintained in office solely by the French Army.

An Izvestia article in late January sharply criticizing Ahidjo's decision to request French assistance probably foreshadows intensified bloc attacks on Ahidjo's regime once the planned offensive gets under way. Despite its past support of Moumie, Moscow sent a delegation to Cameroun's independence celebrations and has offered both diplomatic relations and economic aid.

13 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Panamanians Plan New March on Canal Zone

Nationalistic student groups, civic organizations, and political extremists in Panama are reliably reported to be planning new marches against the Canal Zone on 15 February or 1 March, or possibly on both dates. Students at the University of Panama finished their final examinations on 12 February; 1 March is National Constitution Day and also the peak day of the annual pre-Lenten carnival.

The demonstrators would try to plant Panamanian flags in the zone to protest US failure to acknowledge Panamanian titular sovereignty over the zone. American officials in Panama believe that Congress' recent refusal to allow Panama to fly its flag in the zone has induced a "state of widespread ferment" far surpassing that which preceded the anti-US outbursts in November 1959.

While Panamanian Government spokesmen have indicated concern and have promised to do everything possible to discourage the demonstrations, they also warned that the National Guard would intervene only if Panamanian property were damaged by mobs. Firm government action against anti-US mobs, however, could easily precipitate a popular uprising.

Any anti-US violence would be inspired by an extremist minority, but there is considerable evidence to indicate that such a course would receive much broader public support than last November's outbursts. The US ambassador believes any new demonstration would assume greater proportions than earlier incidents and probably involve bloodshed.

13 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
