[PAGE 01]
21 June 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. YUGOSLAV-SOVIET COMMUNIQUES
(page 3).

2. OKINAWA LAND ISSUE CAUSING PRE-ELECTION
FUROR IN JAPAN (page 4).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 6)

[PAGE 04]
1. YUGOSLAV-SOVIET COMMUNIQUES

Comment on:

The communiqué on party relations
issued at the conclusion of President
Tito's visit to the USSR reveals agree-
ment to expand party contacts consid-
erably. The framework for increased party relations
conforms closely to the preconditions set by Yugoslavia.

The two parties acknowledged that
"the roads and conditions of socialist development are
different in different countries." The declaration states
that party co-operation "should be based on complete free-
dom of will and equality, on friendly criticism, and on the
comradely character of exchange of views on disputes be-
tween our parties."

References to the pressing need for
"co-operation of all progressive and peaceful forces" sug-
gest that the Yugoslavs may assume leadership in develop-
ing popular fronts and increased international contacts be-
tween Communist and Socialist parties.

A separate governmental communiqué
issued simultaneously does little more than document the
issues on which Tito has previously indicated agreement
with the USSR. It supported Communist China's admission
to the UN, endorsed the cut in Soviet forces as a step toward
partial disarmament, urged talks between East and West
Germany to bring about reunification, supported the removal
of obstacles to free trade, and called for aid to underdevel-
oped countries through the UN. The communiqué proposed
no new measures in bilateral governmental relations, but
merely endorsed a continued expansion of trade and scientific
and cultural relations.

[PAGE 05]
2. OKINAWA LAND ISSUE CAUSING PRE-ELECTION
FUROR IN JAPAN

A recommendation by an American
congressional committee that the
United States purchase additional land
for bases on Okinawa, as well as land
now being leased, has caused a furor in Japan, according
to Ambassador Allison. He feels the Japanese government
may be forced into a firm stand against the United States
on this issue in order not to handicap the government party's
chances in the upper house election on 8 July.

Ambassador Allison emphasizes that the
Socialist Party has been quick to exploit the Okinawa land
issue and the testimony before a congressional committee
that American bases in Japan can be retained permanently.
The Japanese press is uniformly critical of American policy
on Okinawa, and several major newspapers have said that
the USSR certainly will make no territorial concessions as
long as the United States retains its Okinawa base.

Comment

The Socialist Party, hard-pressed in the
present election campaign to counteract the
damage its prestige suffered from its roughhouse tactics in
the Diet, may use the Okinawa issue to revive agitation on the
question of American bases in Japan proper.

Although the United States had announced
previously that Japan retains residual sovereignty over Okinawa
while the USSR has actually annexed the Kurils, many Japanese
find the legal distinction unconvincing. During the Japanese-
Soviet talks in London, which were suspended in March, Soviet
representative Malik accused the Japanese of inconsistency in
demanding the return of south Sakhalin and the Kurils while
accepting American occupation of the Ryukyus and Bonins.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 20 June)

Israel permitted UN observers on 13 June
to inspect the Syrian-Israeli demilitarized zone near Banat Yacov,
where the Israelis were reported building tactical defensive posi-
tions. The inspection disclosed two shelters which are considered
legitimate civil defense installations and a reinforced room al-
legedly designed for POL storage. The nature of two additional
installations, previously tentatively identified as bunkers, could
not be determined as they had been recently covered with dirt.
The chairman of the Israeli-Syrian military armistice commis-
sion said he would have to report his investigation as "incomplete."
Though he was of the opinion that these installations were "purely
a local effort," he believes that settlers in the area are violating
the general armistice agreement. An inspection of alleged Israeli
fortifications was also permitted at another post, apparently in the
demilitarized zone on the southeastern shore of Lake Tiberias.
The observers found a perimeter of defense positions "mostly old,
but with some signs of recent work," which were clearly designed
to protect the Ein Gev settlement.

[PAGE 08]
