8. Comment on the new political repression in East Germany:

The suspension of the Chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party from his post as Minister of Trade and Supply is apparently inaugurating a period of increased political repression in East Germany. Premier Grotewohl's alleged statement that anti-Communist resistance will be crushed as the government moves toward Soviet-style socialism coincides with the initiation of purge programs in the Liberal Democratic Party and the East German Christian Democratic Union.

While economic difficulties appear to have caused this search for scapegoats, the crack-down on the bourgeois parties was probably the inevitable result of the initiation last summer of a broad Sovietization program in East Germany. Although it is doubtful that these parties have recently exercised a strongly moderating influence on the regime, indications of their coming demise suggest that the government no longer feels restrained from attacking such centers of resistance as the churches. This attitude may also reflect a conviction in the government that German unification cannot now be accomplished.

9. Ex-German Chancellor advises against EDC ratification:

Heinrich Bruening, German Chancellor in 1930-1932, has reportedly told a Bonn political leader that, as a result of his personal acquaintance with officials of the incoming American administration, he is convinced that a shift in United States foreign policy can definitely be expected. Warning against underestimating the change in American attitudes, Bruening "decidedly advised against the ratification" of the Bonn and Paris treaties.

Comment: West German Social Democratic leaders are now justifying their continued opposition to the EDC treaty by the assertion that the incoming Eisenhower administration has already written off the European Army as "militarily ineffective," and favors the inclusion of a German national army in NATO. They are already exploiting Bruening's statement as that of a respected Christian Democrat who has spent many years in the United States.
