I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos

The heavy Communist attacks in northeastern Sam Neua Province which began on 30 August may signal stepped-up operations to seize control of the province. The attacking force, which the US army attache estimates may have totalled three battalions, seized a number of lightly garrisoned Laotian Army posts along the Nam Ma River. Communist units contained a heavy percentage of North Vietnamese soldiers and that these units were supported by 81-mm. and 120-mm. mortar fire. These claims are unconfirmed. The Laotian commander in northern Laos says that the attack on Muong Het was supported by artillery fire from the North Vietnam frontier, although this may have been confused with mortar fire.

The attacks came at a time when the Laotian Army was initiating offensive operations against the Communist-held Muong Son salient in western Sam Neua. The immediate Communist objective may be to spread out Laotian Army forces and reduce the pressure on Muong Son. However, the attacking forces would appear to be of sufficient force to press southward and threaten Sam Neua town, the provincial capital. Laotian military officials stated on 2 September that rebel forces had penetrated to within 18 miles of that town. Government troops have set up a defensive line northeast of the provincial capital.

Meanwhile, Communist partisans are threatening Muong Hiem in northeastern Luang Prabang, and a post in southern Xieng Khouang Province reportedly is under Communist control.

The bloc countries remain firm in their demand for the recall of the International Control Commission to Laos and continually accuse the US of deliberately engineering the present crisis. In a speech made on the occasion of North Vietnam's National Day, on 2 September, Premier Pham Van Dong stated that US policy "directly and seriously threatens North Vietnam and jeopardizes peace in Indochina and Southeast Asia." Immediately

3 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
