[PAGE 01]
3 July 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping apparently pressing for diplomatic relations with Guinea.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Tension rising between Iran and Iraq over navigation of Shatt-al-Arab River.
Moroccan Government increasingly committed to early progress toward evacuation of US air bases.
Some South Korean officials concerned by Rhee's negative policy toward Japan; Tokyo may be planning tougher attitude toward Seoul.
India--Nehru apparently expects continuing demonstrations in Kerala will force him to impose President's Rule there about mid-August.

III. THE WEST
Finland asks Western oil companies to cut imports; Moscow seeking entire Finnish oil market.
Cuba reported planning new rebel incursions into Dominican Republic; OAS convenes at Dominican request.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Guinea: The arrival in Guinea of Communist China's ambassador to Morocco and his discussions with President Touré as well as other senior officials suggest Peiping is pressing for formal relations with Conakry. The ambassador's visit also appears timed to take maximum advantage of Communist China's 5,000-ton gift of rice which arrived 30 June, just one day after the arrival of the first installment of the American allotment of 5,000 tons of rice.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran-Iraq: Tension between Tehran and Baghdad over Iraqi restriction of navigation on the Shatt-al-Arab River has risen again. An Iranian Foreign Ministry official has confirmed that a private Iranian launch was fired on by an Iraqi border patrol last Sunday. Iranian naval units in the area have standing orders to return fire immediately if fired on. Iran disputes Iraq's claims of complete jurisdiction over the river, and claims the right of free passage. Tehran has vacillated between a desire to avoid irritating Qasim on this matter and indignation over what it regards as arbitrary Iraqi actions. (Map on reverse of page).

Morocco: Statements attributed to Premier Ibrahim during his recent visit to the UAR appear to have publicly committed his government to achieving early progress toward the evacuation of the five US air bases in Morocco. The Premier for the first time was directly quoted in a press conference in Damascus on 25 June as saying he would appeal to "international bodies" if direct negotiations did not provide satisfaction. King Mohamed V, in a discussion with Ambassador Yost on 29 June, again urged an early public declaration by
[PAGE 05]
Ahwaz
IRAN
Khorramshahr
Abadan
Khosropabad
Fao
IRAQ
Basra
KUWAIT
PERSIAN GULF
UNCLASSIFIED
MILES 50
30060
[PAGE 06]
the US recognizing the principle of evacuation--a step vigorously opposed by France and Spain as establishing a precedent which could lead to French and Spanish withdrawal from Morocco.

South Korea - Japan: Some leading South Korean officials appear to be increasingly concerned over President Rhee's negative policy toward the problem of Koreans in Japan. The vice minister of foreign affairs hopes to convince Rhee of the need for a program which would encourage them to return to South Korea by offering them jobs and homes.

Japan has increased its patrols along the Rhee line. Japanese press reports state that the government is contemplating direct trade between Japan and North Korea. There are indications that Japan, frustrated by inability to resolve its disputes with President Rhee, has determined to adopt a tougher attitude in its problems with South Korea.

India: Nehru apparently anticipates that the continuing demonstrations will force the central government to impose President's Rule in Communist-governed Kerala State about mid-August. Lengthy discussions of the Kerala situation by the Congress party high command on 29 June, during which Nehru expressed this view, resulted in a directive to Kerala Congress leaders to intensify their agitation against the Communist government, but without violence. An immediate election is now the anti-Communist coalition's major demand. Clashes between demonstrators and police continue.

III. THE WEST

Finland: In order to assure a greater market in Finland for Soviet petroleum products, which would bring Soviet-Finnish trade into closer balance, the Finnish Government

3 July 59  DAILY BRIEF  ii
[PAGE 07]
has requested Western oil companies operating in Finland to accept substantially reduced import quotas for the six-year period 1960 through 1965. In current negotiations for a long-term trade agreement (1961-65), the Russians reportedly have demanded the entire Finnish market. This the Finns have refused, although they are willing to take additional Soviet petroleum.

Caribbean Area: Cuba is reported to be preparing new rebel incursions into the Dominican Republic or Haiti. Cuba's two eastern provinces have been designated a zone of military operations and the Cuban cabinet is believed to have discussed on 29 June the advisability of a declaration of war against the Dominican Republic. At the same time Cuban leaders fear Dominican counteraction. Venezuela, which also strongly desires the elimination of Trujillo, has threatened to withdraw from the OAS if that body agrees to investigate any Dominican charge of foreign intervention. The Council of the OAS met in urgent session on 2 July, at Dominican request, and set a further meeting for 6 July.

3 July 59  DAILY BRIEF  iii
[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 09]
