[PAGE 01]
8 October 1953

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Swedish ambassador seeks clarification of repatriation commission stand (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Possibility of partial French withdrawal from Cambodia seen (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
3. Pakistani prime minister solves major block to constitution (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Egypt reportedly sending 5,000 troops to Israeli border (page 5).
5. Nasr may assume Egyptian premiership because of Nagib's illness (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. Formation of Bonn cabinet delays consideration of Saar question (page 7)

LATIN AMERICA
9. Britain plans to arrest Guiana Communist leaders and revise constitution (page 8).


[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Swedish ambassador seeks clarification of repatriation commission stand:

The ambassador quoted a New York Times editorial calling for direct protests to the governments of the commission members. He expressed anxiety to counteract "such obvious misunderstandings and misrepresentations."

Comment: This is the first indication that Swedish officials are concerned over possible unfavorable repercussions of their country's role in the Korean armistice.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Possibility of partial French withdrawal from Cambodia seen:

Ambassador Heath in Saigon believes there is a possibility that the French command might remove all French residents from Cambodia and accept a "condition of anarchy," maintaining troops in the eastern part, by force if necessary, to protect the line of communication to Laos. This move, which was under consideration by DeLattre three years ago, might result from the continuing refusal of the Cambodian king to accept French control of Cambodian units for possible use outside the kingdom.


[PAGE 04]
Comment: A complete withdrawal of French forces from Cambodia would strengthen the already great popularity of the king, and probably would provide a considerable degree of insurance against anarchy. A partial withdrawal, such as envisioned above, would only aggravate French-Cambodian tensions.

Continuing pressure on Cambodia to accept French military control has served only to increase Cambodian intransigence.

SOUTH ASIA

3. Pakistani prime minister solves major block to constitution:

Pakistani prime minister Mohammed Ali has broken the deadlock in efforts to draft a constitution by obtaining the unanimous agreement of the cabinet and provincial leaders to a formula for provincial representation in a bicameral legislature, according to Ambassador Hildreth in Karachi. Hildreth states that Ali has accomplished what his predecessors failed to do in six years and that even Moslem League dissidents have praised the agreement.

Comment: This compromise on one of the knottiest problems blocking a constitution will probably result in the adoption of an interim document which would sidestep other controversies such as the dispute over a secular or theocratic state and the question of a national language.

This decision apparently ensures the continuation of the present government and the unity of the country.

East Pakistan, with 60 percent of the population, will dominate the lower house of the legislature on the basis of popular representation; West Pakistan will control the Senate on the basis of state representation.


[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Egypt reportedly sending 5,000 troops to Israeli border:

Approximately 5,000 Egyptian troops left Alexandria, the major part to reinforce the Gaza garrison near the Israeli border. The remainder are en route to the Gulf of Aqaba to garrison two islands guarding the southeastern approach to Israel.

These movements reportedly have been made because of Israeli defense forces' occupation of Al Auja in the Israeli-Egyptian demilitarized zone.


[PAGE 06]
Comment: With this addition there would be approximately 10,000 Egyptian troops near the Israeli frontier, 3,000 less than were there last May when most of the division was withdrawn to Cairo because of the breakdown in Anglo-Egyptian talks.

The Egyptian authorities, preoccupied with the Anglo-Egyptian talks, want a minimum of controversy over the Al Auja incident. Egypt may be forced by Arab pressure to adopt a belligerent attitude, but is unlikely to precipitate direct military action.

6. Nasr may assume Egyptian premiership because of Nagib's illness:

On 4 October Egypt's Revolutionary Command Council decided that Vice Premier Nasr would be made vice president and possibly premier if President Nagib's heart attack makes it impossible for him to discharge his present duties.

Nasr's resignation as minister of interior on the same day was presumably made in anticipation of his greater responsibilities.

Comment: The possible assumption of the premiership by Nasr, long the dominant figure in the military regime, has been rumored since the proclamation of the republic in July.

Without Nagib's restraining influence, Nasr, who has been Egypt's chief representative in the current talks, may be more difficult in the negotiations with Britain.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Formation of Bonn cabinet delays consideration of Saar question:

Ambassador Conant reports that West German chancellor Adenauer is having much greater difficulty in putting his


[PAGE 07]
new cabinet together than he expected and will not be in a position to discuss important issues before 12 October. The chancellor seems unwilling to discuss any aspect of the Saar problem even informally with American officials at this time.

Conant believes, however, that State Secretary Hallstein will stress to Adenauer the importance of early negotiations on the Saar, so that a settlement might be reached in time to allow the EDC treaty to be brought before the French parliament in November.

Comment: Vice Premier Paul Reynaud on 1 October reiterated Premier Laniel's opinion that only the Saar issue is holding up French EDC ratification. The French expect Adenauer to begin preliminary talks with High Commissioner Francois-Poncet as early as 15 October.

Unless EDC debates in the National Assembly start in November, they will probably be postponed until next year because of the French presidential election in December.


[PAGE 08]
LATIN AMERICA

9. Britain plans to arrest Guiana Communist leaders and revise constitution:

Following the arrival of British troops in British Guiana, Governor Savage on 9 October is to assume control of the government and arrest leaders of the Communist-dominated People's Progressive Party, including some cabinet ministers. This action will be taken under emergency authority granted him by London on 4 October.

The Churchill government will introduce special legislation formally suspending the Guiana constitution as soon as parliament reconvenes on 20 October in London. A royal commission of inquiry is to be appointed to recommend appropriate revision of the constitution.

Comment: There have been no reports of rioting in British Guiana, although the Communists are charged with fomenting anti-British demonstrations in recent weeks. Although the planned British moves could spark riots, the British forces can be expected to retain control.
