I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping Accuses New Delhi of Abetting Dalai Lama

Peiping has accused India of abetting the Dalai Lama in
activities hostile to Communist China. This new effort to increase pressure on Prime Minister Nehru to muzzle the Tibetan
leader began on 13 September with a speech by Foreign Minister
Chen Yi on the Sino-Indian border issue. Chen said the Dalai Lama's appeal for UN intervention in Tibet far exceeded "what
is allowed under the international practice of asylum."

The same day, Peiping propaganda media, without attacking the Dalai Lama directly, charged that "reactionary forces
in India and abroad are using the Dalai Lama as a tool against
China." The Dalai Lama's various press conferences and his
meetings with Indian officials and foreign diplomats in New Delhi
were cited as evidence of Indian complicity in "conspiracies
against the Chinese Government." Implying that continued political statements from the Dalai Lama would lead to even greater
strains in Sino-Indian relations, one broadcast quoted a left-wing
Indian newspaper as warning that "if supporters of the Dalai Lama
use India as a base for their activities, it would necessarily involve India in a conflict with China."

This propaganda treatment contrasts with Peiping's reluctance to mention the Dalai Lama for several months, in order
to avoid drawing attention to Tibet. The Chinese probably now
believe that some discussion of Tibet is bound to arise in the UN
and, by implicating the Dalai Lama in cold-war "conspiracies,"
they may hope to detract from any sympathy which might be given
his appeal.

Peiping's latest allegations against New Delhi will be particularly annoying to Indian officials, since they have taken pains to
advise the Dalai Lama against taking a strong anti-Chinese stand
during his stay in India. New Delhi probably will respond by again
denying any responsibility for the Dalai Lama's actions and dissociating the Indian Government from his policies.

15 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
