[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Japanese Government facing decisive tests in Diet (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Moroccan Sultan reportedly expects to be deposed by the French (page 4).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Japanese Government facing decisive tests in Diet:

Ambassador Murphy states that in the remain-
ing few days of the Diet session the Japanese
Government is faced with a number of severe
tests which may be decisive for the Yoshida
cabinet. He believes that a series of recent compromises by Yoshida
with his opposition may enable the government to survive.

Murphy also reports that the combined attacks
of the opposition parties, the Hatoyama faction of the Liberal Party,
and labor groups have so weakened the government that neither Yoshida
nor any other Liberal Party leader can now effectively manage public
affairs. He believes, therefore, that a new alignment of conservative
political forces is inevitable.

Comment: Diet controversy, which might
force a change in government, centers around the bills relating to the
US loan of naval vessels, the supplementary budget, and the Socialist
motion of no confidence in Foreign Minister Okazaki, as well as on
new demands for governmental intervention in the coal and electric
power workers' strikes.

During the past few days, Yoshida has belatedly
recognized the weakness of his position by accepting opposition amend-
ments to the ship transfer and budget bills, and by meeting with repre-
sentatives of the Hatoyama faction.

2.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Moroccan Sultan reportedly expects to be deposed by the French:

the
Sultan of Morocco on 13 December informed
nationalist supporters in New York that he
was in grave personal danger. On 15 De-
cember, he notified them that he was
"threatened with deposition" and was being
held "incommunicado" by the French. He
added that he had refused to sign the "old
and known reform program," and had conditioned further negotiations
with the French on prior restoration of Morocco to normalcy and the
release of prisoners.

The secretary general of the Istiqlal party
on 14 December asked the American UN delegation in New York to
request US intercession on behalf of the Sultan.

Comment: In February 1951 the French
made an attempt to depose the Sultan, who is a rallying point for
moderate nationalism in Morocco. The French Resident General
is now in Paris for consultation. The strong repressive measures
against the moderate nationalists which he has recently employed
have tended to heighten tension and pave the way for eventual ex-
tremist control over the nationalist movement.

In Tunisia, a Residency spokesman stated
on 15 December that the Resident General was leaving for Paris
with a plea to have the Bey removed.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
