[PAGE 01]
19 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
19 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Test ICBM launched from Tyura Tam.
USSR continues relaxation of VOA jamming during Khrushchev visit.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Algerian rebel leaders expected to attack De Gaulle's unwillingness to initiate cease-fire proposals but may offer counterproposals.
Laos--Communists conduct propaganda campaign in Vientiane to undermine government.
Indonesia--Sukarno continues to cultivate Communist support.
Nepal asks US to help it get aircraft through some neutral European source.
Iran--Shah insists he will maintain firm attitude toward USSR; his advisers have expressed doubts about his ability to withstand neutralist pressure.

III. THE WEST
Makarios-Grivas rift threatens unity of anti-Communist Greeks on Cyprus.
Bonn apparently prepared to accept East German consulate in Cairo in view of extensive West German interests in the Middle East.
Finnish-Soviet trade agreement for 1961-65 virtually complete.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
19 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR-ICBM: At about 1602Z (1202 EDT), 18 September the Soviet Union launched a test ICBM from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range. Preliminary information indicates a generally successful 3,500 nautical mile flight to the Kamchatka Peninsula area. The launching followed a four-hour countdown which proceeded without delay.

USSR-VOA: The selective relaxation for the first time of Soviet jamming of VOA broadcasts beamed to the USSR is designed to support Moscow's campaign for "peaceful coexistence" during the Khrushchev visit to the United States. Moscow employed similar tactics with respect to BBC broadcasts beamed to the Soviet Union during the Khrushchev-Bulganin visit to Great Britain in 1956. The Soviet leaders then offered to allow two half hours of unjammed program material per week and also suggested the possibility of exchanging material for rebroadcast. Khrushchev may put forth similar proposals during his visit.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algeria: Rebel leaders are meeting in Tunis to draft a formal reply to De Gaulle's 16-September proposals. Tunisian President Bourguiba is reported to believe the offer is inadequate because it does not contain sufficient guarantees for free elections and fails to be a "serious proposition" because it does not take the Algerian Army of Liberation into account. However, Bourguiba will probably urge the
[PAGE 05]
Algerians to avoid a blanket condemnation. The rebels appear likely to attack De Gaulle's unwillingness to carry out negotiation proposals, but may offer counterproposals. (Page 1)

Laos: A Communist propaganda effort to undermine the position of the Phoui government is under way in Vientiane. Open approaches by Communists to newspaper correspondents demonstrate the ease with which such activities can be carried out in Laos. North Vietnam has broadcast a statement on behalf of the Laotian Communist party charging that the United Nations action "will not bring peace, but will lead to enlarged civil war in Laos and war in Indochina." (Page 2)

Indonesia: President Sukarno's laudatory remarks about the Communist Party at a reception following its sixth national congress indicate his continuing cultivation of Communist support in implementing his "guided democracy" program and in preserving his political position. Sukarno said that the party had made contributions to the revolution and that the Indonesian Communists are fighters for independence and against imperialism. He said his ideal still is to set up a "cooperation cabinet," presumably meaning one that would include Communists. (Page 3)

Nepal: Prime Minister Koirala, worried by the Sino-Indian border dispute, has asked whether the United States could arrange to supply Nepal through some neutral European source with a few aircraft capable of carrying troops, conducting reconnaissance missions, and expediting the movements of administrative personnel. Katmandu recently accepted several US aircraft for Nepal's small civil airline, turning down an earlier Soviet offer. King Mahendra has an IL-14 aircraft--a gift from the USSR--which is being flown by a Soviet crew while two Nepalese pilots are being trained in the Soviet Union. (Page 4)

19 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Iran: The Shah, in recent discussions with American officials in Tehran, has insisted that he will maintain a firm attitude toward the Soviet Union. However, some of his top advisers have expressed doubts over his ability to withstand neutralist pressures. The Shah's approval of informal gestures to top Soviet officials suggesting a willingness to compromise. (Page 5)

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: Archbishop Makarios' recent disclosure of an extremist conspiracy against his "regime" and his refusal to meet extremist leader General Grivas in open debate on the Cyprus agreements have brought to the surface the sharp differences among the non-Communist Greeks on Cyprus. This split could lead to a struggle for power on Cyprus and give the Communists a situation they could exploit to increase their political influence. (Page 6)

West Germany-UAR: The Bonn Foreign Ministry is apparently prepared to accept the establishment of an East German consulate in Cairo since the UAR has made an explicit statement denying that this implies diplomatic recognition. Bonn's standing policy has been that it would break diplomatic relations with any nonbloc country establishing such relations with East Germany. West Germany's extensive interests in the Middle East have evidently been the main factor in the present decision. (Page 7)

Finland-USSR: The Finnish-Soviet trade agreement for 1961-65 is now complete except in regard to crude oil. The USSR wants to supply all of Finland's crude requirements but the Finns do not expect that Moscow will jeopardize the entire agreement by insisting on this point. Finland may feel obliged to accept some Soviet "economic assistance" in connection with the long-standing offer of $100,000,000 - $125,000,000 credit in rubles which the USSR has suggested be discussed later this fall. (Page 8)

19 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian Rebels Discuss De Gaulle Proposals

The Algerian rebel "cabinet" has gathered in Tunis to draft a reply to De Gaulle's new program for Algeria. The rebels are expected to condemn most of the program, but may offer counterproposals.

The atmosphere in Tunis is described as tense by the American Embassy, but President Bourguiba reportedly hopes the Algerians will avoid a blanket condemnation of De Gaulle's program. Bourguiba is said to regard the French proposals as a step forward even though insufficient. He is reported to believe the offer is inadequate because it does not contain sufficient guarantees for free elections and fails to be a "serious proposition" because it does not take the Algerian Army of Liberation into account. At the same time, however, Bourguiba is said to be prepared to put maximum pressure on the Algerian rebels to react positively. He is expected to urge them to hold an informal roundtable with other Algerian elements in order to work out a joint program. He has also invited Morocco to join in consultations with rebel leaders aimed at agreeing on a Maghrebian position.

The rebels will probably consider that De Gaulle recognized Algeria's "right to independence" but will attack his unwillingness to negotiate an end to the fighting and underscore the conditions which he has attached for Algerian independence.

Tunisia alone among the Arab states appears to accept De Gaulle's proposals as a possible step in the direction of an Algerian settlement. While most Arab states appear to be awaiting the Algerian statement before reacting officially, the government-controlled Cairo press has assailed the French program as exposing De Gaulle's "imperialist intentions" and the Moroccan radio has reacted critically.
[PAGE 08]
Communist Agents Propagandizing Journalists in Laotian Capital

Several newspaper correspondents in Vientiane report being approached recently by "some young Laotians" peddling the line that the current rebellion in Laos is strictly an internal affair set off by elements opposed to the Phoui Sananikone government. A number of journalists have also received a letter from a "Lao citizen" attributing the crisis in Laos to the sabotage of the Geneva agreements by the royal government acting under American pressure. The letter claimed that the Communist partisans have developed into a genuine popular army determined in its struggle against the "despotic" Phoui government. Charges of North Vietnamese involvement were derided and doubt cast on the ability of the UN mission to stop "this murderous war." The letter concluded with a reiteration of the Communist prescription for resolution of the crisis--the reactivation of the International Control Commission for Laos.

The American Embassy in Vientiane believes the letter may forecast the general line the Communists hope to take in connection with the UN fact-finding subcommittee and may herald a flow of Neo Lao Hak Zat- or North Vietnam-inspired "citizen petitions," a normal Communist tactic. The embassy also finds in the open distribution of the letter to correspondents a disconcerting exhibition of the impunity with which the NLHZ operates in Vientiane.

On 17 September, Hanoi made public a statement attributed to a spokesman of the central committee of the NLHZ which declared that the UN decision on Laos would open the way for further US interference, enlarge the "civil war," and lead to war in Indochina. Recent suggestions that representatives of the UN investigative subcommittee remain for some time in Laos were also attacked. Although the NLHZ spokesman reiterated charges that the UN action is illegal, the statement concluded with the hope that the UN would "take positive measures to settle the Laos issue on the basis and within the framework" of the Geneva accords.
[PAGE 09]
President Sukarno Praises Indonesian Communists

President Sukarno's remarks on 16 September at a reception given by the Indonesian Communist party at the close of its sixth national congress reflect his continuing cultivation of Communist support for the implementation of his concept of "guided democracy" and for the preservation of his own paramount political position. He reiterated his oft-repeated theme of national unity through cooperation and mutual help and stated his aim is still to form a "cooperation cabinet," an obvious allusion to Communist participation. He strongly implied that he would appoint Communists to the new legislature, as he has to top planning and advisory councils.

Sukarno noted that the Indonesian Communist party had advocated national unity in recent years, had supported his move to return to the 1945 constitution, and had made contributions to the revolution. He described the Indonesian Communists as fighters for independence and against imperialism.

Sukarno's laudatory remarks countered some of the effect of army restrictions which earlier had prevented the Communists from obtaining any significant publicity from the congress. Despite his current policy of giving his primary support to the army, Sukarno wants to retain Communist good will as a balance against his non-Communist critics. Since both he and the Communists derive their principal strength from the Javanese masses, Sukarno hesitates to challenge the party lest he lose some of this popular support.

The Communists similarly need Sukarno and have built their large electoral following in great part by identifying themselves with his policies. Although displeased with the present Sukarno-Djuanda cabinet, they have avoided direct criticism of Sukarno and have pledged to support the cabinet's program.
[PAGE 10]
Nepal Asks United States to Supply Planes to Help Defend Tibetan Border

Prime Minister Koirala of Nepal on 6 September asked the American chargé in Katmandu whether it would be possible for the United States to arrange for Nepal to acquire a few additional aircraft for defense purposes from some neutral source such as Switzerland or a Scandinavian country. Koirala indicated his concern over the Sino-Indian border dispute and the relative defenselessness of Nepal's border with Tibet. He desired some sort of small, high-altitude aircraft which could be used in civil aviation but could also carry troops, conduct reconnaissance missions, and speed the movements of administrative and government personnel.

Nepal now has a government-owned civil airline consisting of two aircraft, one of which it owns and one which it charters from India. Since the King's visit to Moscow in mid-1958, the USSR has pressed him to accept Soviet aircraft to re-equip this airline. Subsequently, however, the King decided to accept an American offer of three DC-3 planes and two smaller craft. For his personal use the King has an IL-14 plane presented to him by the Soviet Union. It is flown by a four-man Soviet crew; two Nepalese pilots are undergoing training in the USSR, presumably to learn how to fly this plane.

With the opening of a new Soviet embassy in Katmandu, expected momentarily, Soviet pressure for Nepal to accept additional economic aid from the USSR may be expected to increase.

19 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]
Shah Attempts to Reassure Allies

The Shah, in an effort to reassure his allies that the recent return of Soviet Ambassador Pegov to Iran and the softening of Soviet propaganda will not lead to Iranian concessions to the USSR, emphasized to Ambassador Wailes on 17 September that he intends to continue a firm policy toward the USSR. He stated his belief that the "Soviets cannot be trusted and that their agreements are not worth the paper they are written on."

Nevertheless, Iran and the USSR continue to appear to be approaching the point of opening discussions on their problems. Some of the Shah's top advisers have expressed doubts over his ability to withstand neutralist pressures for a rapprochement with the USSR.

The Shah's approval of informal gestures to top Soviet officials suggest a willingness to compromise with the USSR. The Shah, who during the period of the most intensive personal attacks by Radio Moscow became worried over their possible domestic effect, may be willing to go to great lengths to forestall the resumption of such attacks.

In any discussions the USSR will probably again press for conclusion of a nonaggression pact and Iran's renunciation of the bilateral treaty of defense with the United States signed in March, while making veiled threats to resume intensive propaganda attacks unless these conditions are met.

Meanwhile, the Shah has also told the US ambassador that he intends to attack the problem of corruption in Iran energetically. In referring to reforms already carried out he mentioned a "clean-up" of the gendarmerie and said approximately 400 persons in "other areas" have either been dismissed or are under indictment; several high military officers have been arrested for taking bribes from draft evaders. The Shah predicted that a high official of the National Iranian Oil Company would be exposed next. While the Shah made many promises in late 1958 to institute major reforms, he has not yet made an impressive effort to fulfill them.
[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Split Between Archbishop Makarios and General Grivas Becomes More Pronounced

Recent events have emphasized the developing split in Greek Cypriot ranks and have brought into the open the dispute between Archbishop Makarios and former EOKA leader Grivas. Makarios launched the attack by disclosing details of an extremist right-wing conspiracy against the moderate Greek Cypriot leaders and linking Grivas and Bishop Kyprianos with the conspirators. The extremists apparently planned the arrest or assassination of several members of the transitional government. Kyprianos--a bitter rival of Makarios and uncompromising advocate of "enosis"--reportedly was to become leader of the Greek Cypriots.

General Grivas called the disclosures "fairy tales" and offered to meet Makarios in Greece for open discussion so that "peace and normal conditions" could be restored to Cyprus. Makarios' moderate reply indirectly rejected the proposed meeting, and the archbishop for the first time openly criticized Grivas for his "disruptive activities." Grivas answered that if the archbishop refused to meet him the Greek and Cypriot people would have to draw their own conclusions.

The increasing bitterness between the two factions, which apparently has had little adverse effect thus far on Makarios' support, may yet present the large and well-organized Communist party of Cyprus with a situation it can exploit. Spokesmen for the Communist party--technically still proscribed on Cyprus--are remaining in the background in the present controversy. The pro-Communist press in Greece, however, has recently become less critical of Grivas' statements and activities.

The extremist criticism of Makarios may force him to take a firm--possibly uncompromising--stand in his present difficult negotiations with the Turks and British or face the charge of a "sell-out" of Greek Cypriot interests.
[PAGE 13]
Bonn, Apparently Acquiescing in Establishment of East German Consulate in UAR

The Bonn Foreign Ministry is apparently prepared to accept the establishment of an East German consulate in Cairo, in the light of an explicit UAR statement that this did not imply diplomatic recognition. Bonn had previously threatened to break off diplomatic relations with any nonbloc country extending recognition to East Germany. Although Bonn fears that other governments may follow the UAR example, West Germany's extensive economic interests have evidently outweighed this consideration with regard to the UAR itself.

Achievement of this degree of de facto recognition will be interpreted by the Ulbricht regime as a major step in its unceasing campaign to gain full recognition. The regime will use the UAR action as justification to increase pressure on other uncommitted countries for formal acknowledgment of East German trade missions as consulates or consulates general, probably concentrating on Iraq, India, and Indonesia.
[PAGE 14]
Finnish Trade Relations With the USSR

Finland and the USSR have reached agreement on a long-term (1961-65) trade protocol except with regard to oil. The USSR wants to supply all of Finland's crude oil, while the Finns wish to limit imports from the Soviet Union to about two thirds of Finnish crude requirements. The Finns apparently feel that the USSR will not jeopardize the agreement by insisting on supplying all of Finland's crude oil. Finnish officials expect the agreement to be signed in late September or early October.

The Finns want to assure Moscow of their determination to maintain trade and economic ties with the USSR and the Soviet bloc. The USSR has informed Finland that it is ready to enter detailed discussions in late October or early November regarding a $100,000,000 - $125,000,000 Soviet credit in rubles simultaneous with the 1960 trade negotiations. The credit offer was originally made to President Kekkonen in May 1958 and was renewed in January 1959 following the replacement of the Fagerholm government, which the USSR distrusted. Despite their reluctance to become more dependent on the USSR economically, the Finns may feel obliged to accept some "economic assistance."

The unsigned five-year Soviet--Finnish trade agreement, as well as upcoming negotiations regarding the 1960 exchange of goods, provides the USSR with continuing opportunities for exerting quiet economic pressure on Finland during the coming months. Finland is considering some kind of affiliation with the projected Little Free Trade Area, provided such action does not antagonize the USSR. Moscow has not yet officially objected to Helsinki's participation but has warned against association with a group which the Russians consider would be under NATO domination.
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
