Savang believed therefore that the current Bangkok conference of the Manila pact powers should, with Laotian participation, consider plans for the defense of Laos.

Comment: The Laotian government declared at Geneva that it would join no military alliance not in conformity with the charter of the United Nations or with the principles of the Geneva truce agreement. The Laotian premier has stated that the Manila pact does not appear to violate these considerations and that the royal government, owing to its exposed geographic position, "cannot disinterest" itself in such a regional defensive organization.

6. Cambodian king proposes drastic constitutional revisions:

The king of Cambodia informed his cabinet and the entire diplomatic corps in Phnom Penh on 19 February that he had received numerous petitions requesting the postponement or suppression of the national elections scheduled for April. He claimed these petitions reflected the people's distrust of political parties, particularly the Democratic Party, and their objections to the cost of maintaining 70 deputies in the capital.

To correct the situation, the king proposed a number of "reforms" designed to establish a government conforming to the dictates of "Cambodian democracy." The major changes called for were the indirect election of deputies and the establishment of a cabinet appointed by the king which would not be collectively responsible to the legislature. The king indicated he would submit this plan to a popular referendum in April and, if it should be rejected, elections under the old system would be held in June.

Comment: The Cambodian king is sensitive to any form of opposition, and his unilateral effort to change constitutional procedures shows he will go to almost any lengths to eliminate any real or fancied threat to his position. Although his plan is not, in itself, contrary to the Geneva agreement, his attempt to suppress party activity will undoubtedly be disapproved of by the International Control Commission.
