[PAGE 01]
8 October 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SITUATION IN WARSAW

2. CHINESE COMMUNISTS REACTION TO
SATELLITE LAUNCHING

3. LIBYA'S PRO-WESTERN ORIENTATION STRAINED
BY FRENCH ATTACKS

6. BURMA CONSIDERING ADDITIONAL SOVIET
AGRICULTURAL ASSISTANCE

8 Oct 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. THE SITUATION IN WARSAW

The Polish regime has succeeded
in maintaining control of the situa-
tion in Warsaw and preventing any
spread of the disturbances while
conceding nothing to the students'
demands. The students have not
been involved in rioting since 4 Oc-
tober, and a student statement cir-
culated on 6 October denied that
they had intended to resort to violence. Cardinal
Wyszynski's annual academic year sermon on Sunday
advocating moderation has also helped to restore some
degree of patience.

The students failed to gain the support
of factory workers, notably at the Zeran automobile works.
Townspeople on the morning of 7 October were reportedly
expressing their disgust with the wildcat disturbances. There
has been little of the panic buying which normally accompanies
public expectations of serious disturbances.

Neither the Polish nor Soviet military
forces have apparently been alerted. Polish military lead-
ers discussing the situation with US officials at a week-end
diplomatic party without exception expressed their lack of
concern, pointing out their confidence in the militia's ability
to handle the situation and their feeling that the "students had
now had their fun."

The students, however, still demand the
reopening of Po Prostu, the release of those arrested, and
the punishment of officials responsible for calling in the mi-
litia. If the regime fails to meet any of these demands, or
resorts to harsh punishment and press censorship during the
week, tempers may again be inflamed and further student
demonstrations could result. Despite surface calm, the re-
gime has refused to permit the Polytechnical University to
open since 4 October.

8 Oct 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. CHINESE COMMUNIST REACTION TO
SATELLITE LAUNCHING

Peiping's initial reaction to the success-
ful launching of the Soviet satellite hails
the achievement as "proof" of the "in-
comparable superiority" of the socialist
system. This may be the beginning of a
major Chinese propaganda campaign.

Unlike Soviet commentary, which thus far
has emphasized the scientific achievements and what the USSR
considers to be the political implications of the launching, the
Chinese Communists were quick to seize on the military sig-
nificance of the satellite by linking it to Soviet development
of the ICBM. Declaring that the United States can no longer
lay claim to being the most powerful nation on earth, an edi-
torial of 6 October in an authoritative newspaper stated that
Soviet missile successes have shattered all American "hopes
for world hegemony."

Peiping first began asserting last May
that the United States "lagged behind" the USSR in missile
development, and has given wide publicity to reported
"failures" in US missile testing in recent months. The
Chinese have emphasized previously that Soviet successes
should induce the West to agree to Soviet conditions for a
disarmament agreement.

8 Oct 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. LIBYA'S PRO-WESTERN ORIENTATION STRAINED
BY FRENCH ATTACKS

The generally pro-Western Libyan gov-
ernment is likely to come under increas-
ing pressure from elements which are us-
ing the Franco-Libyan frontier incident
of last week to arouse opinion against the
West in general and France in particular.

Speakers participating in an anti-Western
demonstration in Bengazi on 6 October have
demanded abrogation of the Franco-Libyan
treaty of friendship and a reconsideration
of base agreements and treaties with the
United States and Great Britain. The demon-
stration followed the Libyan government's announcement of the
details of a French attack on 3 October directed against a Libyan
village near the Algerian border. The government has denounced
the French "aggression" and requested assistance from the Brit-
ish under the Anglo-Libyan treaty of 1953. Before the incident,
Libyan government officials, who had already indicated they hoped
to renegotiate the American-Libyan base agreement, had asked
for a quick shipment of American military supplies.

In Paris, the American embassy has been in-
formed that the French took action only after being attacked by
"unidentified elements" near the "ill-defined" border. The French
government reportedly believes that such incidents may continue
to occur unless a better demarcation is made.

The American embassy in London reports that
the Foreign Office is "much concerned" and considers the French
attack to have been even if French allegations
that Algerian rebels are operating from that area are true. The
British reportedly hope to avoid the necessity of complying with
the Libyan request for assistance by persuading the French to with-
draw any forces which may still be in Libyan territory.

8 Oct 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
6. BURMA CONSIDERING ADDITIONAL SOVIET
AGRICULTURAL ASSISTANCE

The Burmese government reportedly
is considering a Soviet offer of a loan
of just under $10,000,000 to permit
the acceleration of high-priority agri-
cultural projects. The loan, which would enable Burma
to hire 43 additional Soviet technicians and enlarge the
existing joint agricultural program, would expand the most
successful phase of the USSR's economic aid activity in
Burma to date.

The Burmese government wants the
American economic aid mission to approve financing of a
large-scale land reclamation project already in progress
in the Irrawaddy Delta under the recent $25,000,000 loan
from the United States. The Russians allegedly are anxious
to step in with the required funds for this project because of
its propaganda potential.

Meanwhile, in other spheres of the So-
viet assistance program, 50 engineers and construction ex-
perts are reportedly now in Rangoon to begin on schedule
work on the technological institute and other buildings. In
addition, 12 Soviet planning experts now are in Rangoon fol-
lowing up a previous proposal for the construction of cheap
concrete housing units.

8 Oct 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8

[PAGE 09]
