Evacuation of Chinese Nationalist Irregulars

The Chinese Nationalists are planning to send Lt. Gen. Lai Ming-tang, vice chief of the General Staff, to Thailand early in April to make a final appeal to the irregulars to go to Taiwan. Lai believes that if the momentum of the evacuation is allowed to fall off, many of the irregulars attached to the area or under slack discipline will evade evacuation. He said that there were several hundred irregulars in scattered groups still in Burma, and they would not leave unless driven out by Burmese armed forces.

There are 1,500 to 2,000 men under the command of Yunnan General Tuan who recently withdrew from Burma into Thailand; they have been relatively independent of Chinese Nationalist control and thus far have refused evacuation. Many have married and settled in Burma, but also have villages in Thailand where they go to escape Burmese Army efforts to clean up the area. Great pressure is almost certain to be required to evacuate a significant number of these. General Dawee, the Thai representative on the evacuation mission, believes that over 1,500 Chinese in Laos have also refused evacuation.

Thai cooperation with the nationalists so far appears effective. Prospects have developed for Burmese-Thai military cooperation in removing the irregulars who have refused evacuation. General Dawee will accompany General Lai to the villages and if necessary use force to disarm Tuan's group. General Dawee asked the Burmese to reinforce the border area to keep the irregulars from withdrawing into Burma.

This large group of irregulars remaining in the area will tend to obscure the benefits of the successful evacuation and recall to the Burmese the incomplete previous evacuation in 1953 and 1954. However, with the special forces removed, it appears unlikely that the remnants will be capable of more than banditry unless in the future Taipei resumes efforts to resupply, build up, or control the irregulars.

1 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
