have to be taken. The French prefer to see a government of national union formed in Laos before the conference, but the spokesman admitted this seemed an increasingly remote possibility.

working level believes it is impossible to prevent the bloc from gaining some advantages from the conference because the West has "played its hand too badly for too long." It is unrealistic to hope to postpone the consideration of the formation of a new Laotian government, preferably under Souvanna with Pathet Lao representation. The British are encouraging the Laotian government to accept Souvanna's invitation to political talks now in Laos. While agreeing on the need for being prepared to take "vigorous action" if either the conference or the cease-fire breaks down, London is opposed to measures of readiness which they fear might wreck the negotiations, such as a troop build-up in Thailand or a "conspicuous" increase in US military support. London thinks any commission resulting from the conference must be truly neutral, such as a supervisory commission composed of one Western power, one Communist power, plus Cambodia, Burma, and India.

In a 3 May discussion with UK Ambassador Roberts, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin suggested that Sihanouk's withdrawal of support for the conference was caused by the United States. However, he pointed out that he saw no reason why the conference could not proceed on schedule inasmuch as it was being convened at the invitation of the UK and the USSR. A Chinese Communist government statement of 4 May implied that Ambassador Harriman's trip to Laos was for the purpose of instigating the King of Laos to denounce Sihanouk's proposal for the conference.

The Communists are also voicing suspicion over the Laotian King's call for a National Assembly session on 11 May. Hanoi characterizes this development as a move by the US and Vientiane to "cook up" a new government rather than join with Souvanna Phouma in the effort to form a coalition
6 May 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
