[PAGE 01]
10 April 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
10 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. Kenya: Delay in formation of government invites violence. (Page iii)

7. El Salvador: Disagreements over reform program probably caused resignations from ruling directorate. (Page iv)

[PAGE 04]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Kenya: Several African leaders in Kenya are concerned that violence may occur if political factions continue to refuse to form a government until Jomo Kenyatta--convicted for his role in Mau Mau activities--is released from detention by Britain. As a result of the elections last February, Africans predominate in the legislature for the first time and had been expected to fill most executive posts. The leaders fear that agitators--capitalizing on the lack of progress in meeting economic problems aggravated by the political impasse--may incite disorders among the 80,000 men who have been released from detention camps. Most of these men have not found jobs. Meanwhile, the Kenya administration apparently hopes to concoct a government from among European, Asian, and minority African legislators, although such a government would probably lack popular support and might precipitate nationalist-inspired disorders. (Backup, Page 7)

10 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iii

[PAGE 06]
El Salvador: The resignation on 6 April of two of the three civilians on El Salvador's ruling civil-military directorate probably stemmed from disagreements over how fast the government should move in implementing the moderate program of social and economic reforms launched last month. A group of influential young military officers is insisting on more energetic implementation of reforms, and this may increase opposition to the program among wealthy businessmen and plantation owners. An extensive cabinet reorganization reportedly is imminent. (Page 9)

10 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iv

[PAGE 07]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
Delay in Formation of Government in Kenya Invites Violence

As a result of the legislative elections held in February and the later supplementary balloting by the Legislative Council for 12 "national" members--four from each of the African, European, and Asian groups--the two leading African nationalist parties have 35 seats in the 65-member legislature. The Kenya African National Union (KANU), with 20 seats the larger group, is led by its general secretary Mboya and its president Gichuru. The chief opposition group to KANU is the Kenya African Democratic Union (KADU), led by Ronald Ngala. It has 15 seats and represents minority tribal groups.

In neither party can the leaders control their legislative representatives; KANU is particularly faction-ridden. Mboya is challenged by American-educated Julius Kiano as well as by pro-leftist Oginga Odinga. Several KANU members are reported dissatisfied with their party's rigid stand on the Kenyatta issue and would probably break away and cooperate with KADU if the latter were successful in forming a government or if the governor made some face-saving compromise on Kenyatta.

KADU leaders appear more willing to cooperate with the governor in forming a government, provided the party does not lose its popular backing thereby and provided some KANU members participate. Ronald Ngala is visiting London in an effort to obtain some $60,000,000 in grant aid for the resettlement of Africans in the former White Highlands. At the recent All African People's Conference in Cairo he sought nationalist support by attacking the United States for colonialist policies.

KANU's attitude threatens to cause increasing difficulties for London. Mboya recently told American officials that he saw "no way out" unless Kenyatta were released. Even then, however, KANU would form a government only with the intention of demanding a new constitutional conference in the near future with Kenyatta in attendance. Mboya now demands Kenya's independence in 1961; neighboring Tanganyika is scheduled to become independent on 26 December 1961.

Britain remains opposed to releasing Kenyatta, although it has expressed its willingness to do so as soon as a Kenya

10 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7

[PAGE 09]
government is formed and functioning well. On his recent visit to Kenya, Colonial Secretary Macleod gave his full support to Governor Renison for his policy regarding Kenyatta.

10 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 8

[PAGE 10]
Changes in Salvadoran Government

The two civilians resigned because of their opposition to rapid implementation of reform measures. The directorate will continue operating with its three remaining members,

Changes reportedly will be made in all ministries except defense, interior, and labor. The US Embassy at San Salvador believes the prospective appointees were chosen because they represented diverse groupings and thus would have a broad appeal. One of them, Miranda Lupone, whose appointment as foreign minister appears almost definite, is known to champion "reform by decree," including nationalization of the Central Bank.

Junior army officers believe reforms are not being implemented fast enough because most cabinet ministers are too much under the obstructive influence of wealthy businessmen and landowners. Most of the wealthy class became at least temporarily convinced of the necessity for reforms to improve the lot of the lower classes after an alarming upsurge of Communist and pro-Castro activity in El Salvador between the coup in October 1960 and the one that brought the directorate to power last January. Many of the landowners began to change their minds, however, after the implementation of the first reforms, which included a forced reduction of rent for low-income housing and a paid day of rest on Sundays for agricultural workers. Coffee growers reacted to the Sunday rest law by dismissing large numbers of workers, and the Communists are reported working to exploit the resulting peasant discontent.

The government warned violators that the reforms are in line with recommendations agreed to by 18 Latin American governments at Bogota, Colombia, last year, and that the army will be on the peasants' side in the event of any "social explosion."

The rapidly diminishing influence of the upper class in the government and the prospects of having the schedule for the

10 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 9

[PAGE 11]
implementation of social reforms timed by the army's junior officers increase the probability that some wealthy Salvadorans will resort to bribery and subsidized violence in an effort to frustrate the reforms and, if possible, to bring down the government.

10 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 10

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
