I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communists Planning to Interfere With West German Presidential Election

West German officials have received reports--possibly leaked by the East German regime--of "voluntary" action to be taken by East German workers to interfere with the West German presidential election in West Berlin. Such "spontaneous" action--possibly including a "strike" by railway workers and autobahn police--would be in line with party propagandist Gerhard Eisler's threats on 6 June when he said it was not easy to persuade East Berlin workers to be patient in the face of the West German provocation.

Soviet propaganda has termed holding the election in Berlin a "gross and dangerous provocation," but the USSR has made no direct threat to prevent the holding of the election. The Communist strategy appears rather to be aimed at so frightening some West German electors that they will not attend the 1 July meeting in Berlin. Some harassment such as deliberate slowdowns at the checkpoints cannot be ruled out.

Mayor Brandt agrees with Bundestag President Gerstenmaier that if significant numbers of delegates fail to arrive in Berlin, the election should be held elsewhere. Brandt does not anticipate any serious trouble. He also said that East German interference "would not necessarily be a bad thing" because it could be exploited before world public opinion.

Three cases of East German interference with American military personnel on the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn during the past week--if publicized--might influence some West German delegates not to make the journey. In each case the East German police stopped the Americans after they had been processed through the Soviet checkpoint and demanded to see their travel documents. When one American officer refused and asked to see a Soviet officer, the policeman replied that the East Germans and not the Russians controlled the autobahn, and he threatened to detain the American "for a week or longer."

25 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
