[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

5 October 1959

Copy No. C 65
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 OCTOBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR launches another moon shot.
Communists draft treaty proposals for summit meeting.
Khrushchev leaves Peiping without usual prior joint communiqué.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Indonesian rebels sabotage Sumatran oil installations.
South Vietnam--Aggressive Communist guerrillas ambush army units.
UAR warns Washington embassy improvement of relations with US should not risk antagonizing USSR.

III. THE WEST
Bloc postpones trade talks with Iceland until after elections, possibly as weapon to improve Communist prospects in new government.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 October 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]USSR: For a preliminary evaluation of the latest space launching by the USSR, see[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] Page 1.

USSR: A specially-constituted Soviet "peace commission" has drafted proposals for ending the "cold war" which might be submitted to a summit meeting. These proposals, now being studied by party authorities in the USSR, reportedly include a treaty within the framework of the United Nations to end the "cold war," and an international commission vested with authority to condemn by name all "war provocateurs." (Page 3)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]USSR: Khrushchev and the Soviet delegation to Peiping's tenth anniversary celebration left for Moscow on 4 October amid signs that the talks with the Chinese Communist leaders had been less than satisfactory from the USSR's viewpoint. In an unusual exception to standard bloc practice on such occasions, no communiqué was issued prior to the Soviet delegation's departure. Khrushchev's farewell speech suggests he failed to win Peiping's support for Moscow's current calls for a détente. He said, "We Communists of the Soviet Union consider it our sacred duty and primary task" to end the cold war and guarantee the "triumph of the cause of peace," but he gave no indication that the Chinese had endorsed this line.
The USSR feels anxiety over Peiping's recent behavior, particularly in the Sino-Indian border dispute, and would like somehow to hold China in check[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: A small group of armed men, presumed to be rebels, are reported to have cut pipe lines and damaged storage tanks in the Shell and Standard Vacuum oil fields in South Sumatra on 30 September. The rebels told employees that the destruction was part of an over-all plan. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Dissident threats to commit sabotage unless the oil companies support the rebels have been periodically reported for months[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

South Vietnam: Growing aggressiveness of Communist guerrillas in South Vietnam is reflected by attacks on company-sized units of regular South Vietnamese troops. On 26 September, two out of six companies making a security sweep about 50 miles west of Saigon near the Cambodian border were ambushed separately. One attack from ambush was repelled, but a second, carried out by an estimated 200-300 guerrillas, forced the army unit to surrender. This unit was released after turning over its equipment.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]UAR-USSR: The UAR Foreign Ministry in Cairo cautioned that Cairo did not want "to skid into the cold war" between East and West--if America wishes to improve relations with us, that is all right, but not at the expense of our relations with Russia[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]."

III. THE WEST

Iceland - Soviet bloc: On Soviet and East German insistence, negotiations for new trade agreements have been postponed until after Iceland's general elections on 25 and 26 October. Iceland's bloc trading partners seem intent on using their important position in Iceland's foreign trade to attempt to secure Communist participation in the postelection government. (Page 4)

5 Oct 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Space Vehicle (Lunik III) Launching

At about 0044 GMT 4 October 1959 (2144 EDT 3 October) the Soviet Union, after a smooth four-hour countdown, launched a space vehicle from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range. About three and a half hours later, the operation was publicized by Moscow's overseas broadcasts as the launching of the third Soviet cosmic rocket with a major portion of its objectives being lunar associated.

The USSR has issued considerable propaganda on this space event, the more significant being (1) the satellite (Lunik III) will swerve around the moon and record the reverse side (possibly including photography) from a distance of about 6,000 miles; (2) it will begin a return to the vicinity of the earth after circumnavigating the moon; (3) its exact path after these maneuvers cannot yet be established with certainty--not excluded is that Lunik III may become a long-lived earth satellite with a very elongated axis; (4) it will accumulate scientific data during its travel, but will transmit to earth only two to four hours per day under control of a Soviet ground control station; (5) over-all, the last-stage weight is only slightly heavier (about 3 percent) than Lunik II, but the instrumentation load is about 10 percent heavier, suggesting an exchange of fuel weight for additional instrumentation. While no mention was made as to when Lunik III would start its circumnavigation of the moon, on the basis of the flight times of Luniks I and II, this phase of the operation would start about noon EDT, 5 October.

Other than during the initial part of the flight, there is little independent Western evidence. The USSR sent space-tracking data to the large radio telescope installation at Jodrell Bank, UK, which reportedly was able to lock on and track the satellite for only a very brief time before the signals abruptly ceased.

5 Oct 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Soviet Preparations for Summit Meeting

A specially-constituted Soviet "peace commission" has drafted proposals for ending the "cold war" which might be submitted to a summit meeting.

The Soviet Communist party now is examining a document prepared by the commission and known in central committee circles as the "treaty for the end of the cold war."

This document reportedly includes a treaty within the framework of the United Nations to end the cold war, and the creation of an international court or commission vested with powers to condemn by name all "war provocateurs," such as journalists and newspapers. Under this plan, parties to the treaty should introduce legislation enabling them to deal with offenders denounced by the international court.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_5]]The Soviet delegation to a summit conference will present an "unusual" appearance in that it will include scientists, economists, and writers as well as political leaders and diplomats[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_5]].

Although the existence of a Soviet "peace commission" cannot be confirmed, demands for an end to "war propaganda" have long been a favorite Soviet theme. Khrushchev's speech to the United Nations General Assembly on 18 September contained a program for ending the "cold war" which gave top priority to halting "appeals or calls for war." He also proposed the conclusion of a German peace treaty, expansion of "contacts" between peoples and statesmen, and admission of Communist China to the United Nations.

Khrushchev appears confident that his agreement with President Eisenhower that no time limit should be fixed for renewing negotiations on Berlin will clear the way for an early summit meeting. On his return to the USSR, Khrushchev told a Moscow rally he had discussed a summit meeting with the President and that they had "agreed that such meetings are needed and useful."

5 Oct 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Iceland Under Pressure from Soviet Bloc

At the insistence of the USSR, the Icelandic Ministry of Commerce agreed in August to defer negotiations on a new three-year trade agreement from September until after Iceland's general elections on 25 and 26 October. The East Germans followed the Soviet lead and postponed until 29 October negotiations originally scheduled for 21 September on a new one-year trade agreement. The US Embassy in Reykjavik believes the bloc countries intend to use their important position in Iceland's foreign trade to attempt to secure Communist participation in the postelection government.

The bloc has a strong lever in its expanding trade with Iceland, which during the first half of 1959 accounted for 34.1 percent of Iceland's total foreign trade. While many Icelanders are concerned about this trend, some normally pro-Western groups regard it as a desirable development which will permit a greater diversification of markets despite the disadvantages in many cases of trading with bloc countries.

If the Communists make significant gains during the election, the Social Democratic leadership may come under pressure from its rank and file to abandon cooperation with the Conservatives and revive the leftist-oriented coalition which was in power from mid-1956 to 1958. Otherwise, the Communists are likely to use their strong position in the labor movement to bargain for representation in a Conservative - Social Democratic government.

5 Oct 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
