[PAGE 01]
4 February 1961
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
4 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]USSR: An earth satellite was launched from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at about 2015 EST yesterday. The period of revolution, apparently about 88 minutes, indicates a low altitude orbit, and present evidence suggests this satellite will be recovered soon, probably this weekend.
It is considered likely that a satellite larger than Sputniks IV, V and VI, which weighed in the neighborhood of 10,000 pounds, is involved. While such a satellite is probably part of the Russian man-in-space program there is no basis for concluding at this time that man or animal life is on board.

*Congo: A representative of Czechoslovak Airlines (CSA) reportedly made preliminary arrangements on 31 January with the Sudanese Government for establishment of CSA passenger and cargo services from Prague to Khartoum via Cairo.
CSA hopes to continue the line to Stanleyville.
the Stanleyville regime expects a Czech flight via Khartoum between 6 and 15 February, as part of the Czech "Red Cross aid." The Sudan can probably stall in granting transit rights for permanent service, but may find it difficult to refuse transit of an allegedly humanitarian mission.
both the Czech and the Soviet requests of late January to transit the Sudan with food and medical supplies for pro-Lumumba areas of the Congo may be part of a plan to circumvent Sudanese refusal to grant transit of direct aid to Gizenga[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

Communist China - Albania: In contrast to the Soviet Union and East European satellites, which have publicly shown
[PAGE 05]
their displeasure with Albania's "deviationism" since the Moscow conference last November, Communist China continues to play up the "inviolable" friendship between Peiping and Tirana. On 2 February, Peiping announced the signing of six documents concerned with economic relations negotiated during the current visit to Peiping of an Albanian delegation. Details of the agreements have not yet become available, but a new Chinese loan to Albania may be involved. In discussing the agreements, the Peiping People's Daily on 3 February, in an apparent jibe at Moscow, emphasized the correctness of the statement in the Moscow declaration of last November that socialist countries "big and small" have equal rights and should "support each other." (Backup, Page 1)

*[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Tunisia - USSR: President Bourguiba is negotiating for Soviet credits for public works projects in Tunisia. Bourguiba has been unable to procure enough credits from Western sources to carry out his ambitious development program. This step is part of an adjustment of Tunisian policy intended to make it appear more consonant with Asian-African nonalignment. Two Tunisian engineers went to Moscow this week to work out details of an agreement in principle made with the USSR in January to grant credits for the construction of three small dams in northern Tunisia and to finance an engineering school. This is the second Tunisian credit arrangement with the Soviet bloc; late last year Tunis arranged for an eight-year $8,000,000 credit from Poland, none of which has as yet been used. (CONFI[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]-
(Backup, Page 3)

*Ceylon: Prime Minister Bandaranaike's government continues to encourage closer economic and diplomatic contacts with the bloc. The six-month-old government under Mrs. Bandaranaike is motivated primarily by an urge to demonstrate its neutralist position, while at the same time profiting from favorable trade and aid terms offered by the bloc. In addition to encouraging more active Soviet participation in development projects and "diversifying" Ceylon's trade by allowing bloc countries a

4 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
larger--though still limited--share, Colombo has frequently taken positions favorable to the bloc on major international issues, particularly in its role as a current member of the UN Security Council. Mrs. Bandaranaike plans to visit the USSR in March after the Commonwealth prime ministers' conference in London--her first official trip abroad and the first visit to Moscow by a Ceylonese head of Government.
(Backup, Page 5)

*Portugal: Some of Premier Salazar's stanchest supporters are reported to be shocked by his inability to cope with the situation produced by the seizure of the Santa Maria and to have stated that he must be replaced at some time in the "not too distant future." No precipitate action is likely, but the various factions within the regime will probably make an early attempt to reach agreement among themselves regarding a successor.
(Backup, Page 7)

4 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
New Economic Agreements Reaffirm Sino-
Albanian Friendship

The Albanian regime, which supported Communist China in its dispute with Moscow, has been under fire from the Soviet bloc since the end of the Moscow conference in early December. East German party boss Ulbricht on 18 December publicly accused Albania's Enver Hoxha of adhering to "dogmatic and sectarian" positions at the conference. This is the first such censure since the 1948 break with Tito. Other European satellites and the USSR also have slighted the Albanians on a number of occasions. Moscow's New Year's greetings to Albania omitted the usual introductory phase "dear comrades," and its 11 January greetings on the anniversary of the proclamation of the "people's regime" in Albania, addressed only to titular head of state Lleshi, mentioned only the Albanian people and not the party. On the same day, an article in the leading Bulgarian daily about Albania omitted the customary title "comrade" when speaking of Hoxha.

Tirana, however, has continued to hold to its deviationist positions, probably in large part because of its expectation of continued Chinese Communist support. In contrast with Soviet bloc treatment of Albania, Peiping in its 3 February editorial on the recently signed Sino-Albanian economic agreements, lauded the Albanian regime. It spoke of "the correct leadership of the Albanian Workers' (Communist) party headed by Comrade Enver Hoxha."

Peiping, hoping to retain Albania's support, would probably be willing to give Albania some additional aid despite serious economic troubles at home. Between 1954 and 1958 Peiping granted about $20,000,000 in economic aid to Albania to finance deliveries of Chinese goods and services. Under an agreement concluded in 1959, the Chinese extended another $13,800,000 credit to Albania for use between 1961 and 1965. The series of new economic pacts just concluded in Peiping

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
probably has altered the terms of this agreement by boosting the total amount of aid.

The most notable example of Chinese economic support to Albania during recent months has been the shipment of wheat at a time of critical food shortages in China. In 1960 these exports to Albania totaled about 105,000 tons, only a small part of which came from China, and the rest from Western Europe, Australia, and the USSR; all of it was shipped at the expense of the Chinese, however. Albania also is receiving at least 40,000 tons of the wheat Peiping currently is purchasing from Australia and additional deliveries probably will continue throughout the year.

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Tunisia Explores Soviet Credit for Public
Works Project

President Bourguiba's dispatch of two technicians to Moscow is in line with the gradual expansion of Tunisia's contacts with the Sino-Soviet bloc as well as with Bourguiba's policy of nonalignment. Within the past year, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the USSR have established embassies in Tunis; a Tunisian ambassador accredited also to Czechoslovakia and Poland has taken up residence in Moscow; several Tunisian secretaries of state have visited bloc capitals; and 32 Czech and Bulgarian technicians have been employed under contract by the Secretariat of State for Public Works. Moreover, Secretary of State for Information Masmoudi is scheduled to visit Peiping later this month, presumably as a prelude to Tunisian recognition of Communist China.

These contacts have to some extent silenced Bourguiba's domestic critics, who had argued that his former pro-Western alignment was hampering Tunisia's internal development and its development as a power. Bourguiba's long-standing quarrel with UAR President Nasir and his recent difficulties with Moroccan King Mohamed V have contributed toward the diplomatic isolation from which Bourguiba is seeking to escape.

The American Embassy in Tunis estimates that the projected three small dams located on streams in northern Tunisia might involve foreign exchange costs of about $6,000,000. The estimated construction cost of all three is nearly $13,000,000. The Defense Loan Fund apparently had been approached for financing one of these dams, the Oued Kessab project.

one of the Tunisian technicians en route to Moscow plans to ascertain the nature of

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Soviet assistance to train junior engineers. Although discussions have been held between the Soviet Embassy in Tunis and the Tunisian Secretariat of State for Foreign Affairs regarding an engineering school, these plans remain vague. Present planning for a projected university in Tunis envisages an American contribution of some $2,000,000 over the next four years to a School of Law, Economics, and Business. As of March 1960, the Tunisians anticipated that France might contribute a faculty of sciences.

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]
Ceylon Encourages Relations With the Sino-
Soviet Bloc

The cordial relations established under the leadership of Mrs. Bandaranaike's husband, who was prime minister from 1956 until his assassination in 1959, have been revived during her six months in office. Work on development projects contracted for under the Soviet Union's $30,000,000 credit of 1958 is being stepped up. Six Soviet experts arrived on 25 January to resume work on plans for the construction of an iron and steel mill near Colombo. Soviet engineers have also presented the Ceylonese with preliminary plans for a flood-control scheme and an automobile tire and tube factory to be partially financed by Moscow.

The Ceylonese finance minister, who plans to accompany Prime Minister Bandaranaike on her London-Moscow-Cairo trip, probably will discuss other projects available under the credit agreement as well as recent Soviet offers of civil aircraft, pilot training, and refined petroleum products. Moscow has offered petroleum products at prices considerably below those of the Anglo-American consortium, which is the sole local importer and distributor of these products.

Colombo's attempt to equalize its economic relations with the Communist bloc and the free world has resulted in new trade negotiations with various Communist governments. Since last December, Ceylon has contracted for a total of 79,000 tons of sugar--chiefly of Cuban origin--from Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and the USSR; Ceylon in the past has relied on free-world sources for most of the 150,000 tons of sugar required annually. The government may also be considering the proposal made recently by a visiting East German trade union delegation for a trade agreement; Ceylon now has neither diplomatic nor formal trade relations with East Germany. A trade pact probably would be encouraged by the leftist minister of trade.

Negotiations between Ceylon and Communist China concerning this year's protocol to their second five-year rice-

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 12]
rubber barter agreement (1958-62), apparently are not final. It seems likely, however, that the substantially higher level of rice-rubber trade which existed prior to 1960 will be resumed under the 1961 contract.

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 13]
Impact of the Santa Maria Case on the Salazar Regime

The Santa Maria incident has placed Portuguese Premier Salazar in an unfavorable light in the eyes of some strong supporters who had expected vigorous guidance in directing governmental action. Salazar, who is almost 72, reportedly has lost physical and mental vigor since his early January attack of pneumonia. Since the end of 1958, some of his supporters have believed he has outlived his usefulness. Barring a turn for the worse in Portugal's relations with Brazil or unrest of threatening proportions in the African provinces, current dissatisfaction on the part of Salazar's supporters may, however, die down in the next few weeks. Furthermore, there appears to be no one in sight who, in the opinion of the various factions of the regime, could attract general support and carry through a viable successor government.

Among possible successors, Minister of the Presidency Theotonio Pereira is perhaps the leading contender, although the attitude of the armed forces toward him is not at present clear. Others are Defense Minister Botelho Moniz, and former Minister of the Presidency Marcenio Caetano, who is probably the most capable politician among the top proregime civilians.

The irritation shown by top-level Portuguese officials over the US position on the Santa Maria is likely to persist. The Portuguese still resent the US abstention on the UN resolution calling on Portugal to give information on non-self-governing territories. These factors are likely to cause tougher bargaining on the extension of the Azores bases agreement, which expires in December 1962.

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 15]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. USSR: Earth satellite launched from Tyura Tam Missile Test Range. (Page i)

2. Congo: Soviet bloc continues attempts to transit Sudan with "Red Cross aid" for Gizenga. (Page i)

3. Albania: Peiping emphasizes its "inviolable" friendship with Tirana while rest of bloc criticizes Albania's "deviationism." (Page i)

4. Tunisia: Negotiations under way for Soviet assistance on public works projects. (Page ii)

5. Ceylonese Prime Minister, Mrs. Bandaranaike, plans visit to USSR in March. (Page ii)

6. Portugal: Some former supporters of Salazar advocate his replacement in wake of Santa Maria affair. (Page iii)
