[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

22 September 1959

Copy No. C 65

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
III. THE WEST

Britain-CENTO: (London has renewed its efforts to persuade the United States to accept full membership in the Central Treaty Organization. The British are anxious to boost the Shah's morale. London apparently fears that he will be subjected to increasing pressure to reach an accommodation with the USSR.)

Argentina: The joint Peronista-Communist call for a general strike on 23 and 24 September in support of both political and economic demands has been denounced by Economy Minister Alsogaray as an effort to sabotage economic recovery. He warned of stern countermeasures, and the government is reported prepared to arrest a number of key labor leaders prior to the strike in order to discourage widespread support.

22 Sept 59
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Britain Again Asks United States to Join CENTO

(Britain has renewed its efforts to persuade the United States to accept full membership in the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO). Speaking to Secretary Herter in New York on 18 September, Foreign Secretary Lloyd expressed concern that CENTO--formerly the Baghdad Pact--would collapse. He cited Pakistani and Turkish worries and asserted that full US membership would give the pact an important psychological boost.)

(London's worries center on the problem of Iran as the only CENTO member not also belonging to another Western security organization. Foreign Office Deputy Under Secretary Sir Roger Stevens, a former ambassador to Tehran, recently said he feared that Iran might go neutralist if the Shah does not receive the material and moral support he deems necessary.)

(In connection with the 7-9 October CENTO ministerial council meetings in Washington, London may press some of its other recent ideas for giving CENTO an appearance of greater vitality. These include setting up a CENTO air command, initiating CENTO contingency planning against USSR-incited aggression from Afghanistan or Iraq, and establishing a NATO-like annual review procedure to emphasize balance in economic and military capabilities.)

22 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2

[PAGE 06]
Peronistas and Communists Call General Strike in Argentina

(Argentine Economy Minister Alsogaray has denounced the joint Peronista-Communist call for a general strike on 23 and 24 September as an effort to sabotage economic recovery. He said he would take stern countermeasures to safeguard the public interest and security. The government is reported prepared to arrest a number of key labor leaders prior to the strike in order to discourage widespread support. Such action is legally possible under state-of-siege regulations, and the army commander in chief reportedly favors firm measures against subversive strikes.)

(The collaboration of the Peronistas and Communists is in accordance with their 24 August pact for united action against austerity measures under the US-backed stabilization program. The two groups had already cooperated in earlier strikes and in June had publicly announced their intention to coordinate strike action.)

(The government, also concerned over possible Peronista-Communist cooperation in the congressional elections next March, is preparing a case to be used as a basis for suspending the legal status of the Communist party. Although Frondizi in April issued a decree banning Communist political activity, implementing legislation is lacking, and the Communists participated in several subsequent provincial elections.)

22 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
