[PAGE 01]
22 September 1959
Copy No. C 65

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laotian Government's presentation of aggression case to UN subcommittee called unimpressive.
Algerian rebel leadership regards De Gaulle's proposals as acceptable basis for talks with French, according to Tunisian official.

III. THE WEST
British renew efforts to persuade US to accept full membership in Central Treaty Organization.
Argentine Government prepared to arrest key labor leaders to discourage support of planned strike.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The Laotian Government's initial presentation to the United Nations subcommittee of its case charging North Vietnamese involvement in the rebellion in Laos was unimpressive, the briefing placed too much emphasis on military details of the early stages of the fighting and was confused, ambiguous, and too short in dealing with the period following the attacks of 30 August. All four delegation heads seem anxious to try to obtain proof of North Vietnamese aggression in Laos. (Page 1)

Algeria: The Algerian rebel leadership views De Gaulle's 16 September proposals as an acceptable basis for talks with the French and an eventual cease-fire. The formal rebel reply to De Gaulle is expected to take a positive view of his program, but may emphasize the need for negotiations on the terms of a cease-fire. The rebels reportedly regard negotiations as necessary to obtain certain safeguards as well as to save face and to demonstrate to the rebel army that they have not surrendered.

Although Algiers remains quiet, extreme rightists continue to denounce the De Gaulle program, and any indication that it might be accepted by the rebels could lead to disorders. In a move probably designed to exert pressure on the rebels and to neutralize European extremist sentiment, General Challe announced on 21 September that pacification operations will be intensified and that a new offensive soon will be launched.

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Britain-CENTO: London has renewed its efforts to persuade the United States to accept full membership in the Central Treaty Organization. The British are anxious to boost the Shah's morale. London apparently fears that he will be subjected to increasing pressure to reach an accommodation with the USSR. (Page 2)

Argentina: The joint Peronista-Communist call for a general strike on 23 and 24 September in support of both political and economic demands has been denounced by Economy Minister Alsogaray as an effort to sabotage economic recovery. He warned of stern countermeasures, and the government is reported prepared to arrest a number of key labor leaders prior to the strike in order to discourage widespread support. (Page 3)

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UN Subcommittee Begins Investigation in Laos

The Laotian Government's initial oral presentation of its case to the United Nations subcommittee charging North Vietnamese involvement in the rebellion in Laos was unimpressive, the briefing placed too much emphasis on military details of the early stages of the fighting and was confused, ambiguous, and too short concerning the attacks of 30 August along the Nam Ma River in Sam Neua Province and the period following. There were numerous discrepancies between this briefing and statements given to the UN by Laotian Foreign Minister Khamphan Panya.

The subcommittee has since turned to examination of written evidence compiled by the Laotian Government, and will probably later make on-the-spot investigations in the forward areas of Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces where most of the enemy attacks have occurred.

All four delegation heads seem basically anxious to try to obtain proof of North Vietnamese involvement. The impreciseness of the subcommittee's mandate and the differences of its interpretation among the members may, however, impede the investigation of the Laotian Government's charges. The subcommittee secretary general, in effect Dag Hammarskjold's representative, has exercised a restraining influence on the scope of the investigation in line with Hammarskjold's concern that nothing be done to cast doubt on the subcommittee's limited role of "fact-collecting."

[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

Britain Again Asks United States to Join CENTO

Britain has renewed its efforts to persuade the United States to accept full membership in the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO). Speaking to Secretary Herter in New York on 18 September, Foreign Secretary Lloyd expressed concern that CENTO--formerly the Baghdad Pact--would collapse. He cited Pakistani and Turkish worries and asserted that full US membership would give the pact an important psychological boost.

London's worries center on the problem of Iran as the only CENTO member not also belonging to another Western security organization. Foreign Office Deputy Under Secretary Sir Roger Stevens, a former ambassador to Tehran, recently said he feared that Iran might go neutralist if the Shah does not receive the material and moral support he deems necessary.

In connection with the 7-9 October CENTO ministerial council meetings in Washington, London may press some of its other recent ideas for giving CENTO an appearance of greater vitality. These include setting up a CENTO air command, initiating CENTO contingency planning against USSR-incited aggression from Afghanistan or Iraq, and establishing a NATO-like annual review procedure to emphasize balance in economic and military capabilities.

[PAGE 08]
Peronistas and Communists Call General Strike in Argentina

Argentine Economy Minister Alsogaray has denounced the joint Peronista-Communist call for a general strike on 23 and 24 September as an effort to sabotage economic recovery. He said he would take stern countermeasures to safeguard the public interest and security. The government is reported prepared to arrest a number of key labor leaders prior to the strike in order to discourage widespread support. Such action is legally possible under state-of-siege regulations, and the army commander in chief reportedly favors firm measures against subversive strikes.

The collaboration of the Peronistas and Communists is in accordance with their 24 August pact for united action against austerity measures under the US-backed stabilization program. The two groups had already cooperated in earlier strikes and in June had publicly announced their intention to coordinate strike action.

The government, also concerned over possible Peronista-Communist cooperation in the congressional elections next March, is preparing a case to be used as a basis for suspending the legal status of the Communist party. Although Frondizi in April issued a decree banning Communist political activity, implementing legislation is lacking, and the Communists participated in several subsequent provincial elections.

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
