WESTERN EUROPE

6. Ehrenburg issues strong blast at Mendes-France in Pravda:

Pravda on 6 January carried an article by the well-known Soviet publicist, Ilya Ehrenburg, which the American embassy described as the most vicious personal attack yet on Mendes-France. Ehrenburg said the French premier had "won the confidence of American rulers but lost the confidence of France." He said that it had taken Mendes-France only six months to "renounce everything he had professed before."

Ehrenburg charged that Mendes-France had lost his short-lived interest in parallel negotiations, and was now misleading some naive Frenchmen into believing that "the vigorous goose-stepping of restored German divisions" will facilitate talks on Germany. He warned that ratification of the Paris agreements would make negotiations on Germany meaningless.

Comment: Soviet press treatment of Mendes-France has become increasingly critical in recent months, but this attack is distinctly stronger and more personal than any heretofore. The USSR probably believes that Mendes-France is currently vulnerable to the charge of being the chief French architect of German rearmament, and that an all-out attack on him will help to overthrow him and thereby damage the prospects for full ratification of the Paris accords.

7. French reported proposing that Bonn promise Moscow delay on rearmament:

According to West German state secretary Blankenhorn, Jean Soutou, personal spokesman on foreign affairs for Mendes-France, has proposed that Bonn approach Moscow after ratification of the Paris accords and offer not to put into effect the military clauses of the treaty pending some settlement of the question of German reunification. Blankenhorn said that Chancellor Adenauer "quickly rejected" Soutou's proposal. He doubts that Mendes-France will bring up the matter again in the 14 January meeting with Adenauer.

Comment: Blankenhorn in the past has not always been a reliable reporter of French-German negotiations.

Soutou has seemed obsessed recently by the idea that definite assurances of further four-power negotiations on German and European security problems are necessary to guarantee a favorable vote on the Paris accords in the Council of the Republic. He has admitted, however, that Mendes-France has "no illusions whatever" about obtaining anything from the Russians at a possible four-power meeting early next summer except in the unlikely event of a change in the basic Soviet position on Germany.

It is hardly likely that the government would have underestimated the reaction of Chancellor Adenauer to such a proposal. Even if Bonn agreed to such a plan, its necessarily secret character and the time element would make its political exploitation in France difficult.

8. French minister for Associated States favors return of Bao Dai to Vietnam:

Minister for Associated States Guy La Chambre told Ambassador Dillon in Paris that he is convinced that the immediate return of Bao Dai is the only working solution for South Vietnam. He said the French were thinking in terms of Tran Van Huu as premier and Nguyen Van Tam as interior minister.

La Chambre pointed to evidence of a lack of enthusiasm among the Viet Minh rank and file for the Communist pattern now unfolding in the north and argued the urgency of getting a "strong, effective" government in the south to demonstrate that life under a non-Communist regime is better.
