[PAGE 01]
21 April 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN

2. SOVIET NOTE ON THE MIDDLE EAST

4. FIRST SHIPMENT OF CHINESE COMMUNIST AID TO
CAMBODIA UNDER WAY

21 Apr 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN (As of 2100, 21 April)

Egypt and Syria, together with antimon-
archical Jordanian nationalist groups
inside and outside of Jordan, are attempt-
ing to prevent King Hussain from consol-
idating his position and may be about to
undertake a struggle which could set the
anti-Western majority of the population in
West Jordan in open resistance to the king.

The new crisis was given impetus by the
king's appointment of a council of five army
officers to investigate loyalty in the army,
and by his replacement of 40 to 60 nation-
alist officers with Bedouin officers loyal
to the crown. These moves and the arrest
of at least eleven antimonarchical "free
officers" led to the flight of recently ap-
pointed chief of staff Hiyari to Damascus,
whence he tendered his resignation. Al-
though professedly nonpolitical, Hiyari has
a background of covert nationalist, anti-
monarchical activity. Following his resig-
nation, Hiyari held a news conference in Damascus and accused
the "palace" of "preparing a plot in co-operation with foreign
non-Arab military attachés in Amman against Jordan's inde-
pendence and liberty!" Hiyari said that he had left when he
"found he could not stop this plot." A Bedouin officer, Major
General Habis Majali, has been named acting chief of staff.

21 Apr 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
Coincidentally with Hiyari's flight, ac-
tive opposition to the King's program began to develop in
West Jordan. The dominant National Socialist Party is re-
ported to have demanded that its leader, former Premier
Nabulsi, resign from the cabinet, and the leftist-dominated
National Guidance Committees in West Jordan have circulated
petitions demanding replacement of American ambassador
Mallory for alleged interference in Jordan's internal affairs.
Demonstrations have resumed in West Jordan supporting these
demands.

21 Apr 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]
2. SOVIET NOTES ON THE MIDDLE EAST

The 19 April Soviet notes to the United
States, Britain and France appear to be
primarily an attempt to exploit for its
propaganda value in the Arab world the
Western refusal of the USSR's six-point
draft declaration of 11 February on the Middle East.

The USSR, while restating the validity of
its original declaration, now calls for a four-power declara-
tion condemning the use of force in the Near and Middle East
as a first step toward "normalization." It accuses the West
of refusing to seek an acceptable basis for a regional settle-
ment. The three notes are: not identical in their lines of argu-
ment, but they all reflect the USSR's preoccupation with pre-
venting unilateral Western intervention in the area. For the
most part, the notes merely recapitulate the established
Soviet position.

21 Apr 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
4. FIRST SHIPMENT OF CHINESE COMMUNIST AID TO
CAMBODIA UNDER WAY

The first shipments under the $22,400,000
Chinese Communist aid program to Cam-
bodia are scheduled to depart Hong Kong
on 20 and 24 April, according to the Amer-
ican embassy in Phnom Penh. The aid will consist of 1,200 tons
of cement, 1,400 tons of textiles, and "iron and steel cargo".

This shipment is being made at a time when
anti-Communist sentiment is perceptively increasing in neutral-
ist Cambodia. Peiping's long delay in implementing the aid agree-
ment negotiated nearly a year ago has caused dissatisfaction in
Phnom Penh, culminating in a newspaper attack on Chinese aid
"promises" by a high Cambodian official during late March.
Growing Communist subversion in Cambodia has heightened
this dissatisfaction and has raised doubts as to the efficacy of
Cambodia's present "neutralist" policies.

21 Apr 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
