[PAGE 01]
21 April 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN (page 3).

2. SOVIET NOTE ON THE MIDDLE EAST (page 5).

3. MAKARIOS' VIEWS ON CYPRUS ISSUE (page 6).

4. FIRST SHIPMENT OF CHINESE COMMUNIST AID TO CAMBODIA UNDER WAY (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN (As of 2100, 21 April)

Comment on:

Egypt and Syria, together with antimonarchical Jordanian nationalist groups inside and outside of Jordan, are attempting to prevent King Hussain from consolidating his position and may be about to undertake a struggle which could set the anti-Western majority of the population in West Jordan in open resistance to the king.

The new crisis was given impetus by the King's appointment of a council of five army officers to investigate loyalty in the army, and by his replacement of 40 to 60 nationalist officers with Bedouin officers loyal to the crown. These moves and the arrest of at least eleven antimonarchical "free officers" led to the flight of recently appointed chief of staff Hiyari to Damascus, whence he tendered his resignation. Although professedly nonpolitical, Hiyari has a background of covert nationalist, antimonarchical activity. Following his resignation, Hiyari held a news conference in Damascus and accused the "palace" of "preparing a plot in co-operation with foreign non-Arab military attaches in Amman against Jordan's independence and liberty!" Hiyari said that he had left when he "found he could not stop this plot." A Bedouin officer, Major General Habis Majali, has been named acting chief of staff.

King Hussain was trying to get Syrian forces to withdraw from Jordan and was attempting to gain control of the army in preparation for making an alliance with the West and accepting the American proposals on the Middle East.

[PAGE 04]
Foreign Minister Nabulsi and others had been forced to join the cabinet by the king's threats, and would take the first opportunity to escape.

Coincidentally with Hiyari's flight, active opposition to the King's program began to develop in West Jordan. The dominant National Socialist Party is reported to have demanded that its leader, former Premier Nabulsi, resign from the cabinet, and the leftist-dominated National Guidance Committees in West Jordan have circulated petitions demanding replacement of American ambassador Mallory for alleged interference in Jordan's internal affairs. Demonstrations have resumed in West Jordan supporting these demands. Demonstrations and riots are expected to occur in West Jordan after Easter in an attempt to overthrow the King.

On 20 April the Egyptian military attaché in Damascus urged Cairo to publicize Jordanian events immediately, and recommended preparation of Jordan's "people, political organizations and reliable men for opposition to the King's wishes, if he is bent on carrying his plans through to the end." The attaché added that the Syrians had sent an officer to contact those "free officers" in Jordan who were still in command of their units, but admitted that their disposition in relation to other army units was unfavorable since they could not leave the Israeli front unguarded. He said that if Cairo desired to act in Jordan, "the work should be co-ordinated with Syria quickly," and urged that the Saudis be made to understand that their support of Hussain would lead to Jordan's disintegration.

[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET NOTES ON THE MIDDLE EAST

Comment on:

The 19 April Soviet notes to the United States, Britain and France appear to be primarily an attempt to exploit for its propaganda value in the Arab world the Western refusal of the USSR's six-point draft declaration of 11 February on the Middle East.

The USSR, while restating the validity of its original declaration, now calls for a four-power declaration condemning the use of force in the Near and Middle East as a first step toward "normalization." It accuses the West of refusing to seek an acceptable basis for a regional settlement. The three notes are not identical in their lines of argument, but they all reflect the USSR's preoccupation with preventing unilateral Western intervention in the area. For the most part, the notes merely recapitulate the established Soviet position.

the USSR never expected the West to accept the declaration proposed in its note of 11 February, but considered that the note had a high propaganda potential.

[PAGE 06]
3. MAKARIOS' VIEWS ON CYPRUS ISSUE

Reference:

Archbishop Makarios' views on a solution of the Cyprus issue remain the same as when his negotiations with British governor Harding were broken off in February 1956.

Makarios then demanded an elected legislature appropriately reflecting the island's Greek majority, amnesty for members of the EOKA underground, Cypriot control of internal security, and the grant of self-determination within a fixed time limit. Makarios' statement means his ultimate goal remains the union of Cyprus with Greece.

Following a discussion among Makarios and Foreign Minister Averoff and his subordinates on 17 April, all concerned regarded partitioning Cyprus as "utterly unacceptable." Averoff also said that Makarios seemed interested in the concept of "guaranteed independence" but did not respond to Averoff's offer to work for that solution.

According to Averoff's account, Makarios is pleased with the Greek government's handling of the issue and particularly with Prime Minister Karamanlis.

Makarios disagrees with Athens' attempts to avoid offending Ankara, whose reaction he insists is "contrived." The Turks would "have to be satisfied" with assurances on minority rights but cannot expect to participate in any negotiations. Makarios also rules out NATO consideration because of the "complications" which would be created for the Greek government.

Makarios reportedly intends to leave Athens in a few days because of his fear of becoming embroiled in local politics: "If I stay, it will become like a coffeehouse wherever I am."

[PAGE 07]
4. FIRST SHIPMENT OF CHINESE COMMUNIST AID TO CAMBODIA UNDER WAY

Comment on:

The first shipments under the $22,400,000 Chinese Communist aid program to Cambodia are scheduled to depart Hong Kong on 20 and 24 April, according to the American embassy in Phnom Penh. The aid will consist of 1,200 tons of cement, 1,400 tons of textiles, and "iron and steel cargo."

This shipment is being made at a time when anti-Communist sentiment is perceptively increasing in neutralist Cambodia. Peiping's long delay in implementing the aid agreement negotiated nearly a year ago has caused dissatisfaction in Phnom Penh, culminating in a newspaper attack on Chinese aid "promises" by a high Cambodian official during late March. Growing Communist subversion in Cambodia has heightened this dissatisfaction and has raised doubts as to the efficacy of Cambodia's present "neutralist" policies.

Cambodia is concerned that South Vietnam--with which its relations have been gradually improving--will not permit these shipments to transit its waters, thereby forcing them to be off-loaded in lighters at the new Cambodian port of Kampong Som in the Gulf of Siam.

[PAGE 08]
