[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

3 January 1953

Copy No. 58

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Large manganese-copper deal between USSR and London firm reported (page 3).
2. Yugoslav position on joint military planning with Greece and Turkey reported (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Japan planning reduced defense expenditures in new budget (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
5. Nepal reported considering diplomatic relations with Communist China (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
9. British Suez proposals contingent on Egypt's participation in MEDO (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
10. Soviet officials predict early reopening of Berlin canal (page 7).

LATIN AMERICA

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Large manganese-copper deal between USSR and London firm reported:
a British firm has reached agreement with the Soviet trade delegation in London to purchase 150,000 tons of Russian manganese ore at $47 per ton against delivery via Antwerp to Gdynia of Chilean electrolytic copper of the same value. Deliveries are to be made within the next six months.

Comment: This amount of manganese ore is about three times the total quantity shipped from the USSR to all of Western Europe in 1951, although it represents less than three percent of estimated Soviet production. In November an East-West trader approached the US Embassy in Bern seeking a dollar buyer for at least 50,000 tons of manganese ore and an offer to an American firm of 30,000 tons has been reported from Bombay.

The apparent willingness to expand manganese ore exports suggests that Moscow now attaches more significance to obtaining embargoed copper than to depriving the West of manganese.

2. Yugoslav position on joint military planning with Greece and Turkey reported:
Yugoslavia desires a formal agreement with Greece and Turkey for joint action in the event any one of the countries is attacked, according to the Greek Defense Minister. At the most recent military talks with Greece, Yugoslavia proposed that such an agreement include specific arrangements such as provision for operations of Greek forces in Yugoslavia and vice versa.

The Greek Defense Minister states that Greece would be disposed to sign a defense agreement with Yugoslavia if such an agreement would not conflict with its NATO obligations.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
Comment: Yugoslav military talks with Turkey and with General Handy, representing the United States, France, and Britain, have made little progress; none of the participants is yet ready to make definite commitments. Yugoslav willingness to proceed immediately with Greece probably reflects the greater need of such cooperation for strategic reasons, the hope that Turkey will follow Greece's lead, and a need to strengthen Yugoslavia's hand against Italy. Turkish officials have also indicated a desire to coordinate the matter with NATO before making a specific agreement.

FAR EAST

3. Japan planning reduced defense expenditures in new budget:
The Japanese Cabinet has tentatively approved a reduction in defense expenditures for the fiscal year beginning 1 April 1953. The proposed budget, which will be presented to the Diet in late January, allocates only $403,000,000 to the defense program in contrast with a total of $514,000,000 for the current fiscal year.

Comment: The proposed reduction reflects the basic weakness of the Yoshida government, which feels that public opinion will not support increased military expenditures. An expansion of Japan's ground forces to 180,000 during 1953, as envisaged in tentative American planning, cannot be accomplished under the proposed budget.

Japanese officials justify the contemplated decrease on the grounds that $155,000,000 of the 1952 appropriation was a one-time expenditure for construction and original equipment.

4.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

5. Nepal reported considering diplomatic relations with Communist China:
The Nepalese Government is seriously considering the early establishment of diplomatic relations with Communist China,

A late November Nepalese press report stated that the establishment of relations with Peiping was under consideration.

Comment: Nepal reportedly rejected a Chinese Communist approach on this subject last summer, apparently because of opposition from India, which exerts strong influence in Kathmandu.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
9. British Suez proposals contingent on Egypt's participation in MEDO:
Egyptian participation in MEDO is an essential part of the British proposal for settling Anglo-Egyptian differences. Under the plan, now being discussed in London with American officials, MEDO would be established, including Egyptian officers, as soon as Egypt agrees to participate.

Britain hopes thus to determine Egyptian willingness to cooperate in the joint defense of the Middle East before withdrawing all British troops from the Suez area.

Comment: Ambassador Caffery, commenting on the British proposal, states that Egypt will not accept any settlement making British evacuation dependent on participation in MEDO. To him, Cairo's 10 November note to the United States indicates that Nagib would probably not agree to any public announcement of his intention to participate in joint Middle East planning.

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Soviet officials predict early reopening of Berlin canal:
Soviet officials told British representatives in Berlin on 30 December that the Rothensee shiplift on the Mittelland Canal would probably

- 7 -
[PAGE 08]
be opened by the end of January. They said that repairs had been given high priority, but that bad weather had hampered the work.

The Soviet officials also said that the Allied request for additional trains to Berlin could be granted, but that details had not yet been worked out with the East German Reichsbahn. They proposed another meeting in about two weeks to discuss the matter.

Comment: According to some reports, the shiplift is already being used by East German barges.

LATIN AMERICA

- 8 -
