European Confederation Talks

The results of the top-level talks in Paris last week end on closer political ties among the six Common Market (EEC) countries were apparently predetermined in large part by Adenauer's meeting with De Gaulle on 9 February. According to Netherlands Foreign Minister Luns, De Gaulle opened the "little summit" meeting by renewing his proposals for a loose European confederation, with provision for quarterly heads-of-government meetings, ministerial committees for foreign and cultural affairs, and a permanent secretariat. De Gaulle also referred to the need for defense coordination, but did not pursue this point.

In the subsequent discussion, De Gaulle's proposals were endorsed by the prime ministers of Italy, Belgium, and Luxembourg, and only Luns declared his complete opposition. Adenauer thereupon also supported De Gaulle and, apparently to Luns' surprise, took no cognizance of the Dutch opposition. De Gaulle kept stressing the necessity for "Europe of the Six" to speak with one voice, and argued that a "strong Six" would eventually attract Eastern Europe since "Communism would not last, God is too high, and the United States too far away." In later discussions, strong pressures were exerted on Luns by both De Gaulle and Adenauer, the latter reportedly having observed at one point that the Netherlands' reservation "at most had deserved only a few minutes interruption in the historic proceedings."

The objections by the Dutch reflected in large part their continuing belief that the creation of new institutions will weaken the existing institutions of the Common Market, and that De Gaulle's plans for political cooperation will deepen the rift between the Common Market and the British-led Outer Seven and prove divisive in NATO. They think De Gaulle still is interested only in a Continental alliance and that his thinking is based on "unrealistic assessment of the centers of world power." Dutch concern on these points does not appear to have been shared to any extent by the others, with the possible exception of Fanfani. A West German official has attributed Dutch resistance mainly to a desire to have Britain
