[PAGE 01]
11 November 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence,
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Ambassador Bohlen reports on talk with Malenkov (page 3).
2. Bulganin makes friendly overtures to Iranian and Turkish mili-
tary attachés (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Mendes-France wants Washington talks to center on Indochina
(page 4).
5. Sukarno's endorsement of government's position seen as turning
point in Indonesian politics (page 6).

SOUTH ASIA
6. Nehru seen now "cautiously sympathetic" toward United States
(page 7).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Communists reported to be planning world-wide protest against
Iranian executions (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. High West German official discusses Saar agreement develop-
ments (page 9).

LATIN AMERICA
10.

****

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Ambassador Bohlen reports on talk with Malenkov:

Ambassador Bohlen reports that Premier Malenkov, during a half-hour
conversation at the 7 November recep-
tion, seemed particularly desirous of
impressing upon him the seriousness with which the Soviet Union
viewed the world situation and the intensity of its desire to pre-
vent war. The ambassador believes the attitude of Malenkov and
other Soviet officials at the reception and the restrained tone of
the holiday speeches indicate hesitancy and concern on the part of
the Soviet government arising out of the current situation--par-
ticularly the progress toward West German rearmament--which
it can do little about.

Malenkov told Bohlen and the British
ambassador that Moscow was not trying to improve its relations
with Britain at the expense of the United States; the USSR was not
so foolish as to try such a stupid game. He said the Soviet Union
wanted normal and good relations with all countries. With regard
to the Paris agreements, Malenkov said that something should be
done to improve relations "before their ratification." He coun-
seled that many outstanding problems would take time and patience
to settle and warned against letting small issues develop into big
ones.

Bohlen believes Malenkov's talk and
reference to "small issues" was directly motivated by his knowl-
edge of the recent plane incident and reflected concern that the
cumulative effect of such incidents with the United States might
lead to serious consequences.

2. Bulganin makes friendly overtures to Iranian and Turkish military
attachés:

According to the Iranian embassy in
Moscow, Soviet defense minister Bul-
ganin told the Iranian military attaché

[PAGE 04]
at the 7 November reception that Stalin had "spoiled the USSR's
good relations with Iran" and that he, Bulganin, had been against
this policy. Bulganin added that "we are now returning to Lenin's
policy" of friendship with Iran. He asked the attaché to report
this to Tehran as the view of the Soviet government. Bulganin
then turned to the Turkish military attaché and made a similarly
friendly statement. He also told the Iranian attaché that the USSR
would welcome military missions at any time and that they would
be shown "everything."

Ambassador Bohlen comments that this
is the first time since Stalin's death that a top Soviet official is
reported to have spoken directly in opposition to Stalin policy.

Comment: Moscow has repeatedly dem-
onstrated its willingness to negotiate differences with Iran and,
while its efforts to keep Iran from siding with the West have been
largely unsuccessful, it may still believe that friendliness will
preclude an all-out commitment. Soviet propaganda aimed at both
Turkey and Yugoslavia has been particularly friendly during re-
cent weeks, probably to counter Western defense efforts in the
Balkans and the Near East.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Mendes-France wants Washington talks to center on Indochina:

French premier Mendes-France consid-
ers Indochina the most important topic for
discussion during his visit to Washington
next week, according to Jean Soutou, his
personal spokesman.

Soutou told American officials in Paris
on 9 November that the premier intends to take up the question
of American aid along the line: "Are the Atlantic allies prepared
to make a further major effort to save the rest of Indochina from
Communism? If so, how? If not, how can we best get out of
Indochina?"

[PAGE 05]
Comment: Minister for the Associated
States La Chambre has made it clear that France still expects to
control administration of American aid to Indochina, and there are
other indications that France hopes the United States will accept
changes in the positions agreed on in the French-American dis-
cussions in Washington in September.

France apparently still hopes to do busi-
ness with the Viet Minh. The official French radio has announced
that Jean Sainteny, French representative to the Viet Minh, will
soon be officially accredited as a delegate general. While he was
given this title in August, Mendes-France later told American of-
ficials that it had been a mistake and that his functions were purely
consular. A French official in Washington admitted on 6 November
that France would have difficulty refusing the Viet Minh a similar
mission in Paris.

[PAGE 06]
5. Sukarno's endorsement of government's position seen as turning
point in Indonesian politics:

In a public address in central Sumatra
on 9 November, President Sukarno
stated that anyone loyal to ideas of
social progress in Indonesia would be
firmly against either Western or domestic capitalism. He ac-
cused "several Indonesian leaders" of collaborating with foreign
disruptive elements to bring down the cabinet. He said that the
Indonesian economy must not continue under external control,
and deplored the fact that "intelligent Indonesians" are still un-
der the influence of foreign ideas.

The American embassy comments that
if correctly reported, the speech is a clear abandonment of Sukar-
no's nonparty position and an unequivocal endorsement of the pres-
ent government coalition and the National Party. As such it is a
turning point in Indonesia's internal political struggle.

Comment: Sukarno's speech climaxes
several months of activity in which he has increasingly identi-
fied his own political future with that of the National Party, which
dominates the present cabinet. Formerly he had been regarded
as above politics and the most important controlling and unifying
factor in the Indonesian political picture.

As a partisan politician Sukarno will be
far more vulnerable to attack by the government's opposition. His
prestige, however, is still such as to provide the government with
much greater staying power than it has recently exhibited. The
government has become increasingly dependent on the Communists
for parliamentary support.

[PAGE 07]
SOUTH ASIA

6. Nehru seen now "cautiously sympathetic" toward United States:

Leading Indian editors and publishers in
Madras, all of whom have pipelines into
New Delhi, are convinced that Nehru has
returned from Communist China disillu-
sioned with what he saw, according to the American consul general
in Madras. Nehru will not admit disillusionment, and dramatic
moves on his part should not be anticipated. Nevertheless, Nehru
will be more "cautiously sympathetic" to American policies.

Comment: There is ample evidence that
Nehru did not fall under Communist influence in Peiping and that
he recognizes India's need to advance rapidly in the economic
sphere to keep pace with China.

One of the most striking illustrations of
this is Nehru's apparent willingness to surrender the leadership
of the Congress Party to its conservative elements, whose views
have been more in harmony with the West than his own.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Communists reported to be planning world-wide protest against
Iranian executions:

The Iranian government has information
which indicates that the Soviet Union is
planning a world-wide propaganda cam-
paign blaming the United States for the
current executions of Communists in Iran, according to Foreign
Minister Entezam.

Entezam told American chargé Rountree
that Iran is considering what measures it can take to counter lo-
cal rumors that the United States ordered the executions.

Comment: Soviet broadcasts to Iran
and to Europe soon after the arrests of Iranian Communist officers

[PAGE 08]
established the line that the anti-Communist campaign was
American-instigated. The only demonstrations against the exe-
cutions thus far reported occurred on 1 November, when a small
group of Israeli Communists protested outside the American em-
bassy in Tel Aviv.

A Tehran rumor, perhaps spread by the
Communists, asserts that the Shah attributes the executions to
American pressure.

[PAGE 09]
WESTERN EUROPE

9. High West German official discusses Saar agreement developments:

The West German government is launch-
ing a large-scale domestic propaganda
campaign this week to emphasize the
advantages of the Saar agreement, State
Secretary Globke told Ambassador Co-
nant on 8 November. Chancellor Adenauer,
he said, intends to negotiate with the
French on the agreement, particularly on
its economic provisions, but is unlikely to push hard on questions
of principle.

Globke believes the Refugee Party will
support the Saar agreement after the 28 November state elections,
and that the Free Democrats will split on the issue.

American observers in Bonn believe the
election results in Hesse and Bavaria will considerably influence
the Bundestag votes--now tentatively scheduled for mid-December--
on the Saar agreement and the Paris treaties.

Globke said that the possibility of a
Constitutional Court case on the Saar accord could not be excluded,
but that he hoped the Hesse elections would dissolve the only state
government that might bring suit.

Comment: It now appears that the minor
coalition parties would accept the Saar agreement, if assured that
it will be provisional and that political activity within the Saar will
be unhampered. It is doubtful, however, whether the French are
willing to commit themselves to the interpretations desired by the
Germans.

[PAGE 10]
LATIN AMERICA
