[PAGE 01]
8 December 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Pakistan-India: The Pakistani Government's selection of A. K. Brohi, one of Pakistan's most prominent and able legal experts, as high commissioner to India appears to be another move by President Ayub to promote better relations with New Delhi. Brohi is considered a strong advocate of closer ties. Ayub probably feels Brohi's experience as a UN delegate and skill as a negotiator will be useful in the Indo-Pakistani negotiations anticipated by Pakistani leaders.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: New difficulty in negotiating the status of the important American facilities on Cyprus may be foreshadowed by Archbishop Makarios' insistence that the issue be settled bilaterally with the new Cyprus government rather than multilaterally in London. Makarios had earlier agreed to holding the talks in London. He apparently continues to favor keeping the facilities on Cyprus but will probably seek compensation. He earlier warned, "You will have to pay us something." (Page 3)

Venezuela: The arrest in Mexico of several exiled Venezuelan officers on charges of preparing an invasion of Venezuela lends credibility to reports that such an attempt is being planned, possibly with external financial support from Dominican dictator Trujillo and former Venezuelan dictator Perez Jimenez. Rumors of a coup attempt sometime during December by disaffected Venezuelan military elements against the coalition of President Betancourt are circulating with increasing frequency in Caracas. Betancourt is believed to retain the support of the majority of the armed

8 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
forces and the overwhelming backing of civilian groups. The plotters are apparently deluding themselves that the time is ripe for an attempt in view of alleged difficulties in negotiations for a new labor contract in the key oil industry and the government's recent financial and exchange problems which have provoked considerable public uncertainty.

Peru: Navy Minister Tirado, reacting to a report from the Peruvian Embassy in Washington saying that Peru will not receive the funds allocated it under the Mutual Security Act, indicated to a US Embassy officer that he would consider such an action a direct reprisal against Peru for purchasing a second British cruiser. Tirado added that, if the report is confirmed, he will demand the withdrawal of the US Naval Mission in Peru. Peru's purchase of a second cruiser undercuts a recent move by West Coast Latin American countries toward cooperation in limiting military spending. (Page 4)

Panama: Foreign Minister Miguel Moreno told the US ambassador that the Panamanian Government will issue a press statement in the next day or two declaring that "no progress whatsoever" has been made in the recent negotiations of US-Panamanian differences. Panamanian student groups are believed to be organizing a new anti-US demonstration for 12 December. (Page 5)

8 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Latest Pakistani Move to Improve Relations With India

The Pakistani Government's selection of A. K. Brohi, an outstanding legal expert, as high commissioner to India appears to be another move by President Ayub to promote better relations with New Delhi. Brohi is regarded as a strong advocate of closer ties with India. He has considerable stature as a constitutional lawyer and will probably gain the respect of Indian officials. Ayub may feel that Brohi's experience as a UN delegate will be useful in future efforts to settle the Kashmir dispute.

Relations between Pakistan and India have improved markedly since Pakistan's military government came to power, and even more since the increase in Chinese Communist pressure on the Himalayan border area. The two countries are beginning to make real progress in settling border and financial issues that have troubled their relations since the partition of British India in 1947. On 3 December the two countries announced a new payments agreement intended to increase their mutual trade.

Pakistan's government-monitored press has recently curbed its hostile attitude toward India, and the Indian press has toned down its criticism of Pakistan. In editorializing on President Eisenhower's current visit to the subcontinent, newspapers in both countries have anticipated that he will try to bring India and Pakistan closer together and have implied that such an effort would be welcomed.

8 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 07]
Cyprus

The procedure to be followed in assuring continued operation of American facilities on Cyprus after the island becomes independent next February is uncertain following a change in Archbishop Makarios' position on this issue. Makarios originally suggested that the subject be discussed by US representatives and Cypriot leaders. He later agreed to have the Joint Committee in London, composed of British, Greek, Turk, and Cypriot representatives, take up the matter and accept in principle the continuation of existing arrangements between the US and UK. Details of a final agreement were to be negotiated by American and Cypriot representatives after Cyprus became independent. On 5 December, however, Makarios reverted to his original position.

The US maintains an FBIS monitoring station near Kyrenia and a Department of State radio relay station and certain other activities near Nicosia. The Zurich-London Agreements of 19 February 1959 provide that the new Republic of Cyprus will assume "appropriate obligations" of the present government.

Makarios repeatedly has indicated that continued operation of these facilities is acceptable to him but has also warned that compensation for this "hospitality" will be expected. No further action on the question is anticipated prior to the Cypriot presidential election on 13 December.

8 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
III. THE WEST

The Peruvian Situation

Peruvian Navy Minister Tirado charged on 4 December that the United States was planning direct reprisal against Peru for purchasing a second cruiser from the United Kingdom. Reacting to a report from the Peruvian Embassy in Washington saying that Peru would not receive funds allocated it under the Mutual Security Act, Tirado told a US Embassy officer that, if the report were confirmed, he would demand the withdrawal of the US Naval Mission in Peru or, failing that, would resign from the cabinet.

The disclosure of Peru's purchase of a British cruiser late in October had sharp repercussions in Chile and led to concurrent Peruvian-Chilean proposals for cooperation among West Coast Latin American countries in limiting military spending. Peru's second purchase, which was consummated last October but kept secret until early December, undercuts the proposals for arms limitation and may revive a destructive armaments race among Peru and its neighbors. Chile has been offered several British ships, including a battleship, at low cost and now may feel impelled to accept the offer. The United Kingdom, however, has agreed to consult with the United States on the sale of any battleship to Latin America.

8 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
New Anti-US Demonstrations Planned in Panama

Military intelligence sources and items in the Panamanian press have reported plans of extremist student groups to stage another anti-US march and meeting on 12 December. The demonstration would celebrate Panamanian rejection, as the result of mob action, of an agreement on US bases in 1947.

Foreign Minister Miguel Moreno told the US ambassador on 4 December that the Panamanian Government will publish a statement within a few days declaring that in spite of the recent conversations, the US has not made any substantial or specific offers to Panama, and "no progress whatsoever" has been made in the negotiation of US-Panamanian differences. He added that the administration felt obliged to tell the Panamanian people, whose hopes of more canal benefits have been raised by recent events, that the De la Guardia government regarded the latest US offers as being "entirely unsatisfactory." The publication of such a statement would increase the likelihood of additional disorders.

Unconfirmed reports have also been received that an assassination attempt against US Ambassador Harrington may be made on 8 December, and similar attempts at some indefinite time against the lives of Canal Zone Governor Potter and Panamanian National Guard Commander Vallarino. Plotters are said to include several instigators of the anti-US incidents of 3 and 28 November, who are hoping to force the US to move troops into Panamanian territory, thus causing an international incident which might eventually force the US to relinquish its control of the Canal Zone.

8 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
