Situation in the Congo

Kasavubu plans to ask the UN to provide protection for the reconvened legislature and thus reduce the intimidation which characterized the last session. Nevertheless, most of the legislators remain motivated primarily by personal ambition and have little understanding of parliamentary procedure or constitutional theory. Their votes will be based on a mixture of bribery, tribal loyalties, and individual whim, with factional allegiance running a poor fourth. Gizenga has been more energetic than the Leopoldville regime in taking advantage of this situation. Although he lacks Lumumba's crowd-appeal, he has inherited the relatively strong organization of the late premier's National Congolese Movement (MNC), which, together with Gizenga's own African Solidarity party, at least nominally controlled 48 seats in the 137-member Chamber of Deputies and 19 in the 84-seat Senate. Death and defections cut the Gizenga bloc to about 25 in the Chamber and 16 in the Senate by early April; since then, however, Gizenga has attracted several wavering deputies to Stanleyville by placing them in lucrative positions, with the result that his strength in the lower house now may be about 40. If his fortunes should appear to be rising, this total would increase further.

Relations between the UN and the Katanga regime continue to improve in Tshombe's absence. The ruling triumvirate in Elisabethville, headed by Interior Minister Munongo, apparently has agreed to allow the disbandment of the white mercenary units in the Katanga armed forces. Munongo may not only feel that he is removing a potential source of armed opposition to his regime, but may also want to maintain good relations with the UN at a time when pressure from Leopoldville for reintegration with the rest of the country is increasing.

Renewed tribal warfare in southern Kasai Province has forced the UN to evacuate much of that area. Reports from Leopoldville indicate that the Ghanaian UN troops are to be

15 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
