A military police general sent to arrest General Kia, former chief of intelligence for the Joint Staff, at noon on 13 May delayed for four hours after Kia argued that noon was "not the proper time to arrest lieutenant generals." Kia attempted to get in touch with the Shah and the minister of the interior to have the arrest order rescinded. Subsequent press reports of his arrest suggest he was unsuccessful. The former ministers of interior and of finance as well as the former director of the fisheries administration were also reported arrested. The fisheries administration oversees the export of Iranian caviar and is, therefore, a lucrative source of graft. Those arrested have long been identified in the public mind with some of the more flagrant abuses of position, and the Shah probably estimated that the favorable public reaction would more than offset their influence in the army or political circles. The arrests also provide Prime Minister Amini with the first of the "spectacular" moves he hopes to make to impress the public with his determination to be effective.

Africa: The conference in Monrovia of 20 moderate African states ended on 12 May after agreeing to reconvene in Lagos soon--possibly before the next UN General Assembly session, where they intend to present a united front. The meeting's final communique adopts the standard African nationalist lines on Angola and South Africa; however, since many of the participants are sympathetic toward France and Katanga, it takes a cautious line on the Congo and Algeria. The participating countries have agreed in principle that at the next meeting in Lagos they will set up an "African cooperation organization" which would include machinery for settling disputes among members. The conference also agreed to establish a body for economic and cultural cooperation. The refusal of the radical African states--Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Morocco, and the UAR--to attend has strengthened the trend on the continent toward division into moderate and radical blocs.

15 May 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
