Common Market and Greece Sign Association Agreement

Greece's association with the European Common Market (EEC) has been the subject of laborious and frequently acrimonious negotiations since June 1959. Much of the difficulty has derived from Athens' demands for developmental aid and a privileged position for Greek exports, and from Italian concern over potential Greek competition in agricultural products. There has also been some political opposition among the six EEC countries--notably in the Netherlands and West Germany--to the principle of associations with individual countries.

These difficulties are fully reflected in the resulting agreement, which is said to run to more than 100 articles and which provides in general for an eventual Greek-EEC customs union. Greek industrial exports will benefit from the tariff reductions in the Common Market, and special provision has been made for increased EEC purchases of tobacco, the major Greek export item. Certain Greek industries will receive extended tariff protection from EEC competition, and over the next five years Greece will receive $125,000,000 in long-term developmental loans. The major disadvantage to Greece appears to be Italy's successful insistence on "safeguards" against imports of Greek citrus fruit by the other five EEC countries.

While Athens has accordingly looked on the association agreement primarily in terms of its economic benefits, its importance to the EEC is principally political. Negotiations with other potential associates in the Mediterranean area--notably Turkey, Tunisia, and possibly Israel--have been in abeyance pending conclusion of the Greek agreement. Probably even more important, the agreement comes at a time when the EEC is increasingly preoccupied with its future associative ties with Africa, since the convention which linked the African territories of the EEC colonial powers with the Common Market expires in 1962. Many of these now-independent territories seem interested in continuing their EEC ties but will almost certainly insist on formal association agreements such as that concluded with Greece.

The Greek agreement may also strengthen the Common Market in its continuing rivalry with the European Free Trade

1 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
