[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
3. Taipei agrees in principle to withdrawal of forces from Burma (page 5).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. Polish ship in Rangoon loading rubber and steel for Communist China (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Mossadeq reportedly takes steps to remove Majlis opposition leader (page 6).
7. Israel asks United States for $70,000,000 grant (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

3. Taipei agrees in principle to withdrawal of forces from Burma:

Taipei agrees in principle to the withdrawal
of Chinese Nationalist forces from Burma but, because of the
practical difficulties involved, "cannot be held responsible" for
failing to effect it.

Comment: The Nationalist Government
has previously been reluctant even to agree in principle to
withdrawal and probably will not cooperate in carrying it out.

Meanwhile the Burmese Government on
25 March lodged a complaint with the United Nations against
Chinese Nationalist aggression.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Polish ship in Rangoon loading rubber and steel for Communist China:

A Polish vessel is in Rangoon loading 1,500
tons of Burmese rubber and 300 tons of
scrap steel for discharge at the Chinese
Communist port of Whampoa, following a
stop at Colombo.

[PAGE 04]
The American Embassy in Rangoon
believes that the decision by the Burmese to permit this shipment
was reached at cabinet level.

Comment: This shipment will mark the
first known delivery of rubber from a United Nations member to
Communist China since the UN-sponsored embargo of May 1951.

In early February, a Burmese Cabinet
member told an Embassy officer that in view of its neutral foreign
policy, Burma was reluctant to forbid rubber exports to China. This
is probably a sincere explanation, considering the Rangoon govern-
ment's extreme fear of angering Peiping.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Mossadeq reportedly takes steps to remove Majlis opposition leader:

On 20 March Prime Minister Mossadeq
appointed Haerizadeh, pro-Shah leader of
the opposition in the Majlis, as a "special
inspector" of Iranian diplomatic missions
abroad.

Comment: Mossadeq, feeling that
Haerizadeh, who recently formed a 10-man "Freedom" group in
the Majlis, could not be accused of being a "British agent," apparently
chose this method as the simplest way to remove him.

The same tactics were employed last
September to remove another potential Mossadeq rival, Allahyar
Saleh, who was appointed Ambassador to the United States.

[PAGE 05]
[PAGE 06]
7. Israel asks United States for $70,000,000 grant:

Ambassador Eban and three other Israeli
officials in Washington have asked the
State Department for a grant of approxi-
mately $70,000,000 to meet debts falling
due between April 1953 and May 1954. The Israelis stated that
the national debt would be permanently reduced by that amount.

Comment: On 10 March Ambassador
Davis reported from Tel Aviv that Israel was planning to request
"one-time" special assistance from the United States and would
require $20,000,000 in outside aid for the quarter ending 30 June
1953.

[PAGE 07]
[PAGE 08]
