South Korea Proposes Resumption of Talks With Japan

In a memorandum to the Japanese Foreign Ministry on
30 July, the South Korean Government has proposed an "uncon-
ditional" resumption of talks to normalize relations between
the two nations. The memorandum noted that the status and
treatment of Korean residents in Japan is a major cause of
tension which can be relieved by "mutually arranging" the re-
moval of the difficulties blocking the repatriation to South
Korea. If this is done, Seoul is ready to encourage a mass
return of Koreans and to expedite the exchange of Japanese
fishermen now held in Korea and all Korean detainees in
Japan. The Japanese press reports assert that Japan has
been assured that the discussions would not involve Japan's
policy of repatriating some Koreans to North Korea.

South Korea apparently hopes that a reopening of talks
would delay action on Japan's present agreement to return
Koreans to North Korea. As recently as 27 July, South Ko-
rean Vice Foreign Minister Kim strenuously insisted to Am-
bassador Dowling that if Japan wants an agreement with Seoul,
Tokyo should not object to postponing further negotiations with
Pyongyang. He noted that in order to obtain President Rhee's
consent for proposing a resumption of talks with Tokyo, he
found it necessary to assure him that both the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Japanese Government
would cooperate in postponing repatriation to North Korea.
Kim has also expressed the hope that a resumption of talks
with Tokyo might lead Pyongyang to abrogate its agreement
with Japan.

The question of Japan's compensating Koreans returning
to South Korea probably will be a major issue in negotia-
tions. Japan has been willing to provide some subsidy, pos-
sibly as a resettlement payment, provided Japan can avoid
liability for similar payments to Koreans going to North
Korea. Seoul has been vague as to the criteria for deter-
mining the amount of such payments although it has insisted
that payments be publicized as compensation for "forced"
Korean labor in Japan.

While Japan expressed its willingness to reopen negotia-
tions with South Korea, it has begun preparations for the

31 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10
