Iraqi Prime Minister Publicly Attacks Communists

During his press conference on 29 July, Prime Minister
Qasim exuded confidence in the ability of his regime to "crush
with overwhelming force" any "anarchist" elements who pro-
voke incidents within the country. Qasim accused the Com-
munist press of fabricating conspiracies against the regime,
laid at its door the blame for atrocities recently committed
at Kirkuk, and stated that the government had thwarted other
Communist-planned uprisings during the 14 July revolutionary
celebrations. As usual, he did not mention the Communists by
name. While disavowing any intention to impose censorship
over the press, Qasim declared that Iraqi journalists would be
held directly responsible for inflammatory writings. The Com-
munist-dominated Students' Union was reprimanded for charg-
ing the security forces with laxity in prosecuting "conspirators."

The Communists have suffered other rebuffs during the past
few days. Training of the Communist-infiltrated Popular Resist-
ance Force has been "postponed" and its members banned from
wearing their uniforms. This order, accompanied by more
stringent regulations concerning the carrying of firearms by the
population and the forced closing of offices of the Communist
party newspaper in southern Iraq will reduce the party's
capabilities if fully enforced.

Anti-Communist Iraqi nationalists have decided to build up
their organizations slowly and to refrain from openly participat-
ing in the struggle between Qasim and the Communists.

Discussions under way to
form a coalition of nationalist parties to combat Communist in-
fluence are said to be receiving the support of certain army offi-
cials.

Qasim is contemplat-
ing further cabinet changes in the near future and that the pro-Com-
munist prosecutor of the Baghdad People's Court, Col. Mahdawi,
is slated for a post in the provinces. Mahdawi was reported on
29 July as having requested arrest, stating that the court's trials
would end soon.

31 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
