French Labor Unrest Increasing

Premier Debré has the authority and the means of enforcing his decision to force key transport workers to remain on their jobs during the 8-hour strike period proclaimed by all the major railroad unions for 16 June. He insists that wage increases now will ruin the economic stability that France is achieving as a result of broad reforms instituted at the beginning of the year.

Labor leaders are increasingly inclined to force his hand. Their bargaining power had been weakened in 1958 by fear of a recession as well as by the general desire to avoid complicating De Gaulle's task. The effect of reduced earnings and reduced purchasing power became apparent in March, however, when widespread local demonstrations and short work stoppages occurred during a "week of action" sponsored by the Christian Workers' Confederation.

As the government's statements on improved financial conditions became more and more optimistic, labor restiveness increased. Workers in the nationalized transport services have been particularly irked because an agreement to bring their wages up to the levels of private industry has been held up for over a year. On 6 May, a 24-hour rail strike brought Parisian suburban traffic to a virtual standstill, and on 1 June a Paris subway strike halted rush-hour traffic.

The Communist-led General Labor Confederation (CGT) has avoided taking the initiative in these demonstrations, but it has joined agitation started by other labor groups. It can now cite a number of instances of unity of action and it will be increasingly difficult for the non-Communist labor leaders to justify their efforts to avoid formal collaboration, particularly if the government holds firm. Increased CGT pressure can be expected, particularly since the French Communist party has been reduced to a handful of deputies in the National Assembly, and has no other legal means of pressing its influence.

There are some signs of private management's willingness to adopt a more flexible wage policy, and the government has indicated that adjustments may be possible by the end of 1959. It seems likely, however, that some concessions beyond the minor family allowances just announced, will be necessary by fall.

15 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
