II. ASIA--AFRICA

The Situation in Iraq

Although Baghdad is outwardly quiet, persistent reports of plotting and unrest and rumors of additional executions indicate that relations between Qasim and anti-Communist nationalists in Iraq are at a new low.

The leaders are said to be Lt. Gen. Najib al-Rubai, president of the Sovereignty Council, and Maj. Gen. Ahmad Salih al-Abdi, military governor of Iraq. Both have been described as dissatisfied with Qasim's leadership and involved in intrigues against him; Al-Abdi is said to have tried several times to resign. The coup group reportedly has concluded that Qasim's continuance as prime minister can result only in Iraqi Communists becoming progressively stronger.

Although they allegedly have not planned very much beyond Qasim's removal, fearing detailed plans would necessarily make too many people privy to the plot and risk its exposure, Al-Rubai and Al-Abdi would head the new government, which would seek to maintain Iraq's independence and neutralist position between East and West but would undertake a purge of Communists inside the country. According to the reports, they seem confident that as legitimate authorities they would be able to keep control of the government machinery and of internal security.

The plot apparently is unrelated either to a previously reported pro-UAR, Baathist plan for assassinating Qasim within the next two weeks, or to an earlier report that army elements had planned a coup which was disrupted by the execution of Brigadier Tabachali and 12 other officers on 20 September. There are rumors Qasim is about to order the executions of the remaining individuals, including several anti-Communist nationalists, whose death sentences have not been commuted. The Communists, whose press is berating the "pseudonationalists," again are referring to themselves as Qasim's only loyal allies.

Qasim himself, in an apparent demonstration of his confidence, continues to expose himself ostentatiously in Baghdad's streets as if to defy his enemies to kill him.
