The New Government in Ceylon

Ceylon's new Prime Minister W. Dahanayake, appointed on 26 September to succeed the late S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike, has said in a broadcast to the nation that he intends to continue Bandaranaike's neutralist-socialist policies, thus indicating he will try to maintain the Sri Lanka Freedom party in power during the year and a half before the next regularly scheduled general elections. Dahanayake reappointed the entire Bandaranaike cabinet, shifted ministerial duties slightly, assumed the ministries of defense and foreign affairs himself, and appointed his parliamentary secretary to be minister of education, the post Dahanayake formerly held.

Leaders of other parties were not consulted concerning Dahanayake's appointment, and the Governor General has not indicated that he intends to call for new national elections. The new government, which does not command a majority in Parliament, will have to seek support from other parties if it expects to remain firmly in power. No other party has indicated whether it will support the new prime minister, although most probably will accept the status quo pending their assessment of the situation. Since Parliament is in session, the attitudes of other parties should become apparent shortly.

In view of the opposition's continuous attacks on Bandaranaike's policies and the several attempts to force him out of office during the past year, Dahanayake may soon face a vote of no-confidence. While he has long been a prominent figure in Ceylonese politics and has wide grass-roots support in his own constituency, he has never been outside Ceylon and lacks the sophistication of most other Western-educated Ceylonese political leaders. He is not held in the same regard by other politicians as Bandaranaike, and he may not long be able to match Bandaranaike's ability to hold together the dissident elements in his own ruling party. Dahanayake may also have difficulty retaining a sufficient number of independent and Tamil members to provide his own 38-man group with a working majority in the 100-man Parliament.

There has been little indication of public unrest as yet. A walk-out by some Colombo port workers on 26 September does not appear to have been directed by any of the powerful port unions affiliated with leftist opposition parties. While the walk-out may have been occasioned merely by the prime minister's death, it could be the prelude to politically motivated labor disturbances designed to weaken the government.
