clashed with college students demonstrating against the sentencing of eight student leaders by a military court for fomenting a riot in late February. This student unrest is apparently symptomatic of more widespread dissatisfaction over the regime's failure to make more rapid progress in implementing promised reforms, particularly regarding return to constitutional government. President Ayub has postponed his plans to visit Australia in May and is touring the country to rouse support for his government's programs. (Backup, Page 6)

Guatemala: For the first time since the fall of the pro-Communist Arbenz regime in 1954, most top leaders of the Guatemalan Labor (Communist) party are back in the country, actively reorganizing their party and strengthening their influence in labor groups and front organizations. Their operations have been facilitated by President Ydigoras' divide-and-rule tactics which have weakened the opposition Revolutionary party, the Communists' most powerful political adversary. Ydigoras has maintained the stability of his conservative regime in large part by such maneuvers, and his avowed anti-Communist stand has not prevented him from occasionally working with the Communists when he thought he could use them.

(Backup, Page 7)

Ecuador-Cuba: Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Chiriboga, in a note to Cuba, in effect rejected the Cuban view that the Organization of American States is an ineffective body for dealing with Cuba's current complaint against the United States in the UN General Assembly. In his note, Chiriboga said that, while "recognizing that the OAS is not perfect," Ecuador continues to adhere to the principles of the inter-American system. He added that the OAS was established to resolve hemisphere problems. This formal diplomatic note of Chiriboga, a leader of the anti-Castro faction in the Ecuadorean Government, may not, however, reflect the present views of President Velasco, who has followed an equivocal policy toward the Castro regime.

(Backup, Page 8)

11 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF v
