Situation in Laos

General Phoumi, despite his recent allusions to the need for a political settlement of the Laotian crisis, apparently remains convinced that military action is the only way to prevent a Communist takeover. He recently told an American Embassy official that he was fighting a last-ditch battle to keep his "tough" policy alive. He expressed the belief that the Laotian Army, "properly armed" and with the aid of American and Thai troops to offset North Vietnamese forces in Laos, could bring about a decisive military victory which would restore popular confidence in Vientiane.

At odds with Phoumi's appraisal, the cautious and defensive-minded attitude of the Laotian Government, the government forces are remaining vigilant, "despite the weakness of our positions, which makes it seem advisable for us, for our part, to begin to cease hostilities."

In a 10 April conversation with Ambassador Thompson, Gromyko repeated the line Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin had taken with the UK ambassador in an earlier discussion of the British proposals on Laos. Gromyko remarked that the USSR hoped to have a reply to the proposals very soon. He said he was sure that the Laos problem could be satisfactorily settled if the US carried out its announced principles toward Laos. Gromyko remarked that he had the impression that things were calmer in Laos now but urged that it was most important that no action be taken to disturb the situation.

A French Foreign Ministry official on 7 April outlined his government's preliminary thinking on matters to be dealt with at a conference on Laos. He sees the main problem in the international sphere to be finding means of guaranteeing a status for Laos giving it unity, independence, and neutrality. France favors doing this through a unilateral declaration, as advocated by Souvanna Phouma, rather than with a multilateral document which would provide too many opportunities for outside interference. The French spokesman said he envisages that the future

11 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
