[PAGE 01]
7 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping closes its trade mission in Beirut in protest over Lebanon's continued relations with Taipei.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Moroccan-French relations likely to become severely strained over issue of troop evacuation.

African conference in Accra, 7-9 April, will be sounding board for attacks on France and South Africa.

III. THE WEST

British Guiana -- Cheddi Jagan likely to press for complete independence; he stops off in Cuba to seek wider support.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Lebanon: Peiping has closed its trade mission in Beirut following Lebanon's refusal to sever relations with Nationalist China. The Chinese Communists have grown increasingly sensitive to Taipei's diplomatic competition and probably feel that their withdrawal of the mission in Beirut will put other countries in the area on notice that Communist China "will not tolerate attempts to play at two Chinas." (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Morocco-France: The Moroccan minister of public works, who fears the French reaction to demands for the evacuation of French troops, has asked for American assistance in providing technicians should Paris recall its key personnel in electric power and civil aviation functions. The King in his note to De Gaulle last week apparently countered a French offer of a defense pact and only partial evacuation with a request for a commitment that France would withdraw all military forces. Morocco is determined that all foreign forces shall be withdrawn by the end of 1963. (Page 2)

African Conference: Nkrumah's "emergency" conference of African governments and nationalist organizations, which meets in Accra from 7 to 9 April, will concentrate new propaganda attacks on France and the Union of South Africa. The French will be denounced for continuing nuclear testing in the Sahara and accused of sabotaging African unity.

President Tubman was soliciting support from several other African states for a protest against Nkrumah's "manner (Page 4)
[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

British Guiana: Cheddi Jagan's dissatisfaction with London's offer of internal self-government may lead him to agitate for complete independence. Jagan, Communist leader of the dominant Guianese political party, is making efforts to gain wider support in the Caribbean area with a current visit to Cuba. On 4 April he conferred at length with a high-level member of the Cuban Communist party and with Cuban Government officials. (Page 6)

IV. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future:
None.

*5 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China Closes Trade Mission in Lebanon

Peiping has given up its four-year effort to obtain recognition from Lebanon. The Chinese Communists on 1 April closed their trade office in Beirut because the Lebanese Government refused to sever relations with Nationalist China.

Lebanon's relations with the Nationalists, established in 1954, have been a source of contention since the Communist mission arrived in 1956. Peiping intends that such trade missions serve political as well as economic purposes, working to persuade business and government leaders that recognition of the Communist regime is financially and politically desirable. This approach has succeeded elsewhere but has been noticeably unsuccessful in Lebanon, where trade with Communist China is negligible and where the Nationalists have gained in stature. Taipei concluded a $2,000,000 trade agreement with the Lebanese in 1956 and, in 1957, its diplomatic mission was raised to an embassy. The Nationalist ambassador in Beirut believes accreditation of the first Chinese Nationalist military attache may have triggered Peiping's decision to withdraw its mission.

Peiping has grown increasingly sensitive to Taipei's diplomatic and trade competition. Guinea, which recognizes the Communist regime, recently received a stiff protest from Peiping threatening to break relations if Conakry repeated the official reception it gave a Nationalist delegation in January. Withdrawal of the unproductive Chinese Communist mission to Lebanon probably is intended to put other African and Middle Eastern nations on notice that Peiping "will not tolerate attempts to play at two Chinas."
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Moroccan-French Relations Expected to Worsen

Moroccan-French relations appear to be entering a "new and disquieting phase," in the view of Ambassador Yost in Rabat. Difficulty is likely to center on Moroccan agitation for the evacuation of the 17,000 French troops based in Morocco and to be complicated by other issues such as Moroccan support for Algerian independence, popular opposition to French atomic tests, and nationalist claims to large portions of the Sahara.

The Moroccan minister of public works, who fears serious trouble may develop, has asked for American assistance in providing vital technicians in the event Paris recalls key French personnel employed in Moroccan electric power and civil aviation facilities. Prime Minister Ibrahim has also recommended that the minister seek Egyptian or other Arab technicians.

President de Gaulle is reported to have expressed displeasure to the Moroccan minister of defense, who presented a message from the King on 31 March, over the promptness of the King's quick counterproposal to a recent offer by De Gaulle of a defense pact and partial evacuation. De Gaulle reportedly believed his offer could not have been seriously considered. The King apparently replied to the French offer with a plea for an immediate gesture along the lines of the American commitment last December to evacuate one air base almost immediately and the three others by the end of 1963.

French Ambassador Parodi, who told Ambassador Yost that De Gaulle's proposal went beyond earlier French offers and could have been represented by the Moroccan Government as a gain, nevertheless urged that Paris honor the King's request in order to bolster his position in the face of the mounting
[PAGE 08]
instability resulting from the political infighting between left and right factions in Morocco.

Ambassador Yost comments that the genuine and passionate Moroccan feeling on the evacuation question probably will lead Rabat to push the issue hard. The King, who apparently now intends to prolong the life of the Ibrahim government, may be motivated by a desire to keep the left with him rather than against him during a showdown with the French.
[PAGE 09]
African Nationalists Convening in Accra

The "emergency" conference on "positive action for peace and security in Africa," being held in Accra from 7 to 9 April, appears to have been inspired largely by Ghanaian Prime Minister Nkrumah's determination to keep himself in the forefront of the pan-African movement. Nkrumah, who is increasingly displaying signs of a Messianic complex, hastily convoked the gathering a month ago after the Ghana-backed drive to force early action at the UN on France's nuclear testing program in the Sahara failed to bring immediate results. Although most of the approximately 200 delegates expected will represent African nationalist organizations, the governments of some independent African states--including Liberia and Libya--are apparently planning to accept Nkrumah's invitation to be represented officially.

The conference appears certain to concentrate heavy new propaganda attacks on France and, almost certainly, on the Union of South Africa. Nkrumah announced last month that the meeting would be aimed at coordinating "action" against the French tests and the "threat"--emanating principally from France in the eyes of Nkrumah and other militant African leaders--of "neocolonialism" and the "Balkanization" of Africa. The American Embassy in Accra anticipates an "extremely strong" attack on colonialism in every form and an attempt to mobilize African opinion against all military or security arrangements between African and non-African states. Such an attack could include criticism of the US-Liberian cooperation agreement signed last summer.

Behind the scenes, Nkrumah's recent tactics--as well as the program for "direct action" which he apparently has in mind--seem likely to provoke considerable criticism from at least some of the participants.

President Tubman's government was "shocked" by the "nature of the agenda" prepared by Nkrumah and was soliciting support from
[PAGE 10]
other African states for a protest against Nkrumah's "manner of handling things." Guinean President Sekou Toure was also reported cool to the Accra meeting, which he is said to view as an attempt to "smother" the second Afro-Asian People's Solidarity Conference--to be held in Conakry from 11 to 15 April.
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

New Problems in British Guiana Likely

The recent moves by Cheddi Jagan, minister of trade and industry in the colonial government and Communist leader of the People's Progressive party, the dominant political group in British Guiana, suggest that there will be a cooling of his working relationship with colonial officials. Jagan is visiting Cuba from 4 to 7 April on the way home from the constitutional conference in London. He conferred at length on 4 April with Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, a high-level Cuban Communist who is influential in the Castro regime, and with major government leaders. This is the first such contact between British Guiana and Cuba and may lead elements in the Castro government to support Jagan.

The constitutional talks broke up on 31 March over arrangements for transitional measures toward internal self-government, and Jagan said he would strive for early independence, which the British had refused to discuss until 1963. Although Britain's proposal to introduce internal self-government in August 1961 was received favorably, the Guianese delegation objected to making this advance contingent on satisfactory interim arrangements involving partial retention of British control over the police and internal security and provision for safeguarding the future of British officials in the local civil service.

The Guianese also opposed allowing the governor to retain the constitutional right to issue decrees in an emergency, but London believes it should retain certain controls because Jagan--who will probably become the first prime minister--is a Communist. Meanwhile, Jagan's control over the People's Progressive party may be challenged at the forthcoming party congress by those critical of his and his wife's autocratic domination of party councils. He probably will be able to fend off any such attack. Despite his desire to press independence demands, he does not wish to prejudice chances for much needed foreign investment by attempting to go too far too fast.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
