of the Baathist newspaper, tends to support Hadid's remarks. Iraqi security measures remain strict. Authorities fear the Communists will demonstrate against their opponents when Qasim leaves the hospital in the next few days.
UAR intelligence in Baghdad has advised antiregime elements not to carry out any "follow-up action" until a more opportune time.

Saudi Arabia: The dispute between King Saud and Crown Prince Faysal over governmental powers continues. Saud, who is seeking to reassert his authority, says that he will act as prime minister during Faysal's planned absence for medical treatment in Europe. Faysal insists that one of the princes assume the post, and he delayed his departure. Some informed Saudis believe Faysal may resign as prime minister. However, since the royal princes probably backed Faysal, some temporary compromise was apparently reached.

Japan: The Japanese Socialist party's right-wing faction, headed by Suehiro Nishio, has decided to secede from the party and to form a "truly democratic socialist party." The secession, while not yet official, is based on Nishio's opposition to the party's increasingly pro-Communist orientation and domination by left-wing labor unions. Nishio apparently is supported by about 30 of the 249 Socialist Diet members, and he must attract considerably more Socialist Diet members to form an effective new party. The Socialist split may have a divisive effect on Prime Minister Kishi's Liberal-Democratic party, which was formed in 1955 to counter the merger of the Left and Right Socialists. Kishi may thus have additional difficulty in holding his party in line on important issues, including revision of the US-Japanese security treaty and relations with Communist China.

III. THE WEST

Guatemala: Serious disturbances may occur on 20 October, anniversary of the 1944 revolution that initiated a decade of leftist rule in Guatemala. Extreme leftists are planning a massive parade, while an anti-government rightist faction is reported to be

19 Oct 59
DAILY BRIEF
ii
