II. ASIA-AFRICA

Major Reduction of Sino-Ceylonese Economic Ties Possible

Ceylonese Minister of Commerce and Trade R. G. Senanayake and Governor General Goonetilleke apparently advocate terminating Ceylon's rice-rubber barter agreement with Communist China provided Ceylon can secure financial support for its rubber-development program in lieu of the $15,000,000 Chinese grant which accompanies the five-year barter agreement. Senanayake has asked whether the United States would furnish $3,000,000 in aid to cover expenditures made in advance of receiving the first installment of Peiping's grant. Whether new Prime Minister Dahanayake and other cabinet and government members favor such action is uncertain, but economic factors rather than Dahanayake's professed anti-Communist views are likely to determine any government decision on the matter.

During the past two years Colombo has grown dissatisfied with the conditions attached to Chinese Communist aid and with the terms of the rice-rubber contract. The economic benefits Ceylon once derived from the agreement, first negotiated in 1952 and renewed in 1957, have since been virtually nullified by rising rubber prices and abundant world rice supplies. During protracted negotiations with Peiping on the 1959 rice-rubber protocol, Colombo bargained hard for more favorable terms but was unwilling to relinquish the agreement, partially because of concurrent difficulties in concluding a satisfactory 1959 rice agreement with Burma. However, Colombo and Rangoon on 25 September signed a four-year trade pact effective in 1960 under which Ceylon will purchase at reduced prices 300,000 tons of rice annually--100,000 tons more than under its 1959 contract. It therefore is in a better position to cancel its contract with Communist China than at any previous time.

Ceylon has been attempting to reduce the price of the 80,000 tons of Communist Chinese rice still to be shipped under the 1959 contract; the Ceylonese Government intends to cancel shipment of this amount if Peiping maintains the contract price. This does not necessarily indicate that the government has decided yet to terminate the entire agreement, however.

A Ceylonese delegation would leave for Communist China on 22 October for a week of negotiations on the 1960 rice-rubber protocol provided the Chinese officials agreed.

Page 2
