III. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran: After several weeks of hesitation, the Shah appears to have decided that the parliamentary elections which are expected to start sometime this month should again be rigged to assure the choice of pre-selected candidates. Commentary in the Iranian press on these elections, in contrast to the treatment of the August elections, has been very scanty, apparently because the regime hopes to reduce the impact of electoral chicanery on the public. Iranian security officials expect demonstrations but believe they can handle them easily. One high security official expressed the view that the "real and tragic damage" which will result from these elections will be the irreparable widening of the gap between the regime and the people. (Page 4)

Ethiopia: Emperor Haile Selassie's failure to follow up his success in crushing the recent attempt to depose him with positive steps to reconstruct his regime has paralyzed normal governmental operations and is raising doubts among Ethiopians regarding his ability to re-assert his one-man rule over Ethiopia. On 3 January a high security official appealed for calm over Radio Addis Ababa and denied the credibility of numerous rumors circulating in the capital. While the American ambassador foresees no immediate breakdown of public order, he points out that trouble could break out if the Emperor fails to take early steps to quell the discontent. (Page 6)

Japan: The Socialist party has begun a campaign to rally popular opposition to government negotiations for settlement with South Korea by pointing out that Seoul cannot speak for all of Korea. Since mid-October, the Socialists have shifted their tactics away from the mass action of last summer to attacking the conservative government in parliament on issues with wide popular appeal such as renewal of Sino-Japanese relations and opposition to Japan's defense build-up. The more moderate Socialist approach in the present political context offers considerable danger to the government and to US-Japanese relations. (Page 7)

Nepal: Leaders of both the Communist party and the former ruling Nepali Congress party have begun separately to operate underground in Nepal. They are also engaging in organizational activities in India in opposition to the takeover of the government by King Mahendra. The King's 5 January ban on political parties will strengthen their determination to oppose his direct-rule policies. Former Deputy Prime Minister Subarna Shumshere, who has been in Calcutta since the King's takeover in December, is already in contact with Indian government leaders and has reportedly received New Delhi's covert blessing for "limited resistance activities." Subarna has, however, ruled out collaboration with the Communists.

IV. THE WEST

Cuba: Latin American reaction to the US-Cuban diplomatic break thus far has been mixed and fragmentary. The most striking comment has come from Mexican Foreign Minister Tello. He told US Embassy officials that while the Cuban situation is a problem for the Cubans themselves, they will need "a little bit of outside help." He implied that the problem could be dealt with by the Organization of American States, under its Caracas Resolution of 1954 against international Communism. Mexico is a strong proponent of the concept of nonintervention, and this is the furthest any Mexican official has yet gone toward condoning external action to solve the Cuban problem. Tello also spoke of the great difficulty of influencing Cuba back into the American family of nations--a sharply contrasting attitude to the warm official reception given by Mexico to Cuban President Dorticos last June. (Page 9)
