East German Popular Disaffection Reflected in High Refugee Flow

A near record holiday flow of more than 7,000 refugees reached West Berlin in the two weeks including Christmas and New Year's--some 4,345 in the week ending 3 January. This influx brings the total number of escapes to West Berlin in 1960 to more than 150,000, compared with less than 90,000 last year. Escapes to both West Berlin and West Germany this year totaled just under 200,000, compared with less than 144,000 in 1959. Among the refugees are many medical men, teachers, engineers, technicians, and skilled workers whose services are vitally needed by the Ulbricht regime.

In recent weeks, the regime has sought to stem the flow at least among professional people. Medical men, teachers, and engineers have been promised better living conditions, some relief from political pressures, and an opportunity to follow their professional preferences. Party boss Ulbricht took a conciliatory line in his report to the eleventh central committee plenum in mid-December, admitting even that "sometimes there is reason for dissatisfaction" in East Germany. He reproved officials for using "crude" methods toward professional men and intellectuals and ordered instead the use of persuasion.

Left to himself, Ulbricht probably would sharply intensify controls on East Germans desiring to travel to West Berlin and West Germany. However, he must instead fall in line with the USSR's desire to keep tension over Berlin at a low point for at least the time being. The regime has therefore reduced controls within Berlin and reportedly in mid-December liberalized the granting of permits to visit the Federal Republic. As Ulbricht complained in his speech to the party plenum: "We had to and still must compete with imperialist and capitalist West Germany with open frontiers. This is not easy."

In past months, there has been evidence that East German party functionaries have been critical of Khrushchev's decision to delay a solution of the Berlin question. Although Ulbricht has always seemed to accommodate himself to Khrushchev's tactics and has kept such elements in line, internal party pressures for harsher policies to prevent escapes will probably mount.
