Indonesia Plans to Send Military Mission to Moscow

The Indonesian Government expects to send a military mission to the Soviet Union shortly to visit military establishments and discuss the possible purchase of arms. The Soviet Union welcoming the mission at any time. Prior to the mission's departure, the Ministry of Defense will submit to the Soviet Embassy a list of the arms and equipment Indonesia is interested in purchasing.

This is Indonesia's first open approach to the Soviet Government for arms and equipment under the military purchase program which has been in progress for a year and a half. In early 1957, Indonesia bought 4,000 jeeps from the Soviet Union. The coordinated all-service purchase program, however, which began in January 1958, has resulted thus far in contracts for military items from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Communist China amounting to at least $170,000,000. Although Indonesia has heretofore carefully avoided direct arms dealings with Moscow, it has an agreement with the Soviet Union for economic assistance amounting to more than $100,000,000.

In order to maintain its neutral position, the Indonesian Government may now feel that recent military missions to the West, including the United States, should be balanced by one to the USSR.

Prime Minister Djuanda told American officials he had established a ceiling on military purchases and had sent out positive instructions that no further commitments be made. He is undoubtedly concerned not only over meeting future payments from Indonesia's meager financial resources but also over the emphasis on the arms program at the expense of civilian problems. The armed services, however, may request a withdrawal or postponement of the prime minister's directive. In any event, Moscow has seen fit recently to agree to supply arms to the UAR at one third their cost and, therefore, in order to encourage further Indonesian reliance on the bloc for military aid,

8 May 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
