Thai-Cambodian Relations Strained by Border Dispute

Indignation is mounting in Thailand over Cambodia's recent referral to the International Court of Justice of the long-standing dispute over the Preah Vihear temple ruins on the Thai-Cambodian frontier. The ruins are a symbol for the competing nationalisms of Thailand and Cambodia. Despite the Thai regime's professed disapproval of demonstrations on this subject, some have occurred in outlying towns. Bangkok press commentary on the issue is becoming increasingly vitriolic, with some papers calling for a boycott of Cambodian goods and services. It is also being suggested that Thailand counter Cambodia's claim to the temple with demands for the return of certain Thai provinces ceded to Cambodia when the latter was under French rule.

Thai official comment on the issue has in general been restrained. However, Premier Sarit has taken a number of actions, such as launching a public subscription campaign to help defray court costs, which in themselves are relatively nonprovocative but may have the cumulative effect of exciting nationalist sentiment. Moreover, Sarit has not chosen to curb extremist statements in the press.

The Cambodian Government, maintaining that its approach to the World Court on the temple dispute is motivated solely by a desire to remove a latent irritant to Thai-Cambodian relations, has expressed injured surprise at Thailand's reaction. To date, Cambodian official statements and press commentary on this issue have been deliberately restrained, but the hardening Thai attitude--particularly press insults aimed at Premier Sihanouk--is likely to provoke inflammatory rebuttals. An aggravating factor is the penchant of the Cambodian ambassador in Bangkok for reporting hostile Thai commentary to the exclusion of moderate statements made by several Thai officials and the more responsible press.

(Cambodia's belief that Thailand is covertly supporting anti-Sihanouk Cambodian dissidents led by Sam Sary and Son Ngoc Thanh is an additional irritant.)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
6 Nov 59
