SOVIET UNION

1. Comment on Khrushchev's appointment as first party secretary:

The USSR Central Committee plenum has elected N. S. Khrushchev as first secretary of the Communist Party, thereby confirming him in a position which he has in fact held since G. M. Malenkov left the Secretariat on 14 March. This action, which is further evidence of the close ties between Khrushchev and Malenkov, does not appear to change the power relationship which has existed since Beria was purged.

Khrushchev, who is 59 years old, has been a member of the Central Committee since 1934. After serving as first secretary in the Ukraine from 1938 to 1949, he became first secretary of Moscow oblast and a member of the Central Committee's Secretariat in 1949. In 1939 he was made a member of the Politburo and has recently been ranked third in Soviet listings of Presidium members, following Malenkov and Molotov. His position as first secretary of the Central Committee, however, probably means he is second only to Malenkov in actual influence.

Khrushchev, an agricultural expert, is generally considered to have been the instigator in 1950 of the policy of amalgamating collective farms into larger units. Under this policy the number of farms decreased from 254,000 at the beginning of 1950 to 97,000 by October 1952. However, a concomitant part of Khrushchev's idea, the resettling of peasants into agrogords or large towns, was seriously criticized in the press and never implemented. A report on agricultural shortcomings which he presented to the plenum just prior to his election indicates that he is now directly responsible for Soviet agricultural affairs, a field with which Malenkov has been particularly concerned since 1946.

Although the full text of the Central Committee decree resulting from Khrushchev's report is not yet available, it appears to follow closely the program for agriculture which Malenkov outlined at the recent session of the Supreme Soviet. The decree reveals that the Ministry of State Farms has been re-established. This move supports other indications that the merger following Stalin's death of the various ministries concerned with agriculture resulted in too large and unwieldy an administrative unit which will now be broken up.
