[PAGE 01]
16 July 1958

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
16 July 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Military Reaction to Middle East Developments

In the fields of diplomacy and propaganda, the USSR's initial reaction to the landing of American forces in Lebanon has contained no warnings or hints of possible Soviet counter-action. Moscow's cautious warnings in the latter part of June that Soviet "volunteers" would be sent to oppose any Western military intervention in Lebanon have so far not been repeated. The main lines of the Soviet propaganda counterattack were

16 July 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 11]
set forth in the USSR's resolution in the UN Security Council, condemning the American action as a "grave threat to interna-
tional peace and security," and calling on the United States to stop armed interference in the internal affairs of the Arab states and to withdraw its forces from Lebanon immediately.

Moscow is attempting to portray the landing in Lebanon as the first step toward "armed aggression against Iraq" and as part of a broader design to suppress the Arab "national liberation movement" throughout the Middle East. The USSR has already indicated support for the revolutionary regime in Baghdad by attempting to block the seating of the Iraqi delegate in the UN Security Council.

16 July 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 12]
Kadar May Be Losing Control of Hungarian Regime

Hungarian party First Secretary Janos Kadar appears to have lost what little independent authority Moscow permitted him to exercise and may no longer fully control the Hungarian regime. Kadar's continued usefulness to the Kremlin has been in doubt since the Moscow-Belgrade rupture and particularly since the Nagy execution. His recent efforts to deny any culpability for his involvement in Nagy's short-lived govern-
ment indicate the weakness of his present position.

The East German radio, after broadcasting a recording of Kadar's innocuous 12 July address at the East German party congress, added a blast against the Yugoslavs which the an-
nouncer attributed to Kadar. The addition included a pledge that "we do not tolerate revisionists in any field of social life, and least of all in the party." Kadar's remarks at the Buda-
pest airport on 29 June on his return from Bulgaria report-
edly were "thoroughly edited and doctored" before publication to remove his references to Yugoslavia, possibly because they were too mild. Publication of the speech had been held up for two days.

In Kadar's absence, his closest associate in Hungary,
party secretary and politburo member Gyula Kallai, published
an article in the party's daily newspaper on 13 July completely
endorsing the position of the Stalinist wing of the party. This
declaration, apparently a change of allegiance, ended with the
ominous threat that they would "fight with all their strength
against the still existing remnants of revisionism."

16 July 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
