Prospects for French-Algerian Negotiations

De Gaulle, ever since his pre-referendum speeches in December, has been blurring his previous insistence on a cease-fire as a precondition for negotiations. He implied to Bourguiba during their 27 February talk that there would be no preconditions for talks, and Bourguiba conveyed this impression to Abbas. The rebel leaders, however, were reportedly confused when a subsequent "authoritative" statement from Paris reversed this position. Tunisian Information Minister Masmoudi has alleged that members of Premier Debre's entourage also made statements--published abroad, but not in France--that a cease-fire must precede negotiations. Tunisian officials, and probably the PAG, are said to have regarded this as an attempt by "ultras" around Debre to jeopardize the commencement of negotiations.

following discussions last week between rebel premier Ferhat Abbas, Bourguiba, and a high French official representing De Gaulle, the PAG agreed to a cease-fire and would soon appoint representatives to discuss its implementation with the French. On 6 March Abdelkader Chanderli, PAG "delegate" to the UN, told US officials in Washington that the PAG had proposed to the French that both sides simply agree at the beginning of negotiations to stop fighting, without entering into any formal agreement.

Bourguiba had told De Gaulle that commencement of direct French-PAG negotiations could not safely be delayed much longer and should start by 20 March. Chanderli, however, asserted, that Abbas and De Gaulle will not meet until lower level--but official and formal--negotiations have made substantial progress.

Within Algeria, there are diverse elements on both sides still capable of precipitating incidents that could either prevent formal negotiations from beginning or jeopardize their success once begun. De Gaulle is reported to have said that he could scarcely imagine his reaction, if, while seated at a conference

8 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
