[PAGE 01]
30 December 1960

Copy No. C 7

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
30 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet minister of agriculture replaced.

Congolese Army paratroops reportedly
headed for Kivu Province to prevent
Congolese battalion there from joining
dissidents.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japanese Government reviewing its policy
toward Communist China.

Turkish military regime may soon under-
take campaign of political arrests in all
major cities.

The situation in Laos.

III. THE WEST
Cuban celebrations on second anniversary
of Castro revolution victory will provide
opportunity for guidance of Communist-led groups throughout hemisphere.

Belgian prime minister apparently willing
to make some concessions to Socialists in
austerity program to end widespread
strikes.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 December 1960

BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
*USSR; Vladimir Matskevich, Soviet minister of agriculture since 1955, has been removed following the USSR's second consecutive bad agricultural year. The action was foreshadowed by personal criticism recently leveled at him in the Soviet press. Matskevich, who has been given a secondary assignment in the New Lands, has resisted reforms in agricultural organization advocated by some top-ranking political figures. His successor, Mikhail Olshansky, is a veteran academic specialist in agriculture whose lack of executive experience may signal a cutback in the ministry's operational functions. The shift may clear the way for organizational changes to be adopted at a central committee plenum on agriculture, scheduled to begin on 10 January.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan - Communist China: The recent signing of an expanded trade agreement with the USSR and concern aroused by US dollar-conservation measures have increased pressures in Japan for improved relations with Communist China and induced the Ikeda government to undertake a review of its policy toward Peiping. Tokyo officials emphasize that their current thinking excludes diplomatic recognition and a government-to-government trade agreement but does envisage promotion of private trade, cultural exchanges, and technical agreements on the governmental level. (Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
Turkey: The military regime in Turkey may soon undertake a campaign of political arrests in all major cities similar to that in Ankara on 24-25 December, in which at least 65 persons were arrested on charges of "systematic activities" against the regime. The Committee of National Union reportedly hopes to create a "stabilizing mood" throughout the country before the 6 January convocation of the Constituent Assembly. A widespread campaign of arrests is more likely to increase than to reduce instability. (Page 2)

Congo: Two hundred Congo Army paratroops left Leopoldville on 27 December for Luluabourg, apparently to protect President Kasavubu during a visit to that city. The paratroops will, however, continue on to Bukavu, Kivu Province. The troops are scheduled to emplane on about 30 December for Bukavu, the location of one of three Congo Army battalions in Kivu Province believed to be leaning toward the dissident cause. The commander of the force reportedly has been instructed to seek an "understanding" with the Bukavu garrison, but failing that to occupy the city by force. The Bukavu operation--hastily organized after Gizenga's 25 December invasion of Kivu Province--suggests that Mobutu's immediate interest is to contain the dissidents within Orientale Province rather than to initiate operations against Stanleyville. (Page 3)

Laos:

Soviet and Chinese ammunition and equipment were used during the battle for the city. Four Soviet AN-12s which flew to Communist China and North Vietnam have returned to the USSR. Three are en route to their home base at Vitebsk and one is at Vladivostok. Three others are scheduled to return to the USSR via Peiping. Other bloc transport aircraft continued into Laos through 29 December. The five Soviet MI-4 helicopters probably destined for airlift operations in Laos flew from Shenyang to Tientsin on 28 December and continued their flight southward on 30 December.

[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Cuba: Delegations from the Sino-Soviet bloc, from Latin America, and other countries are arriving in Havana for massive demonstrations on 1 and 2 January to commemorate the second anniversary of Castro's revolutionary victory. The Castro regime will be held up as a model for other Latin American countries. Most of the Latin American delegates were invited because of their sympathy for Castro's program, and a number of Communists are included. The event will provide another opportunity for liaison among and guidance of Communist-led groups throughout the hemisphere and may be the occasion for some dramatic new Cuban announcement. It is probable that opposition elements will step up their bombing in the capital during the celebrations.

Belgium: The Social Christian - Liberal government of Prime Minister Eyskens appears willing to make some concessions to end the widespread Socialist-instigated strikes before Parliament reconvenes on 3 January to take up again the government's economic austerity bill. The government has, however, taken measures to strengthen security. The strikes, in protest against the bill and designed to force its modification, have spread to northern Belgium. Any compromise Eyskens might make would be designed largely to retain the support of the rank and file of the Roman Catholic trade unions. King Baudouin has cut short his honeymoon in Spain to return to Brussels. (Page 4)

[PAGE 07]
Japanese Government Reviews Policy Toward Communist China

The recent signing of an expanded trade agreement with the USSR and concern aroused by the US dollar-conservation program have increased pressures in Japan for improved trade relations with Communist China and induced the Ikeda government to undertake a review of its policy toward Peiping.

The Japanese Socialist party, inspired by the impact made earlier this year by the campaign against the US-Japanese security treaty, decided on 26 December to launch a new national movement directed this time toward establishing relations with Peiping. The Socialists, abetted by business circles, the press, and even some members of Ikeda's own party, are using effective arguments, although the political climate in Japan lacks the volatile elements which led to the downfall of the Kishi government.

The doubling of Soviet-Japanese trade both in 1959 and 1960 and the conclusion of an agreement on 20 December to expand 1961 trade to a total of $160,000,000 have aroused new interest in the possibility of similar success with Communist China. Although Japanese trade with the bloc remains relatively small, it has assumed a political importance out of all proportion to its actual volume. Asahi Shimbun, Japan's largest and most influential newspaper, has adopted the Socialist theme that decreased opportunity to earn US dollars makes important an increase of trade with the bloc.

A Foreign Ministry official has stated that Ikeda does not want to be accused, as was Kishi, of "militant uncooperativeness" toward Communist China. The government, he asserts, already has decided that certain contacts with Peiping, short of recognition or a government-to-government trade agreement, are vital. He has indicated that a study is already under way to determine the form of such contacts.

Official Japanese thinking currently envisages the promotion of private trade, cultural exchanges, and--on the governmental level--technical agreements such as postal and meteorological arrangements. In addition, the Japanese are giving preliminary thought to escaping Afro-Asian criticism by dropping their support for the moratorium on Chinese representation in the United Nations.

[PAGE 08]
More Political Arrests Expected in Turkey

The arrest of at least 65 persons, including military personnel and civil servants, in Ankara on 24-25 December may have been the beginning of a widespread campaign to uproot suspected nuclei of opposition. As many as 150 persons may have been arrested in Ankara and 100 others may soon be arrested in Istanbul. A campaign of arrests in the major cities of Turkey is reported to be imminent for the alleged purpose of creating a "stabilizing mood" throughout the country prior to the convocation of the Constituent Assembly. According to the Turkish Press Liaison Bureau, "certain unfortunate and greedy persons with a reactionary mentality and extreme partisan interest" have engaged in activities contrary to the interests of the nation. Some of those arrested were charged with distributing anti-regime leaflets and other disruptive propaganda.

The Committee of National Union (CNU) has denied rumors of a counterrevolutionary movement in Turkey, but the activities and expressions of concern by some members of the CNU suggest that antiregime sentiment may be increasing. Some reports indicate that military officers who were forced to retire last August are also organizing and preparing for political action.

Widespread arrests at this time may actually help promote and consolidate any incipient opposition movement. Indiscriminate repression of suspected resistance could backfire, especially in a situation where the complete loyalty of the armed forces may be questioned.

Meanwhile representatives of various political and social groups are being chosen to serve in a 272-man chamber of representatives which, with the 23-member CNU sitting as a senate, will convene on 6 January 1961. While it will have legislative powers, its primary mission will be to approve a new constitution and lay the groundwork for national elections. The CNU will retain its power position, however, through a formula which in effect amounts to a legislative veto.

[PAGE 09]
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

[PAGE 10]
The Situation in the Congo

Two hundred Congo Army paratroops left Leopoldville on 27 December for Luluabourg on the first leg of a flight to Bukavu, Kivu Province.

Although the ostensible reason for the movement was to protect President Kasavubu on a visit to Luluabourg, the paratroops reportedly are scheduled to emplane on about 30 December for Bukavu. The Congo Army battalion there--one of three in Kivu Province--is said to be leaning toward the dissidents.

The commander of the paratroop force reportedly has been instructed to seek an "understanding" with the Bukavu garrison and, failing that, to occupy the city by force. The cautious nature of the operation--which appears to have been hastily organized following Gizenga's 25 December "invasion" of Kivu Province--suggests that Mobutu's immediate interest is to contain the dissidents within Orientale Province and not to mount an offensive action against the dissidents in Stanleyville.

According to Ambassador Timberlake in Leopoldville, the dissidents opened communications from Stanleyville to Cairo on 18 December by means of a UAR network which includes a relay station at Juba in the Sudan. Cairo's willingness to serve as the communications link between Stanleyville and the outside world may stem from a desire to monitor Gizenga's operations as well as from an eagerness to assist the dissidents at no great expense to the UAR.

According to a senior Belgian official, Mobutu's foreign minister, Justin Bomboko, has indicated to Brussels that he feels the time is ripe for the re-establishment of the diplomatic relations which were broken off by Lumumba in August. The Belgians regard the restoration of full diplomatic relations as premature, but they are prepared to reopen consulates in the Congo while retaining the one now operating in Katanga. Bomboko's initiative appears to have been motivated in part by a desire to enhance the prestige of the interim government.

[PAGE 11]
Belgian Strike Situation

The eleven-day-old strikes, instigated by the Socialist trade unions to force Prime Minister Eyskens to modify the economic austerity bill before parliament, appear to have reached a high point and have spread to parts of northern Belgium. There have been large-scale demonstrations accompanied by some violence; but the government has increased its security precautions and called some troops back from Germany.

Eyskens is willing to make some concessions to placate labor, although he has adamantly refused to recall parliament before 3 January. The Roman Catholic confederation of trade unions has refused to join in the Socialist strikes and says it has convinced the government that it should modify the bill, which increased taxes and reduced social-welfare expenditures as part of the government's program to offset the loss of the Congo. In agreeing to make some concessions, Eyskens probably hoped to retain the support of the rank-and-file members of the Catholic trade unions, who support his Social Christian party.

The Socialists also are likely to accept a compromise settlement. Without the support of the Catholic trade unionists, they are not likely to be able to force the government to resign, particularly since the Socialist unions' funds are inadequate for a long strike. Organized labor in Belgium is divided approximately equally between the Socialist and Roman Catholic confederations, with the Socialists stronger in the south among the Walloons and the Catholic unions stronger in the north among the Flemings.

King Baudouin has cut short his honeymoon in Spain and returned to Brussels. He will probably call in the principal leaders for consultations, which in turn could lead to negotiations.

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
