[PAGE 01]
15 December 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

USAF review(s) completed.
State Dept., ONI, DIA, USAF reviews completed

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES REORGANIZED

3. BRITISH INTEREST IN EXCLUDING NUCLEAR WEAPONS
FROM CENTRAL EUROPE

4. THE SITUATION IN INDONESIA

6. THE NEW IRAQI CABINET

9. HONG KONG CONCERNED OVER PEIPING'S CONTINUING
PRESSURE FOR OFFICIAL REPRESENTATION
(page 11).

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. SOVIET DEFENSE PRODUCTION
ACTIVITIES REORGANIZED

Comment on:

Dmitry Ustinov, 49-year-old former
Soviet minister of defense industry,
was promoted on 14 December to USSR
deputy premier. He will share top
responsibility for the administrative
direction of the Soviet government with Premier Bulganin
and three other deputy premiers--Anastas Mikoyan, Iosif
Kuzmin, and Aleksei Kosygin. Ustinov, known for his
ability to arrive at independent decisions, will probably
be responsible for all defense production activities.

The new state committees, which on
14 December replaced the ministries of Aircraft Industry,
Defense Industry, Radiotechnical Industry, and Shipbuilding,
are to ensure central control and coordination--particularly
in developmental work--over enterprises and plants transferred
from the abolished ministries to appropriate regional
councils of national economy (sovnarkhozy) for operational
management.

The ministries affected were among the
eight industrial ministries not abolished in Khrushchev's re-
organization of industrial management last May. The remain-
ing four--Medium Machine Building (atomic energy), Power
Stations, Chemical Industry, and Transport Construction--are
apparently considered unsuitable at present for further inte-
gration into the sovnarkhoz system because of the broadly
interregional interdependence that characterizes their activ-
ities or because of security considerations.

Pyotr Dementyev, former minister of air-
craft industry, Aleksandr Dymrachev, Ustinov's former first
deputy in the Ministry of Defense Industry, and Valery Kalmykov,
former minister of radiotechnical industry, were appointed
chairmen of the respective state committees. Chairmanship of
the State Committee for Shipbuilding went to the former deputy
minister, Boris Butoma. No assignment for the former minister,
Andrei Redkin, was mentioned. Redkin was last noted 6 Decem-
ber in connection with the launching of the atom-powered ice-
breaker.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
3. BRITISH INTEREST IN EXCLUDING NUCLEAR WEAPONS
FROM CENTRAL EUROPE

Comment on:

A high British Foreign Office official has
told the American embassy in London that
a proposal to forbid stationing or manufac-
ture of nuclear weapons in Germany, Poland,
and Czechoslovakia might provide a basis for negotiations with
the Soviet Union. The West German government has opposed
any special European arms limitation zone, but the official be-
lieved that indications in West Germany of unwillingness to ac-
cept IRBM's now might provide an opening to propose such a
specific ban.

The Foreign Office has also shown interest
recently in other proposals for special arms limitations in
Europe, such as the London Times' suggestion that both East
and West Germany renounce intermediate range missiles.
Continuing Foreign Office interest in such proposals, along
with agreement among leading newspapers that the way must
be left open for negotiations with the Soviet Union regarding
Central Europe, suggests that members of the Macmillan gov-
ernment may hold similar views, despite their public warn-
ings against any measures that might restrict NATO's military
posture.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
4. THE SITUATION IN INDONESIA

Non-Communist political elements in
Indonesia apparently are making new
efforts to establish a basis for coopera-
tion in order to regain the initiative from
the army and re-establish government by
a parliamentary-based cabinet.

Preparations are being made to win ap-
proval from National party chief Suwirjo
and obtain the backing of military and police forces.

Prospects for the success of such a plan
appear improved by Foreign Minister Subandrio's statement
that Sukarno now is willing to see a new cabinet formed with-
out Communist participation. However, the President is said
to insist that the Djuanda cabinet remain in office until he re-
turns from his "rest" trip abroad, which according to Suban-
drio will begin in January with a visit to India and possibly one
or two other countries.

American businessmen in Java now are
taking a more serious view of the deteriorating economic sit-
uation there, according to Ambassador Allison. Stanvac's
manager in Djakarta states that if normal shipping to all Indo-
nesian ports is not re-established "immediately," serious food
shortages will result within 20 or 30 days. Although he has not
yet ordered Stanvac's American dependents in Java to leave, al-
most all have done so, and all Dutch dependents will be evacuated
by 19 December. Ambassador Allison reports that information
available to the embassy tends to confirm the Stanvac official's
assessment.

A Dutch naval source in Singapore believes
that although the Indonesian army wishes to remove Communist-
controlled workers from seized Dutch firms, it has delayed this
step because it fears civil war might ensue. He feels the army
is rapidly running out of time and must take early action against
these workers if it is to restore economic order on Java.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
6. THE NEW IRAQI CABINET

Comment on:

Abd al-Wahhab Mirjan, president of the
Iraqi parliament, has formed a fifteen-
man cabinet, including seven members
of the outgoing Ali Jawdat cabinet. In
addition to the premiership, he has as-
sumed the Defense Ministry portfolio. Mirjan, a member of
the minority Shia Muslim sect and long a right-hand man to
former prime minister Nuri Said, was minister of public works
and communications in the outgoing cabinet.

Mirjan, while paying lip service to Arab
unity and the Arab League, can be expected to carry out a
more forceful pro-Western foreign policy--including support
for the Baghdad pact--than Ali Jawdat, who followed a soft
line toward Syria and Egypt and who de-emphasized the Baghdad
pact. Ali Jawdat recently urged Crown Prince Abd al-Ilah to
dissolve the present parliament, handpicked by Nuri in 1954,
and call new elections. This met with refusal, and the prime
minister's resignation followed, an indication that the crown
prince and Nuri were dissatisfied with Ali Jawdat's policies.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
9. HONG KONG CONCERNED OVER PEIPING'S CONTINU-
ING PRESSURE FOR OFFICIAL REPRESENTATION

Comment on:

The Hong Kong government and the
British Foreign Office have been ex-
changing views on the advisability of
letting Communist China station an
official representative in the colony,
according to information passed by a high Hong Kong of-
ficial to the US consul general.

Hong Kong authorities apparently hope
that the US will urge London to refuse admission of an of-
ficial Chinese Communist representative. According to
the political adviser of the Hong Kong government, Chinese
Communist representation would undermine the stability
and prosperity of the colony.

Chou En-lai, who originally asked for
permission to station a Chinese Communist "commissioner"
in Hong Kong in February 1956, renewed the request to a
British Board of Trade mission which concluded a visit to
Peiping last month. Peiping may hold out the prospect of
increased trade in return for permission to station its rep-
resentative in Hong Kong.

London, despite Hong Kong's apparent
apprehension, is unlikely to grant the Chinese request but
may try to drag the issue out rather than risk antagonizing
Peiping by a clear rebuff.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11
