[PAGE 01]
11 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Congo: UN not planning to use force to bring about withdrawal of Belgian advisers. (Page ii)

3. Iran: Leader of demonstrations mentioned for cabinet post. (Page ii)

5. Ghana: President Nkrumah replaces pro-Western finance minister. (Page iii)

7. South Vietnam: Comment on cabinet shakeup. (Page iv)

8. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page v)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
Republic of the Congo

11 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page
[PAGE 07]
Congo: Hammarskjold said on 9 May that contrary to fears in Katanga, the UN did not intend to use force to secure the withdrawal of Belgian military or political advisers from the Congo. He added, however, that any Belgians who fell into UN hands would be repatriated. Hammarskjold now plans to keep Dayal in New York for about five weeks; thereafter, if relations between Leopoldville and the UN remain cordial, he will return Dayal to Leopoldville for a brief stay. Hammar- skjold said that Nkrumah is not pressing his threat to withdraw Ghana's troops from the Congo and expressed doubts that the Ghanaian President would do so.

According to the American Embassy in Brussels, Belgian Foreign Ministry officials regard the arrest of Tshombe, who is now being removed to Leopoldville under guard, as a stupid maneuver which might increase unrest in Katanga without facilitating a rapprochement between Leopoldville and Stanleyville. Brussels reportedly is attempting to keep itself disengaged from the public dispute over Tshombe, although it has told Congolese representatives in New York that it disapproves of Leopoldville action.

Iran: The Iranian Government has forbidden any further demonstrations, except at one specified public stadium where assemblies may be held "to express the people's demands" and stated it will take strong measures to maintain order. Crowds, including many students, have been in the streets, however, celebrating the collapse of Sharif-Emami's cabinet and hailing the government's announcement that the police officer responsible for killing a demonstrator last week would be prosecuted. The teachers' organization, which sparked the earlier demonstrations, appears willing to continue its strike for higher wages, although its leader, Mohammad Derakhshesh, appears undecided. He has been mentioned as a possible candidate for minister of education, a cabinet post not yet filled by Amini.

Amini has told the American ambassador that he intends to draw up a new election law, to work for and with the Shah, and to ask for prompt US aid in carrying out major reforms.

11 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 08]
(The Shah is still planning to leave for Europe next week)

Ghana: The replacement on 9 May of Ghana's pro-West- ern Minister of Finance Gbedemah by former Minister of Trade Goka--who is subservient to Nkrumah and has evidenced strong left-wing tendencies--will further strengthen the faction in Accra which favors closer ties with the Soviet bloc. In early May, President Nkrumah tightened his personal control over the governmental and party apparatus by ousting several experienced cabinet officials and bringing in younger and more radical figures. Nkrumah has taken personal responsibility for all financial matters, and the ouster of Gbedemah, who was the main contact point for Western economic groups, particularly in relation to the Volta River hydroelectric project, may lead to a further loss of confidence in the Ghana Government by private Western interests.

11 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 09]
South Vietnam: The cabinet reorganization announced by President Diem on 10 May implements a long-postponed step first outlined last February and is intended to demonstrate Diem's determination to carry out reforms urged upon him to meet the growing Communist guerrilla and political threat. The action follows closely after two decrees which established a central intelligence organization and unified the military command; these were designed to increase the impact of American military aid and to meet the desires of some army officers for less political interference in operations.

The cabinet shuffle, aimed at providing greater co- ordination among related ministerial functions, elevates several capable government figures and suggests some effort to balance the preponderant influence of Diem's controversial brother Nhu. The appointments reach little beyond presently trusted circles, but appear to offer some appeasement to dissatisfied younger elements, particularly in the replacement of Foreign Minister Mau. The effectiveness of the reorganization, however, as well as of the military reforms, will depend primarily upon Diem's willingness to delegate authority and to curb political rivalries.

11 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 10]
WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No change from last week.

B. No change from last week.

C. LAOS: Carried on Page i of Daily Brief.

11 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    v
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 18]
TOP SECRET
