[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

24 February 1960

Copy No. C 67

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

24 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - USSR: As during President Eisenhower's trip to Asia last December, Peiping and Moscow have given sharply divergent propaganda treatment to the President's Latin American trip, this time on the eve of his departure. The Chinese, taking an openly hostile attitude, bitterly charge that the United States is a "savage aggressor" and that Eisenhower "is no friend of the Latin American people." Moscow, on the other hand, thus far has given the trip reasonably factual coverage and has used foreign press quotations to imply that the trip is intended "to soften anti-American sentiments."

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel: The UAR military alert is continuing, although there has been no further UAR build-up in the Sinai area. Available evidence does not indicate that significant Israeli military preparations are under way. Some Israeli reaction to the UAR build-up is likely, however, with a resulting heightening of tensions in the area.

[PAGE 04]
India: The formation on 22 February of a coalition government by the Congress and Praja Socialist parties in Kerala state has resolved differences within the anti-Communist front for the present. Personality and policy conflicts probably will hamper the new cabinet's effort to restore effective government. Chief Minister Pillai, prominent Praja Socialist leader who headed two previous governments, may antagonize his coalition partners by his dictatorial tendencies. The Congress party's preponderant strength both in the cabinet and in the assembly, however, probably will help its leaders keep Pillai in line and maintain coalition unity.

Japan - South Korea: Japanese restiveness over South Korean seizure and continued detention of fishermen operating in the Rhee Line area is mounting rapidly and may become serious, according to Ambassador MacArthur. There are strong pressures on the Japanese Government for a more forceful policy toward South Korea, including the use of armed ships to protect fishing boats and expulsion of the South Korean ambassador in Tokyo. There is a general Japanese feeling that the United States must share responsibility for the seizures because it has supplied oil and ammunition for the South Korean patrols. It is probable, however, that Tokyo would refer the dispute to the UN before sanctioning use of weapons.

(Page 3)

24 Feb 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping and Moscow Issue Sharply Divergent Propaganda on Eisenhower's Trip to Latin America

The propaganda coverage being given the early stages of President Eisenhower's Latin America trip by Peiping and Moscow diverges as sharply as their coverage of his trip to Asia last winter.

The Chinese are taking an openly hostile attitude. The authoritative party paper People's Daily on 23 February bitterly charged that the United States is a "savage aggressor" and that Eisenhower "is no friend of the Latin American people." Blaming Eisenhower for the overthrow of the "democratic" government of Guatemala in 1954, People's Daily warned that "American imperialism" is increasing its intervention in Cuba in order to subvert the Cuban revolution and impede the anti-US struggle in Latin America. One Chinese commentary cited the recent air raid over Cuba by an American-based plane as evidence of the "barbarity and shamelessness" of "American imperialism" and declared that the 650,000,000 Chinese people stand firmly by the side of the Cuban people.

Moscow, however, has given the trip reasonably factual coverage but has used excerpts from the foreign press to imply that the tour is intended to "soften the anti-American sentiment" in the area. A domestic broadcast on 22 February reported the President's television broadcast and quoted him on the purposes of the trip. This was offset, however, by comments purportedly taken from a Senate report on Latin America which Moscow claims is critical of US policy motivated by "egoism" and the "desire to increase profits." The American press is quoted as claiming that the President is not taking "any concrete proposals" which would help Latin Americans.

Peiping's harsh criticism illustrates again the basic disagreement between China and the USSR over the best tactics to be pursued toward the United States. While both powers agree that the future will belong to "socialism," the Chinese disagree with the Soviet policy of "peaceful contacts" to achieve that end and prefer a vigorous attack on the United States as the "arch-enemy" of the bloc.

24 Feb 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese Pressures Mounting for Forceful Policy Toward South Korea

Continued South Korean seizure and indefinite detention of Japanese fishermen operating in the vicinity of the Rhee Line is causing concern in Japan which may become serious, according to Ambassador MacArthur in Tokyo.

The Japanese press, the fishing industry, groups organized for the welfare of families of detained fishermen, and officers of the Maritime Safety Board (coast guard) are calling for a forceful policy, including use of armed boats to protect fishing craft and expulsion of the South Korean ambassador. There is some feeling that the United States must share responsibility for existing conditions because of its support for President Rhee and because it has provided oil and ammunition for the South Korean patrol boats.

The sinking of a Japanese fishing boat on 12 February by a South Korean patrol vessel has intensified Japanese feeling. Moreover, an expected exchange of detainees in early March may be delayed, or even shelved, by South Korea's insistence on additional terms after Japan had agreed in principle to purchase 30,000 tons of rice as a price for obtaining the release of 167 fishermen who have completed their sentences. Another 47 fishermen are either serving terms or awaiting trial.

Meanwhile, Japan has announced plans to arm all its patrol boats in the Rhee Line area by April, a step which Seoul calls a "provocative action" and a "matter for grave concern." It is probable, however, that the Japanese announcement is intended to intimidate South Korea and that Tokyo would refer the dispute to the UN before sanctioning use of these weapons.

24 Feb 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
