[PAGE 01]
3 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. JORDAN DISMISSES BRITISH COMMANDER OF ARAB LEGION (page 3).

2. FRENCH OPINION ON ALGERIAN CRISIS (page 4).

3. CYPRUS TALKS SUSPENDED (page 5).

4. SITUATION IN SINGAPORE (page 6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 7)

[PAGE 04]
1. JORDAN DISMISSES BRITISH COMMANDER OF ARAB LEGION

Comment on:

King Hussain's dismissal of the British commander of Jordan's Arab Legion, General Glubb, as well as the chiefs of ordnance and intelligence and eight unit commanders, is almost certainly a prelude to the gradual elimination of some 70 British personnel attached to the legion.

Britain now fears the possibility of an alliance between Jordan and Syria and Egypt, which could cut off access to Middle East oil supplies. The relief of all British personnel now serving with the Arab Legion would terminate all British influence in Jordan. Britain regards the situation as very critical and is prepared to airlift British paratroops from Cyprus to Jordan on short notice. If sufficient British aircraft are not available, it would expect assistance from the United States.

The king's action will be viewed in the Arab states as a victory for Egypt and Saudi Arabia, who are seeking to replace the British as the dominant influence in Jordan.

The diminution of British influence in Jordan will increase Israel's anxieties since Tel Aviv has regarded the British presence there as a restraining element. The stationing of Egyptian units in Jordan would arouse even greater Israeli concern. An eventual abrogation of the Anglo-Jordanian treaty, removing British protection from Jordan, would make the Israelis less hesitant to reply forcefully to border incidents with Jordan.

[PAGE 05]
2. FRENCH OPINION ON ALGERIAN CRISIS

Many informed Frenchmen consider this problem the most serious that the National Assembly has faced since World War II and even fear that the Fourth Republic could not survive the loss of Algeria. The government has increased its parliamentary difficulties by its reluctant decision to abandon moderate measures in favor of a threat of firmness. Many die-hard Socialists have been shocked by this decision, and rightist elements in Paris and Algiers remain critical of the government's continued inaction.

Comment

Mollet is expected to force the issue in the assembly by asking for a confidence vote on his recent request for special powers to handle the problem.

The Communists have already expressed their hostility to the government's Algerian policy, but their refusal to support the government would handicap their campaign for a popular front. Right-center party leaders, unable to perceive any alternative government, may be willing to let Mollet take the blame for any unpopular measures in Algeria.

[PAGE 06]
3. CYPRUS TALKS SUSPENDED

Comment on:

The failure of Archbishop Makarios and the British to reach agreement on the political development of Cyprus suggests that Makarios believes he can obtain further concessions. However, the inconclusive suspension of talks on 1 March is likely to increase the influence of Cypriot extremists over Makarios and further limit his freedom of action in any future negotiations. The simultaneous British resumption of extensive security operations and publication of the record of the talks as planned may harden attitudes and make a settlement more difficult.

Makarios apparently interpreted the sudden visit to Nicosia of British colonial secretary Lennox-Boyd as an opportunity for further bargaining. Makarios renewed demands for a general amnesty, although he had implied to the American consul on 27 January that the only remaining difference concerned the British refusal to guarantee a legislature with an elected Greek-Cypriot majority.

The British say they envisage such a legislature but cannot make any commitment without inviting serious repercussions from the Turks. After meeting with Lennox-Boyd on 29 February, the leader of the Turkish community reiterated the demand for equal representation with the island's Greek majority. On the same day, the Turkish foreign minister also sharply attacked Greece over the Cyprus issue in a speech to the Turkish parliament.

[PAGE 07]
4. SITUATION IN SINGAPORE

Comment on:

The continuing increase in Communist subversion in Singapore, combined with the weakness of the present government, has aroused serious concern among British officials in the colony and foreign observers. New Zealand and Australian officials there tend to accuse the British colonial office of being unrealistic. The Indian representative in expressing his government's concern referred to Nehru's firm handling of Indian Communists.

The British appear particularly concerned over the wisdom of continuing plans for accelerating Singapore's progress toward self-government in the absence of a strong non-Communist party or a competent non-Communist local leader.

Although plans to hold London talks on self-government in April and to try to strengthen the present Singapore government continue, tentative alternative schemes are being simultaneously explored by the British. One is to include Singapore as the twelfth state in the separately administered Federation of Malaya, where the government is much stronger and where Communist subversion has not developed to the extent it has in Singapore. Also being discussed is the suspension of the Singapore constitution and the reimposition of direct British rule.

The American consul general in Singapore has the impression that the British are improvising on a day-to-day basis.

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 2 March)

The Egyptian flag vessel Khedive Ismail sailed from Alexandria for Lattakia, Syria, with a cargo of Soviet tanks. The ship was due to arrive in Lattakia on 1 March. For security reasons, the British master of the vessel was replaced prior to sailing by a young Egyptian naval officer.

Syria had signed a contract with Czechoslovakia for $5,880,000 worth of arms including 60 T-34 tanks complete with accessories, and replacement parts for three years. The tanks were to be delivered within four months of the time of the signing of the contract.

The reported meeting of Egyptian prime minister Nasr, King Saud of Saudi Arabia, and President Quwatli of Syria will be held in Cairo beginning 6 March. King Hussain of Jordan reportedly has been invited but no reply has yet been received. Nasr reportedly called the meeting partially in answer to Hussain's request for a meeting of Arab chiefs of state. The original site, Aswan, was changed when the news leaked to the foreign press. Press reports have indicated both Aswan and Luxor.

The Egyptian 4th Coast Artillery battery at Sharm el Sheik on the Gulf of Aqaba informed coast artillery headquarters in Alexandria on 28 February that the "test has been completed successfully and the battery is completely ready." Saudi Arabia and Egypt are co-operating in plans to improve the Saudi

[PAGE 09]
airfields at Tebuk, in northwestern Saudi Arabia, just east of the Gulf of Aqaba and south of Jordan, and also probably at Al Kharj, 44 miles southeast of Riyadh, the Saudi capital.

Improvement of these minor airstrips may be connected with the recent Saudi negotiations with Egypt to obtain jet aircraft.

concern with aircraft overflights of the Tebuk area.
