from the outside. The expression of this view, at a time when India is concerned about the security of its Tibetan border, is probably designed to reduce India's opposition to SEATO and the Baghdad Pact, to facilitate a settlement of the canal waters and Kashmir disputes, and to strengthen Pakistan's position in requesting a continued flow of US arms aid. The Indian army chief of staff recently told an American official that now is the time to consider a rapprochement with Pakistan to facilitate joint defense. Considerable progress in resolving outstanding disputes would be necessary, however, before the two countries are ready to engage in joint planning.
(Page 3)

Jordan-UAR: Syrian Interior Minister Sarraj wants to use fedayeen terrorists against Jordan in retaliation for a border incident on 23 April. The decision on reprisal has been referred to Nasir. King Husayn will find an atmosphere of intense political intrigue in Amman when he returns on 2 May. Efforts by Bedouin officers to discredit and oust Jordan's army chief of staff may also be aimed at Premier Rifai. Two leading candidates for the premiership are seeking popular favor by proclaiming their intention to seek better relations with Nasir.
(Page 4)

Yemen-UAR: The arrival of a 32-man Egyptian economic mission in Yemen on 25 April and the impending arrival of an agricultural mission from Cairo indicate increased Egyptian support for Crown Prince Badr during the Imam's absence. These moves are also probably intended to reduce Badr's dependence on Soviet bloc aid.
(Page 5)

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Iran. The situation in the area remains precarious, but a deliberate initiation of large-scale hostilities is unlikely in the immediate future.

Iraq: The Communists are progressively achieving control in Iraq, although for the present they may prefer not to move to take power in their own name.

30 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF
