Shah May Push to Revise Oil Profit-sharing Formula

The Shah, concerned over the 1960 Iranian budget, recently told American Ambassador Wailes he was considering a new profit-sharing formula for the consortium of Western companies operating nearly all of Iran's oil industry. The Shah anticipates a critical budget situation, because $30,000,000 worth of American budget support provided in 1959 is not expected for next year. In addition, 1959 saw a $25,000,000 bonus payment by the Pan American Oil Company for an oil concession; similar bonus payments are not likely in 1960.

Discussions for Iran's next budget beginning in March are already under way. Since most budget revenue sources are fairly stable, Tehran can gain additional funds only from the US Government or from the oil companies. The ambassador has already told the Shah that American aid "would be less than last year and probably considerably less." It appears likely, therefore, that the Shah will press for additional oil revenues from either increased production or from a change in the profit split from the present 50/50 arrangement to something closer to the Venezuelan pattern of about 60/40 in favor of the government. The Shah asked whether increased purchases of Iranian oil were possible at the expense of Iraq and Kuwait.

While Iranian oil production is likely to continue to increase substantially, revenues may not increase proportionally. Price cuts made on Iranian crude oil earlier this year reduced expected revenues sharply; but total revenues are certain to exceed the $245,000,000 received in 1958.

World crude prices continue to be soft, and at least one oil company in the consortium has tentative plans to reduce the price of Iranian crude oil even further in an effort to increase sales. Such a price cut if implemented would also reduce Iran's share of the profits and could signal the beginning of government-inspired agitation against the consortium with the ultimate goal of substantially changing the present government-company relationship.

27 Oct 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
