[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

5 May 1959

Copy No. C 152

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Turkey: Demonstrations both for and against the government during the recent tour of western Turkey by top opposition leaders are evidence of increasing political bitterness in Turkey. The government may take further repressive measures against its principal opposition, the Republican People's party.

5 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
Turkey May Ban Opposition Party

The violence and disorders which occurred during the recent political tour of western Turkey by opposition leader and former President Ismet Inonu reflect increasing bitterness between government and opposition supporters. The Menderes government may make use of these disorders as a pretext to carry out its long-standing threat to ban Inonu's Republican People's party (RPP).

In Usak on 1 May, Inonu and the other RPP legislators accompanying him were stoned, and special security measures were taken at Manisa after Inonu was denied permission to speak. On 3 May police manhandled members of the crowd welcoming Inonu in the port city of Izmir, and the plant of a pro-RPP newspaper was set on fire. When Inonu returned to Istanbul on 4 May, his car was attacked by progovernment elements. Police used tear gas to disperse supporters who sought to welcome him at party headquarters.

Inonu, a strong critic of government restrictions on press and individual freedoms, has made veiled comparisons between Menderes and former Iraqi Premier Nuri Said. According to the RPP press, the government has taken steps to strip Inonu of his parliamentary immunity so he could be tried for statements insulting to Menderes.

The opposition in Turkey is accustomed to working under restraints by the government, but violent attacks on the 74-year-old Inonu, long revered as a military hero and associate of Ataturk, reflect an unusual degree of political tension. If Inonu were to be injured in future disorders, there might be a strong popular antigovernment response and even pro-Inonu pressure on the government by the Turkish Army.

5 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 07]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
