[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 May 1959

Copy No. C 62

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 May 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Chinese Communists and Indians continue acrimonious exchanges about Tibetan situation. (1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR press, under orders from Nasir, attacks Chinese Communist role in Asian affairs. (2)

Iraqi Army's ability to stem power of Communist-controlled Popular Resistance Forces further weakened. (3)

Turkish Government may take further repressive measures against principal opposition party as aftermath of recent demonstrations. (4)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - India: Recent mass rallies in Communist China condemning "Indian expansionists" are intended to remind New Delhi that public Indian criticism of Communist actions in Tibet will not go unanswered.

In speaking to the Indian Parliament on 4 May, Nehru said that he was "shocked beyond measure" by Chinese Communist attacks on India, but that they would not lead to any change in India's neutral foreign policy. He added that, despite these disagreements, India would continue to support China's bid for membership in the United Nations and would not sign a military alliance with any country. Nehru said that he would be happy if the Dalai Lama could return home "with dignity." (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR - Communist China: The Cairo press on 2 May attacked Communist China for its "invasion" of Tibet, violation of the Bandung principles, and intervention in Arab affairs by supporting Arab Communists. Peiping is likely to reply in strong terms, and relations between the two states will probably continue to deteriorate.

Peiping has protested earlier UAR press articles which criticized Communist China in relatively mild terms. (Page 2)

[PAGE 05]
Iraq: The commander of the Communist-controlled Popular Resistance Forces in southern Iraq has begun to assert himself. issued a proclamation to the inhabitants of Basra calling for special efforts against "outcast agents, saboteurs, and people bearing grudges." The forced retirement from Iraq's armed forces of a large number of senior officers on 19 and 26 April will further weaken the army's ability to prevent increasing independence of action by Popular Resistance Forces throughout the country. (Page 3)

Turkey: Demonstrations both for and against the government during the recent tour of western Turkey by top opposition leaders are evidence of increasing political bitterness in Turkey. The government may take further repressive measures against its principal opposition, the Republican People's party. (Page 4)

5 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Sino-Indian Relations

Kuo Mo-jo, a leading Chinese Communist spokesman, speaking at a Peiping rally on 3 May, condemned "Indian interference in China's affairs." He avoided reference to Nehru but called on Indian "political leaders" to "come to their senses!" At another meeting the day before, delegates from Communist China's minority races charged that Nehru, in a 27 April speech critical of Peiping, used words that "benefit only imperialism."

Despite this policy of retaliation, Peiping appears to be seeking some means of ending the bitter exchange of recriminations.

A statement by Nehru on 4 May contained conciliatory aspects which probably will please Peiping. Although he told Parliament he was "shocked beyond measure" by Chinese charges of Indian "expansionism," Nehru said India would not deviate from its neutral foreign and defense policies. He added that New Delhi also will continue to work for China's admission to the United Nations; despite Nehru's remarks, however, the Indian delegation may play a less active role in the future in supporting Peiping at the UN.

The prime minister has rejected recent suggestions that India and Pakistan work out a joint defense policy in the face of increased Chinese military activity along the Himalayan frontier. Nehru said he would be happy if the Dalai Lama could return to Tibet "with dignity," but that New Delhi would not force him to return or put him in an embarrassing position.

5 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Chinese Communist Propaganda Battle Intensified

The UAR is intensifying the intermittent and relatively mild criticism of Communist China which it has carried during the past few weeks. On 30 April, a lead article emphasizing Peiping's repudiation of the Bandung principles of peaceful coexistence and noninterference and attacking its activities in the Afro-Asian world. On 2 May the Cairo weekly Akhbar al-Yawm bitterly criticized China for invading Tibet and for supporting Communist activities among the Arabs.

The UAR information office in Cairo had previously prepared and circulated a 60-page pamphlet comparing Communist aggression in Tibet with the Hungarian suppressions. This drew an immediate propaganda and diplomatic response from Peiping.

Peiping has shown comparative restraint during the Cairo-Moscow dispute, confining its action to articles deploring the UAR's anti-Communist campaign and to private diplomatic representation. No major Chinese Communist leader has yet attacked Nasir publicly. Akhbar al-Yawm's accusations, however, are sure to draw scathing rejoinders and to quicken the deterioration in Sino-UAR relations.

5 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Popular Resistance Forces in Iraq

The commander of the Communist-controlled Popular Resistance Forces (PRF) in southern Iraq has begun to "assert himself with regard to local military commanders. In a proclamation issued with the consent of the local military commander to the inhabitants of Basra on 2 May, the PRF commander restated the broad security functions of the "permanent" PRF members. Significantly, it called as well for special efforts against "outcast agents, saboteurs, and people who bear grudges." This last appears to be an open invitation for more of the secret denunciations which have been effectively used by Communists close to Qasim to press for the ouster of senior military officers and other non-Communist officials.

Basra is a center of PRF strength and a focal point of friction between army officers and members of the rapidly expanding PRF. Communist-led street mobs have shown their capability to defy police and army authority and take virtual control of the city; in some instances, army officers who made the mistake of arguing with PRF members have subsequently been murdered.

The PRF has also grown rapidly in the northern part of Iraq, but Brigadier Janabi, commander of the army's Second Division, has assumed operational control over the PRF along with other police and security forces there.

PRF units are participating in Janabi's brigade-level campaign against dissident Kurdish tribes in the extreme northeast.

The continuing purge of the Iraqi officer corps will pave the way for further increases in the power and freedom of action of the PRF. officers from the rank of lieutenant colonel to major general were forced to retire on 19 and 26 April. Army efficiency and military discipline have been impaired. In a few cases enlisted men on learning that their officers had been posted for retirement, have attempted to kill them.

5 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
Turkey May Ban Opposition Party

The violence and disorders which occurred during the recent political tour of western Turkey by opposition leader and former President Ismet Inonu reflect increasing bitterness between government and opposition supporters. The Menderes government may make use of these disorders as a pretext to carry out its long-standing threat to ban Inonu's Republican People's party (RPP).

In Usak on 1 May, Inonu and the other RPP legislators accompanying him were stoned, and special security measures were taken in Manisa after Inonu was denied permission to speak. On 3 May police manhandled members of the crowd welcoming Inonu in the port city of Izmir, and the plant of a pro-RPP newspaper was set on fire. When Inonu returned to Istanbul on 4 May, his car was attacked by progovernment elements. Police used tear gas to disperse supporters who sought to welcome him at party headquarters.

Inonu, a strong critic of government restrictions on press and individual freedoms, has made veiled comparisons between Menderes and former Iraqi Premier Nuri Said. According to the RPP press, the government has taken steps to strip Inonu of his parliamentary immunity so he could be tried for statements insulting to Menderes.

The opposition in Turkey is accustomed to working under restraints by the government, but violent attacks on the 74-year-old Inonu, long revered as a military hero and associate of Ataturk, reflect an unusual degree of political tension. If Inonu were to be injured in future disorders, there might be a strong popular antigovernment response and even pro-Inonu pressure on the government by the Turkish Army.

5 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 11]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 May 1959

Copy No. C 62
