The Situation in the Congo

Cairo's ambassador in Leopoldville continues to maintain regular con-
tact with Patrice Lumumba. On 6 October when the ambassador
turned over to Lumumba "three fifths of the amount sent," he
found Lumumba "more cheerful than on the previous occasion."
Lumumba apparently discussed with the ambassador his inten-
tion of announcing a new cabinet to include anti-Lumumba lead-
ers in order to place the "opposition in a dilemma."
This maneuver was thwarted, however, by the
arrest of 12 Lumumba followers--most of whom were among
those named to the cabinet--immediately after the announce-
ment was made on 7 October.

Lumumba assured the UAR ambassador that he would im-
mediately both resume publication of his newspaper and dismiss
an Egyptian Jew who served as a press aide and had been useful
because of his linguistic ability. The ambassador assured Cairo
he would see that the dismissal was effected within two days.

Also on 6 October the UAR ambassador pressed UN repre-
sentative Dayal to strengthen the guard on Lumumba and to
the salaries of the members of the Congolese parliament.
the ambassador had cited the danger
that members of parliament loyal to Lumumba might be bought
off because their salaries had been denied them. The ambassador
estimated on 6 October that the Congolese Army was more strongly
armed than UN forces, pointing out that it was equipped with ar-
mored cars, many bazookas, mortars, and light guns. He added
that "any soldier would be able, by himself, to gain complete con-
trol of the situation."

Meanwhile, rumors are circulating in Ghana that an attempt
with Ghanaian support will be made "in a week" to restore Lu-
mumba as premier. One such report claims that Ghanaian troops
in Kasai will be flown by IL-18s to take over Leopoldville. Although
admitting that the Leopoldville airport could be closed to such a
flight, the Belgian ambassador in Accra claimed that such a plan
could explain the disappearance of 40 Soviet technicians not seen
in Accra since 4 October. The Soviet ambassador to the Congo is
reported to have returned to Accra, after consultations in Moscow
with the full intention of returning to Leopoldville.
the USSR is supporting Ghana
completely in the move to restore Lumumba.

10 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
