India - Communist China: The border incident revealed by Defense Minister Krishna Menon on 14 March, while apparently only a minor skirmish between Indian and Chinese border guards, may set off new protests in the Indian Parliament and increase New Delhi's determination to remain unyielding. Menon said that a Chinese soldier had been captured by an Indian patrol four miles inside the Himalayan state of Sikkim. The incident, probably resulting from Chinese reconnaissance activities, is one of several along this sector of the Tibetan frontier reported since November, but the only one publicized by Indian officials. In view of the deadlock in diplomatic efforts to solve the border dispute, New Delhi may feel it expedient to keep Peiping under pressure by playing up its "aggressive" activities. Peiping will probably minimize the incident.

USSR-Morocco: additional military equipment destined for Morocco--of types and amounts not yet determined--is now being processed at the Soviets arms port of Nikolayev. In addition, Rabat has announced that two Soviet experts have arrived in Morocco "at the request of his majesty's government" to examine the possibilities for constructing a shipyard on the Mediterranean. Their arrival apparently is a result of economic aid discussions during the visit of Soviet President Brezhnev to Morocco in February.

Saudi Arabia: King Saud, casting about for a "success" to bolster his administration against supporters of Crown Prince Faysal, has asked that the US agree to his announcing immediately abrogation of the Dhahran Airfield agreement. Prior to his dismissal as prime minister by the King last December, Faysal had asked the US to "study" changing the status of the airfield. Saud's emissary to the American ambassador asserted that members of the pro-Faysal faction are preparing to attack the King through propaganda releases in other Arab states alleging that Faysal was dismissed because he wanted to abrogate the airfield agreement;

15 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  iv
