step by its reluctance to approve a parliamentary recommendation for a second Asian-African conference which was heartily endorsed by all other political factions. Communist party leader Aidit--in an obvious effort to prevent Indonesian participation in a conference which will discuss Chinese Communist disagreements with other Asian nations--stated on 23 November that this is not the time for such a conference in view of the controversies among Asian countries. (Page 2)

Nationalist China: Chiang Ching-kuo, Nationalist China's security chief, told an American official on 27 November that he had decided to airdrop small-arms ammunition to Kuomintang irregular forces in northern Burma. Chiang alleged his decision was based mainly on positive indications that the Burmese Army is preparing another offensive against the irregulars. Although Chiang asserted no weapons would be dropped, several recent reports indicate the Nationalists have been dropping supplies, possibly including rifles, mortars, and machine guns, to KMT troops during the past month. (Page 3)

Nepal: Prime Minister Koirala informed the press on 29 November that he will visit Communist China in February or early March. The Chinese had invited Koirala to come to Peiping to conclude arrangements on their recent cash offer of $8,000,000 in new economic aid. Koirala probably will use the opportunity to try to commit Peiping to recognition of the "traditional" Sino-Nepalese border. The prime minister also announced that in response to Nehru's invitation he would visit India late in January, apparently in an effort to reassure New Delhi and to coordinate the two governments' positions on the border problem. Koirala referred to Nehru's recent reaffirmation that India would resist any aggression against Nepal as an "expression of friendship," but noted that Katmandu "would decide if there were aggression"--a statement probably designed to underline Nepal's independence and its publicly neutral position on the Sino-Indian dispute. (Page 4)
