Khrushchev Plans to Reduce Forces in Eastern Europe

Khrushchev told the West German ambassador to Moscow on 18 January that the recent decision to reduce Soviet forces by one third would be followed by reductions of Soviet troops in Poland, Hungary, and East Germany. He added that the USSR was prepared to withdraw all forces if the West accepted his proposal for complete disarmament. When the ambassador inquired about the effect of a withdrawal on the East German regime, Khrushchev said this would not take place for several years, and that material conditions there would improve sufficiently to permit an eventual complete withdrawal. The USSR currently has 325,000 troops in East Germany, 55,000 in Hungary, and 35,000 in Poland, and a substantial portion of these could be withdrawn without jeopardizing the regimes' security.

The Soviet premier apparently feels that an announcement of cuts in Soviet forces in these countries and a conditional offer to withdraw will strengthen his hand in the summit negotiations, particularly in pressing the West for reciprocal reductions in Western forces in Germany and Berlin. In his speech in Budapest on 1 December, he dwelled at length on the contradictions between Western professions of support for disarmament and their desire to retain forces in West Berlin.

In his talk with the German ambassador, as well as in an unofficial memorandum to the West German Social Democratic party leaders, Khrushchev reaffirmed his position on Berlin and Germany and repeated his public threat to conclude a separate peace treaty. The memorandum, from "responsible Soviet circles," was delivered by Ambassador Smirnov and was probably intended to bring pressure on the Socialists to take a stronger stand in challenging recent statements by Adenauer and Berlin Mayor Brandt to the effect that the Western proposal at the Geneva foreign ministers' conference for an interim Berlin solution should not be the West's starting point at the summit.

Soviet expectations of a protracted period of negotiation on Germany and Berlin, evident in Khrushchev's recent statements, were also reflected in information that Khrushchev and Ulbricht have evolved a long-range strategy for gaining Western concessions. The Communist leaders feel that they can afford to be patient, believing that it is only a matter of time until the Western powers become "tired" and make concessions.

25 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
