[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
11 October 1952
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West German sentiment favors all-German unity discussions (page 5).
5. New Soviet approach to France reported (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 04]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. West German sentiment favors all-German unity discussions:

A recent public opinion poll conducted by HICOG in West Germany shows that two out of three of those polled supported East-West German discussions on unity. Six out of seven approved of the Bonn decision to receive the East German Volkskammer delegation on its recent visit.

Nearly half of those polled were not entirely convinced of American sincerity on the question of German unification.

Comment: This support for all-German talks is further evidence of eleventh-hour West German reluctance to abandon hope for unification. It also suggests greater public receptivity to the stepped-up Communist unity offers, and contradicts earlier reports of public apathy toward the Volkskammer delegation visit.

5. New Soviet approach to France reported:

The American Embassy has been reliably informed by a high French Foreign Ministry official of an interview between Soviet Foreign Minister Vyshinsky and French Ambassador Louis Joxe upon the latter's recent departure on leave from Moscow. Joxe was told that Moscow's "greatest wish" was to reach a general understanding with France as the prelude to a detente between East and West. The French Foreign Ministry is thinking of instructing Joxe to say upon his return that talks, if any, should be held in Paris rather than Moscow.

The American Embassy comments that the French Foreign Office seems well aware of the current Soviet desire to divide the West.

- 5 -

[PAGE 05]
Comment: French Ambassador Joxe, although anti-Communist, is reported to have definite leftist tendencies and to be impressed by Soviet sincerity regarding the dangers implicit in "aggressive" American intentions.

Prime Minister Pinay's recent rejection of the American note on military expenditures and the universal press approval for his independent stand with regard to American "interference" indicate that the French Government, given sufficient encouragement by the USSR, may strike out on a course of its own with respect to such policies as EDC and rearmament.

- 6 -

[PAGE 06]
