[PAGE 01]
29 September 1951
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

USSR

FAR EAST

2. Chinese UN delegate unreceptive to US suggestions regarding troops
in Burma (page 4).

NEAR EAST

WESTERN EUROPE

5. French urge caution in approach to Egypt on Middle East Command (page 6).
6. European fascist meeting reportedly being held in Spain (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

7. Comment on reported revolt and state of siege in Argentina (page 7).

****
[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

2. Chinese UN delegate unreceptive to US suggestions regarding troops in Burma:

The Chinese delegate to the UN does not believe
that the Nationalist troops in Burma will accept
internment or that the Burmese Government as
an alternative to internment will permit their
withdrawal to Formosa. He also thinks it unlikely
that his government will agree to recall Li-Mi, the leader of the troops concerned, and to hold him in Taipei.

In addition, the official indicated that he was not
concerned about these troops precipitating a Chinese Communist invasion of Burma and even advocated that they be rearmed and sent back into Yunnan.

While admitting the embarrassment that would be created by a Burmese
appeal to the UN for assistance, the Chinese delegate stated that he would
answer such action with "some eloquent speeches."

Comment: It has long been recognized that the
Taipei regime exercises little or no control over its troops in Burma. Since
the Burmese agreement to defer an appeal to the UN was, in part, contingent
upon successful US efforts in obtaining at least a show of cooperation on the
part of Taipei, this statement by the Chinese delegate may indicate that the
problem is not yet resolved.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. French urge caution in approach to Egypt on Middle East Command:

Comment: Egyptian sentiment is anti-British,
rather than neutralist, as a result of the serious Anglo-Egyptian Treaty dispute. Unless, as the French imply, the details of the proposed Middle East
Command scheme are made sufficiently attractive to Egypt, Egyptian Government leaders may not approve of the Middle East defense scheme.

6. European fascist meeting reportedly being held in Spain:

European Social Movement was scheduled to
meet in Spain on 28 September to organize a Pan-
European Movement or at least an international
body of fascist war veterans. Among the groups
which reportedly were to be represented at the
meeting were the neo-fascist Italian Social
Movement, Nazi SS legions, and the Falange. Among the individuals named as participants were the German neo-Nazi Priester, the Swedish neo-Nazi Engdahl, former SS General Korsemann and
the notorious Nazi intelligence agent Skorzeny. The Executive Council of the
European Social Movement hoped to secure a pledge of Falange cooperation
from Franco.

[PAGE 07]
the notorious Nazi intelligence agent Skorzeny. The Executive Council of the
European Social Movement hoped to secure a pledge of Falange cooperation
from Franco.

Comment: The Falange has maintained friendly
relations with other fascist groups in Europe, especially the Italian Social
Movement, and the Franco regime has given asylum in Spain to a considerable
number of prominent German Nazis, including Skorzeny. The aim of the anti-
Communist, anti-US European fascist movements is to achieve a militarily
strong and independent union of fascist European governments. Except for
the Falange the fascist organizations do not represent, as yet, important
political forces in their respective countries.

LATIN AMERICA

7. Comment on reported revolt and state of siege in Argentina:

Circumstances surrounding the alleged army revolt against the Argentine Government on 28 September and the resultant proclamation of a state of siege indicate that the "plot" may have been largely precipitated by Peron. The only action against the government reported thus far is that army planes, flying over the business section of Buenos Aires, dropped leaflets urging the armed forces to revolt against the government. The quick action of the state-controlled labor confederation in calling a general strike in support of the government appears to indicate prior planning. The police who support Peron were not in evidence.

By afternoon the government announced that it had crushed the revolt and the leaders were in flight.

Peron's purpose in staging such a demonstration
would be to elicit greater popular sympathy by "proving" his continuing charges of conspiracy and to create a pretext for greater restriction of opposition activity. While some top generals object to many of Peron's policies, recent developments indicate that the army is now prepared to support Peron

[PAGE 08]
at least through the November elections.

Neither the Navy nor the Air Force is in a position to revolt. Peron has the support of labor. None of the opposition political parties has means to effect a coup at this time.
