[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

CHINA - JAPAN
2. Chinese Communists charge US plans to rearm Japan (page 3).

CZECHOSLOVAKIA - AUSTRIA
5. Dissension within Czech Communist Party (page 4).
6. Possibility of Austrian Communist disorders (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
CHINA - JAPAN
2. Chinese Communists charge US plans to rearm Japan:
Peiping Radio has warned that China and the USSR cannot ignore US plans to rearm Japan and has pointed out that "one of the primary objectives of the Sino-Soviet Treaty (of February 1950) is the prevention of the revival of Japanese armed aggression."
Comment: The broadcast represents an extension of the current Soviet propaganda line that the US is rearming Japan and creating in it an ally of the US.
The timing of the Peiping broadcast is coincident with the Bulganin mission to Japan and is probably aimed at reducing its effectiveness.

[PAGE 04]
CZECHOSLOVAKIA - AUSTRIA
5. Dissension within Czech Communist Party:
US Embassy Prague reports that former Foreign Minister Vladimir Clementis has allegedly disappeared from Prague and is presumed to have escaped from the country.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The position of Clementis within the Party has been none too secure since his removal as Foreign Minister in the spring of 1950. His disappearance, also reported in the press, coincides with the alleged escape and arrest of important Party and government officials during the past week, as well as with other current purges and rumors of purges.

6. Possibility of Austrian Communist disorders:
Austrian officials are concerned over the possibility of new Communist disorders in late February and early March, when economic conditions are expected to become acute. Indications of trouble are seen in Communist-inspired demands for wage boosts and in the continuous training of Communist strong-arm squads in the Soviet zone for use in the seizure of industrial installations and public utilities. Vice Chancellor Schaerf, particularly alarmed, feels that full employment must be achieved to insure a firm socialist grip on labor. Chancellor Figl, more sanguine, agrees that reduction of unemployment is essential to minimize the effect of Communist-inspired disorders. He believes, however, that the Austrian security force is capable of controlling the situation.
Comment: The possibility of such Communist efforts has been anticipated for some months. During the October disturbances when police effectiveness was impaired by Soviet interference, efforts by Socialist workers contributed substantially to the break-up of Communist riots. Communist capabilities would be considerably enhanced, however, if the Socialists lost control of the majority of labor rank and file.

[PAGE 06]
