Somalia and British Protectorate Intend to Form Union

Nationalist leaders of the Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia and of the British Somaliland Protectorate announced on 22 April, at the conclusion of a week-long conference, their intention to unite the two territories under a "Somaliland Republic" on 1 July.

Britain has invited protectorate leaders to London in May and apparently hopes to dampen enthusiasm for early independence and union. Various British officials have expressed doubts, however, about their ability to influence developments, and London might considerably shorten the present tentative schedule calling for independence in two or three years.

The conferees--who met in Mogadiscio, capital of Somalia and the designated capital of the new state--released a joint communique at the end of the conference outlining their plans for the union. The legislative bodies of the two territories are to merge to form the new national assembly which will elect a president to head a coalition government formed by the political parties now in power in the respective countries.

The agreement appears to be a major victory for Somalia’s Prime Minister Issa. He was believed to favor a loose association with the protectorate in order to prevent upsetting the delicate tribal balance which would permit him to remain in power, but he now appears to have executed a clever political maneuver which probably will strengthen the position of his party and greatly enhance his own popularity. In return for agreeing to accept the protectorate’s plan for total integration, Issa apparently received a pledge of support from the protectorate leaders as either prime minister or president of the new state.

Addis Ababa is apprehensive over the attraction such a union would present to the nomadic Somalis who inhabit Ethiopia’s Ogaden region, and has substantially increased its security forces in the Somali border areas during the past year. Three battalions of Imperial Body Guard troops--Ethiopia’s elite fighting force--reportedly were moved into this area recently.
