[PAGE 01]
1 August 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1 AUGUST 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping gets Crown Prince Badr's
permission to send more techni-
cians to Yemen.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq--Army instructors ordered
withdrawn from Popular Resistance
Force, Communists reported con-
sidering strikes and sabotage in oil
fields.

World Bank loan to Nasir for Suez
Canal improvement may be blocked
by Israel and UK. Israelis want
loan tied to commitment on freedom
of transit.

King Saud agrees to meet with Nasir.

Japan indicates it will "sign repatria-
tion agreement with North Korea;
may cause Seoul to withdraw offer
to resume talks with Tokyo.

South Korea--Rhee's personal control
of government may be weakening as
result of mental deterioration.

Afghan propaganda charges US collu-
sion in alleged Pakistani aggression
against 'Pushtoonistan.

Somalia requests arms from Italy;
could aggravate tensions with Ethi-
opia.

III. THE WEST

Reported plots against Castro re-
gime seen as unlikely to succeed if
attempted at this time.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Yemen: Communist China, falling
behind in its road construction program in Yemen has re-
ceived permission to send in another 202 "experts" in early
August. These will be in addition to 500 Chinese personnel
now in Yemen. Most of them are laborers engaged in constructing
a 40-mile section of the Al Hudaydah - Sana road. Peiping has asked Crown
Prince Badr in early June for permission to increase the num-
ber of Chinese "engineers." Badr had refused the request because
the Chinese were attempting to subvert the local population. The subsequent change
in Badr's attitude probably reflects a hope that the concession to
the Chinese will induce further aid offers from the West.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: Military personnel engaged in training the Commu-
nist-infiltrated Popular Resistance Force (PRF) have been or-
dered to rejoin their army units immediately.
Withdrawal of these personnel, along with recent orders banning the wearing of PRF
uniforms and withdrawal of arms from the PRF units, should
further reduce its potential. Communist elements "are gathering in all areas
of Iraq," and Communist officials in the Iraqi oil fields are con-
sidering employing strikes or sabotage.

UAR: Nasir's hoped-for $40,000,000 loan from the World
Bank for Suez Canal improvement may be at least temporarily

[PAGE 05]
blocked by British and Israeli opposition. The British are
seeking a delay, partly because they fear that, if the loan
is granted before the problem of the return of sequestered
British property is resolved, damaging "awkward questions"
might be asked during the period before the parliamentary
elections, which are expected this fall. Israel has informed
the British Foreign Office of its desire to see commitments
regarding freedom of transit attached to the loan and is seiz-
ing on Nasir's recent belligerent statements to launch an in-
ternational propaganda campaign to discredit his reliability.
(Page 2)

UAR - Saudi Arabia: King Saud has accepted an invita-
tion from Nasir to visit Egypt sometime after Saud's return
from Europe in late August or early September. The invitation was
conveyed to Saud by UAR Vice President Marshal Amir in
mid-July when the King's yacht passed through the Suez Canal.
The meeting would be the first encounter between the two lead-
ers since the UAR accused Saud of plotting Nasir's assassina-
tion in the spring of 1958.

Japan-Korea: Japanese Foreign Minister Fujiyama
indicated Tokyo's desire to sign the
Japanese - North Korean repatriation agreement, following
consultation with the International Committee of the Red Cross,
now that South Korea had "given in on the repatriation to North
Korea". Fujiyama probably fears that Pyongyang, which has
been pressing for immediate signing, might denounce the agree-
ment because of Seoul's 30 July proposal to resume talks with
Tokyo and to accept repatriates. Despite Seoul's "uncondi-
tional" offer, the signing of the North Korean agreement prior
to the opening of the South Korean - Japanese talks probably
would be regarded as a provocation by the Rhee govern-
ment and might cause it to refuse to begin talks with Japan.

South Korea: President Rhee's personal direction of Korean
policies and governmental operations may be weakening.

1 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
Governmental decisions are re-
portedly being made by certain members of the Liberal party
and the presidential secretariat, most of whom have been
identified with the faction of the Liberal party that has advo-
cated extreme measures to retain power.
(Page 3)

Afghanistan: The government-controlled Afghan press,
in a new departure in its propaganda, is attacking alleged
Pakistani "aggression against Pushtoonistan." This line, which
may be Soviet-inspired, claims US-Pakistani agreements are
intended to convert Pakistan's Pushtu region into an American
military base.
This attack follows the conclusion of recent agreements
for Soviet economic and military assistance. Kabul has also
made arrangements for Soviet military advisers to work in the
Ministry of Defense and apparently is preparing for ten Soviet
experts to work on the second five-year plan.
(Page 4)

Somalia-Italy: Somalia, the Italian-administered UN trust
territory scheduled for independence next year, has recently
asked Italy for $5,600,000 worth of arms to be used for internal
security. Rome has not yet reached a decision, but Italian of-
ficials have speculated they might provide funds to permit Mog-
adiscio to buy some equipment. Such action could lead to an
aggravation of existing tensions between Ethiopia and Somalia.
Each state fears territorial expansion on the part of the other;
an arms assistance to Somalia would probably prompt Ethiopia to
seek more arms aid.
(Page 5)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Various sources of the American Embassy report
plotting to oust the Castro regime in the near future. The con-
spiracy is said to involve the planned assassination of Fidel and

1 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
Raul Castro, the revolt of a portion of the armed forces, and
coordinated landings by armed groups from the Dominican
Republic. Although Dominican Dictator Trujillo is known to
be supporting an irregular armed force, led by Cuban exiles,
for use against Castro, he is not likely to unleash it prior to
the inter-American meeting of foreign ministers scheduled to
begin on 12 August. Even if attempted, such plots would be
unlikely to succeed at this time.
(Page 6)

1 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping Sending More "Road Experts" to Yemen

An additional 202 Chinese Communist "road experts" have
been given permission to enter Yemen, where Peiping's road
construction project is falling behind schedule. The Chinese
will arrive in early August,

Since 1958, about 500 Chinese Communists have arrived in
Yemen. The majority of them are working on the 173-mile road
Peiping agreed to build between Al Hudaydah and Sana under the
terms of its 1958 technical assistance agreement.

the Chinese would be un-
plete the first 40-mile section of the road by the original June
deadline. Peiping is anxious to impress underdeveloped nations
with its capability to provide technical aid and is driving hard to make a success of the Yemen program despite difficulties with
local labor.

Crown Prince Badr resented the entry of the Chinese and had denied a re-
quest to bring in 150 more "engineers" because they were attempt-
ing to subvert the local population. At the time, Badr hinted he
would be happy to see them leave the country if only he had the money
to pay off the used portion of Peiping's $16,000,000 interest-
free loan. The subsequent change in Badr's attitude probably re-
flects a hope that the concession to the Chinese will induce further
aid offers from the West.

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

British and Israeli Opposition May Delay World Bank
Loan to Nasir

Nasir's hoped-for $40,000,000 loan from the IBRD for start-
ing his ambitious Suez Canal improvement scheme may be de-
layed at least temporarily by British and Israeli opposition. The
British, concerned over possible adverse domestic reaction to
UK acquiesence to the loan without an acceleration of the return
of sequestered British property and a solution to the Suez Canal
transit problem, have indicated to IBRD President Black that
they favor a delay, and probably London would prefer waiting
until after the parliamentary elections expected this fall.

Foreign Minister Lloyd told Secretary Herter in Geneva on
30 July that the UK "thought it would be safer to let the loan slide
until November as long as the UK was not charged with slowing
it up." Egyptian knowledge of the UK's stand would probably
further delay resumption of UK-UAR diplomatic relations, which,
according to a Foreign Office official "Egypt knows the UK
stands ready to resume at any time."

Israel has informed Britain of its desire to see "commit-
ments" regarding transit of the canal attached to the IBRD loan.
A Foreign Office official on 29 July stated his impression that
Israel might attempt to force this issue, presumably by demand-
ing UN consideration of the subject. Israel's cabinet will con-
sider the problem on 2 August. Ambassador Reid has reported
from Tel Aviv that the Hebrew press on 28 July carried the sug-
gestion that Israel may be planning to launch an "information"
campaign to enlist public opinion, especially in the United States,
against the proposed IBRD loan. Nasir has recently made sev-
eral belligerent statements in reaction to the call made by
Israel's former chief of staff, Moshe Dayan, for a firmer pol-
icy against the UAR. Israel may use these statements against
Nasir in a campaign to discredit his reliability.

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 10]
Syngman Rhee's Control Over Government Seen Weakening

President Rhee's personal direction of Korean policies
and governmental operations may be weakening. Since the
latter part of May, Rhee has shown increasing inability to
focus his attention on government problems and to grasp even
the most elementary of new ideas,

Ambas-
sador Dowling, in a personal meeting with Rhee on 13 July,
noted that the President appeared to have difficulty focusing
his attention on the problem under discussion

There is some indication that leadership has been assumed
by a triumvirate comprising Minister of Home Affairs Choe
In-kyu, Minister of Justice Hong Chin-ki, and Minister of
Finance Song In-song, and by the "hard" faction of Rhee's
Liberal party. The presidential secretariat also appears to
exercise considerable influence over governmental decisions
by controlling what and whom the President sees. The most
influential member of the secretariat--Pak Chan-il--is report-
ed to be more anti-Japanese than Rhee.

If knowledge of President Rhee's apparently failing mental powers becomes widely known, confidence in the government may
decline, and South Korea could face a protracted period of in-
stability prior to the presidential election next year. Moreover,
those persons reported to be exercising leadership have demon-
strated in the past their willingness to use drastic measures to ensure their retention of power. The lack of any constitutional
provision for the removal of an incapacitated president would
provide them with justification for blocking the succession to the
presidency of opposition Vice President Chang Myon.

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
Afghan Press Criticizes US "Bases" in Pakistan as Kabul
Accepts Soviet Military Advisers

The government-controlled Afghan press has criticized
American "bases" in Pakistan, declaring the Pakistani Gov-
ernment was compelled to carry out "aggression" against
the Pushtu region in Pakistan under the terms of a US-Pakistani
agreement in order to convert the area into an American mili-
tary base. The Afghans are apparently referring to the re-
cent US-Pakistani agreement to establish a communication
facility in northern West Pakistan and to a series of tribal
incidents in Baluchistan, at the southern end of the Pakistani
Pushtu tribal region. The propaganda attack follows the con-
clusion of recent agreements for Soviet military and economic
assistance and is a marked departure from Afghanistan's customary
neutral position.

Kabul, which in the past has secured advisory assistance
almost entirely from the West, is now accepting Soviet advisers
as distinct from technicians.
Soviet military advisers--to be identified as "instructors"--are to
work in the Afghan Ministry of Defense. The Afghans apparently
are arranging for ten Soviet experts to help work out the details
of the second five-year plan.

A Soviet major general, with the reported title of "Director
General of Soviet Military Groups in Afghanistan," arrived in
Kabul on 23 June. Such a designation would indicate that Soviet
military technicians and advisers are now organized into a formal
military assistance group. Afghan military training and reorganiza-
tion seem likely to be accelerated with Soviet assistance.

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]
Somali Arms Quest May Heighten Tensions With Ethiopia

Somalia's recent request to Italy for $5,600,000 worth of
arms and equipment may aggravate tensions between Somalia
and neighboring Ethiopia. These were intensified earlier this
month when the Somali prime minister publicly accused Ethiopian
Emperor Haile Selassie of seeking during his current trip abroad
international support for a policy aimed against Somalia's inde-
pendence and toward the eventual absorption of Somalia by
Ethiopia. This is violently opposed by Somali nationalists, who
hope instead to bring about the union in one state of the approxi-
mately 2,500,000 ethnic Somalis who are now divided among
five separate political jurisdictions, including Ethiopia.

While the materiel sought by the Somalis is allegedly for
internal security purposes only, the list provided the Italians
includes such items as light tanks or scout cars, mortars, and
bazookas intended for Somali border guards along the disputed
and already highly volatile frontier with Ethiopia. Even if these
items were omitted, however, Addis Ababa could be expected to
react strongly against any significant strengthening of Somalia's
present 3,500-man security force. New efforts by Ethiopia to
bolster its own military establishment would probably follow and
could lead ultimately to the acceptance of arms from the Soviet
bloc, with which Addis Ababa has recently expanded its ties.

Rome has not yet reached a decision on the Somali request.
However, an Italian Foreign Ministry official, who indicated on
29 July that Italy would have difficulty fulfilling it, also hinted
that Rome might provide the Somalis with limited funds with
which to purchase at least some of the equipment they desire
from other Western suppliers. Failure to provide some satisfac-
tion to Somali officials on the arms issue--about which they feel
strongly--might prompt Mogadiscio to look to non-Western sources.

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

Attempt Against Fidel Castro Regime May Occur Soon

an active conspiracy exists against the government of Cuban
Prime Minister Castro. The coup effort, which most sources
indicate will be launched in the near future, would include at-
tempts to assassinate Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, chief
of the armed forces. A revolt of a portion of the armed forces
would be coordinated with landings of armed groups from the
Dominican Republic.

A key figure in the conspiracy is William Alexander Morgan,
renegade American and former second in command of a guerrilla
band that fought independently of the Castro forces during the
revolution against the Batista regime. Morgan, now a major in
the Cuban Army, is reported to have agreed to defect, taking
numerous army colleagues with him. Past reports of Morgan's
anti-Castro plotting, his known hostility to "Che" Guevara, an
officer close to Castro, and the disillusionment of Morgan and
his associates, who expected more influential positions in the
Castro regime, suggest that Morgan may well defect. It is
very doubtful, however, that he could count on a sufficiently
large segment of the military to threaten the regime seriously.

Although Dominican dictator Trujillo is known to be sup-
porting an irregular armed force in the Dominican Republic for
use against Castro if he considers it necessary, he is not likely
to unleash it prior to the inter-American meeting of foreign min-
isters scheduled to begin on 12 August. If, however, the San-
tiago meeting does not produce what Trujillo considers adequate
protection against further Cuban-backed rebel incursions into
the Dominican Republic, Trujillo may again consider defensive
action against Cuba.

Discontent has increased in Cuba, but is not believed to have
reached the point where it seriously endangers the regime, and
Castro has demonstrated that he still retains the ardent support
of the Cuban masses. The American Embassy believes the
reported conspiracy would almost certainly fail, but would "add
further to the weight of bloodshed and tragedy which Cuba now

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 15]
