[PAGE 01]
1 November 1951

Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Chinese Nationalists aroused over alleged statements of Japanese Prime Minister (page 3).

5. New Greek Government not expected to last long (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Harassing of German interzonal trade continues (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Chinese Nationalists aroused over alleged statements of Japanese Prime Minister:

Prime Minister Yoshida's reported statement before the Japanese Diet on 30 October that Japan would "gladly" negotiate a peace treaty with the Chinese Communists without the "slightest objection" has shocked the Chinese Nationalist Government, according to the US Charge at Taipei.

He reports that Yoshida's recent comments, indicating that Japan will make no early decision on the Chinese treaty question, are producing a highly embarrassing and unsettling situation in Formosa. This is damaging the US aid program, is helping the Communists, and is giving the impression that "the Japanese are already throwing their weight around in the traditional manner."

Meanwhile, the Chinese Foreign Minister has requested US help in meeting charges that Yoshida's statements actually represent US policy and are "intended both as a direct Japanese and indirect US slap-down for the Nationalist Government."

Comment: There is as yet no official confirmation of Yoshida's alleged statement. In previous Diet speeches he has attempted to maintain a non-committal attitude on the Chinese treaty question, out of deference both to diverse international opinion and to domestic political opposition. He has officially assured the US, however, that the Japanese Government has no intention of concluding a bilateral treaty with the Communist regime.

Despite the strong anti-Communist stand of the Japanese Government, the Nationalists remain skeptical of Japanese intentions and have repeatedly urged the US to intercede in their behalf.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
5. New Greek Government not expected to last long:

Liberal leader Venizelos accepted the post of Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs in the new coalition government against his better judgment. The US Embassy in Athens, which expressed this opinion, added that Venizelos obviously withheld some of the best of the Liberal Party members from cabinet posts, perhaps to use them in further maneuvers. The length of time that the new government remains in office will probably depend to a large extent on Venizelos' attitude.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
Comment: the uneasy coalition government created on 27 October is not given a long life expectancy. New elections are expected within the next few months.

Meanwhile, continuing instability will prevent Greece from contributing significantly to NATO or the Middle East Command

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Harassing of German interzonal trade continues:

The Allied Commandants in Berlin report that Soviet and East German authorities have still not demonstrated that they intend to comply with their oral agreement to cease interference with Berlin trade. The Commandants recommend that economic pressure be brought to bear on the East Zone.

Comment: The Allied High Commission decided on 24 October to suspend interzonal trade entirely if USSR and East German officials did not remove restrictions on Berlin traffic by midnight 1 November. As French and British officials had been reluctant, prior to the 24 October meeting, to stop interzonal trade; this counteraction may still be postponed pending a possible change in East German tactics.

Little trade has moved since the signing of the interzonal trade pact on 20 September. Although the West Germans appear to have shipped roughly three times as much to East Germany as they have received, the East Germans have shown considerable displeasure that key shipments, such as iron and steel, have been delayed.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
[PAGE 08]
