7. Inter-ministerial differences hamper scope of Italian rearmament:

The difference in economic philosophy between Italian Minister of Commerce Togni, who favors a corporative economy, and Treasury Minister Pella, who favors a free enterprise system, is preventing the formulation of a definite economic policy and is delaying the development of a rearmament program commensurate with Italian capabilities. The former Minister of the Treasury Corbino attributes Pella's persistent opposition to rearmament to his "accountant's mentality" and to the fact that he is a "neutralist." Corbino comments that, in his opinion, the present Italian supplemental military budget should be considerably increased and that dollar aid should be sufficient to avoid the necessity of reducing consumption by lower income groups.

In the meantime, the announcement that about half of the $71 million ECA funds recently released to the Italians would be used to purchase new materials for Italy's defense effort is expected to encourage the Italian defense effort and to counter Communist charges that rearmament means inflation.

Comment: Corbino's views support previous estimates of US observers to the effect that Italy's rearmament effort is below Italian capabilities and its economic policy is inconsistent. This is the first indication that Treasury Minister Pella is a "neutralist"; if true, this would be damaging to US security interests in Italy. Pella's apprehensions over the effects of rearmament also spring from an overriding fear of inflation.

8. Italy urges Western initiative in Middle East:

An official of the Italian Foreign Office has stated that the Italian Government is concerned over the deterioration of political conditions in the Middle East, particularly as a result of developments in Iran, and believes that a Western initiative should be taken to reverse the present trend. He indicated that the Italian Government would be satisfied with either the inclusion of Turkey or Greece in NATO or with a separate security arrangement for the Mediterranean, the latter having the advantage of holding out hope to other countries such as Egypt for eventual inclusion.

Comment: Italy is becoming increasingly concerned at what it regards as the lack of political initiative in the West in contrast to the Soviet bloc. It has been a long-standing objective of Italian foreign policy to integrate Turkish and Greek defense more closely into Western defense arrangements in order to protect Italy's exposed eastern flank. The Italian Government will therefore firmly support US efforts to have Greece and Turkey included in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
