[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
1 September 1958
Copy No. C

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Air Build-up
Communist troop strength
Nationalist troop strength
Piston fighter
Jet fighter
Piston light bomber
Jet light bomber
Ground-attack
SELECTED MAJOR AIRFIELDS

SOUTH CHINA SEA
SANTU BAY
JOINT OPERATIONS CENTER
EAST CHINA SEA
CHINA
TAIWAN
PESCADORES IS.
HONG KONG
HAI NAN
STATUTE MILES

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 September 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Taiwan Strait Situation (as of 0100 EDT, 1 September):
With the exception of renewed and apparently heavy shelling of Tungting, a small island south of Kinmen (Quemoy), on 31 August, there has been a general lull in Chinese Commu-
nist military activity in the Kinmen area since 29 August.
Light and sporadic firing against other islands has continued and has been directed mainly at the Tan islands and Kinmen airfield and resupply beach. Reconnaissance aircraft over the Fukien coast on 30 August encountered no aerial opposi-
tion, and for two days radar has failed to detect hostile air-
craft over the coast or in operation at any of the airfields be-
tween Swatow and Luchiao. The lull in naval activity may be due to rough seas which would have hampered operations of the Communists' small craft.

The continued build-up of Chinese Communist military strength in the area opposite Taiwan indicates that the Commu-
nists are preparing for heavy harassment and interdiction activ-
ities if not a major assault. The supply situation on Kinmen and Matsu remains good, but the two Tan islands have been cut off for several days.

Peiping continues to broadcast statements from the Fukien Front Command to the Kinmen garrison appealing for the defec-
tion of individual senior officers. The US Embassy in Taipei be-
lieves that while the defection of a garrison on one or more of the islands would be a heavy blow to morale on Taiwan, the Com-
munists are overestimating their chances of success. In domes-
tic broadcasts, Peiping is still almost ignoring the Taiwan Strait situation.

An enlarged session of the Politburo of the Central Commit-
tee met from 17 to 30 August. The first broadcast concerning its discussions was limited to economic matters.
(Map on reverse side of page)

[PAGE 05]
USSR: Pravda declared on 30 August that the Soviet Union will give Communist China the "necessary moral and material help" and warned that any "aggression by the United States" in the Far East will inevitably lead to the spreading of war to other areas. The editorial was designed to arouse further world-wide apprehension over the prospect of general hostilities. The statement stops short of committing Moscow to any military action.

USSR-Libya: The USSR has submitted a broad offer of economic aid to Libya. Prime Minister Kubar fears accept-
ance would lead to an influx of Soviet technicians, but that on the other hand, rejection would be used by the USSR to streng-
en the hand of pro-Egyptian opposition forces.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR propaganda: The UAR government-controlled press and radio have, after a brief lull, strongly attacked the lead-
ers of anti-Nasir Arab governments, despite the UNGA reso-
lution on 21 August in which the Arab states in effect pledged non-interference in each others' affairs. The Cairo press warned Jordan on 30 August that if quick arrangements were not made for withdrawal of foreign troops, "tension will re-
turn to the area, and this time it will be very severe and dan-
gerous." The Syrian press has been assailing the governments of Jordan and the Sudan. In addition, on 28 August, it launched the strongest attacks to date on Tunisian Prime Minister Bour-
guiba, comparing him with Iraq's late Nuri Said as an "agent of imperialism and an enemy of the Arabs."

III. THE WEST

Iceland-Britain: Fishery experts of eight nations in Paris failed to reach a compromise before Iceland's unilateral ex-
tension of its fish conservation limits to 12 miles became ef-
fective on 1 September. Iceland continued to insist on

1 Sept 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
recognition of the new limit. Despite last-minute efforts to prevent clashes between the British fish protection squadron and Iceland's coastguard, there is a possibility that some incidents will occur.

Mexico: Last week's student and labor violence have contributed to an unstable situation which the American Embassy views with grave concern. Efforts may be made to discredit outgoing President Ruiz Cortines, on the occa-
sion of his last state of the union message on 1 September.
Although the 40-year rule of the Party of Revolutionary In-
stitutions will be continued under President-elect Lopez Mateos, leftists who have won increased control in key unions will seek to influence the new administration.

1 Sept 58    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Special Adviser to the President
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 08]
