Peiping Stands Firm in Political Disputes With Moscow

The major Chinese address at the Rumanian party congress--delivered by politburo member Peng Chen on 22 June--made no concessions to Khrushchev's authoritative restatement of Soviet policies toward the West delivered at the congress the previous day. Peng did, however, attempt to avoid exacerbating the situation in Bucharest by presenting a judiciously worded statement. He blurred the question of the inevitability of war by quoting contradictory statements from the 1957 Moscow Declaration, but he made no mention of peaceful coexistence and limited his endorsement to Khrushchev's attack on the United States at the summit. Peng gave credit for China's economic success to the regime's "leap forward" and commune programs--Chinese domestic developments in disfavor with Moscow.

Propaganda emanating directly from Peiping continued to voice sharp criticism of Khrushchev's foreign policies. An article in the official party paper, People's Daily, on 21 June--broadcast on 22 June--made many of Peng's points but in much stronger language. Reflecting the Chinese view that the bloc is in a position to deal from strength, the article rejected Khrushchev's policies of "active coexistence" and "friendly cooperation" with the West, calling instead for a "resolute struggle" against imperialism as the only assurance of peace. By implication, the article names Khrushchev a "renegade" for branding the Chinese interpretation of Leninism as "stiff dogmatism" and takes the Soviet leader to task for lauding what the Chinese call "shameful actions of betrayal" as creative Marxism-Leninism.

As far as is known, Sino-Soviet political differences have not so far affected economic and military cooperation between the two powers, but a continued deterioration in political relations would make close cooperation difficult to maintain. For this reason, further attempts to resolve these differences may be expected.

On the same day Peng spoke, all the Eastern European satellites except Albania wholeheartedly supported Khrushchev's

24 June 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1
