[PAGE 01]
28 February 1961

Copy No. C 80

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
Page Denied
[PAGE 03]
28 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Situation in the Congo. (Page 1)

2. Laos: Vientiane may use Chinese Nationalist irregu-
lars presently in Laos; Peiping warns against such
use. (Page 3)

3. West Germany: In talks with Macmillan, Adenauer
receptive to increasing Bonn's foreign aid but gave no
assurance of a continuing commitment. (Page 4)
[PAGE 04]
Republic of the Congo

Approximate area controlled by:
Kasavubu-Mobutu
Gizenga
Kaloni
Tshombe

UNited Nations Forces
Selected road
Selected railroad
Selected airfield
Cut railroad

DETAILED MAP OF
LEOPOLDVILLE -
LULUABOURG AREA

28 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page
[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

28 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*Congo: A radio address by Kasavubu on 27 February in
which he urged resistance to UN "tutelage" may worsen the
already tense relations between UN personnel and the Congo-
lese army.

The present location of the forward element of Gizenga's
column is unknown. In Elisabethville, the situation between
UN troops and Katanga forces is explosive

President Keita of Mali reportedly confirmed
on 23 February that his country is sending a diplomatic rep-
resentative to Stanleyville.

Laos: Contrary to previous disclaimers, Laotian military
leaders apparently are proceeding with plans to use the Chinese
Nationalist irregulars at present in Laos, at least in a defensive
capacity. The Peiping People's Daily on 27 February raised the
implicit threat of intervention if US imperialism dares to incite
the Kuomintang bandits to join the Laotian rebel forces." Such
a move, said People's Daily, would "seriously menace the secu-
rity of China's southwestern border"--a menace that "absolutely
cannot be tolerated."
[PAGE 06]
West Germany: Adenauer, in his talks with Macmillan
in London on 22-23 February, gave the British the impres-
sion that he was better briefed and more receptive than a year
ago to the proposition that West Germany's international pay-
ments imbalances should be corrected by increased foreign aid
and arms purchases. He reportedly gave no assurance, how-
ever, that West Germany would assume continuing foreign
commitments. The chancellor spoke of the need for a more
flexible attitude on Berlin; in general, he was described as
"relaxed and cautious" on Berlin. He had much to say about
"revivifying" NATO, and expressed confident that De Gaulle
would be cooperative while hinting that West Germany had no
intention of being frozen out of a major role in NATO by any
kind of tripartite directing body in the alliance.

28 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
Situation in the Congo

Gizenga apparently remains the dominant figure in the
Stanleyville regime, and the city is reported calm. Bernard
Salumu, formerly Gizenga's representative in Cairo and
more recently a leading figure in the Stanleyville regime,
is reported to have fled, presumably as a result of a strug-
gle for power.

The British chargé in Bamako, who met with President
Keita on 23 February, feels that the government of Mali is in
agreement with the Soviet position on the UN, including the
removal of Hammarskjold and his replacement by a triumvirate.
The chargé felt that his vigorous defense of Hammarskjold and
the UN made little impression on Keita.

Within the past two weeks,
Tshombe has reportedly issued Mauser rifles and ammunition
to many members of his Conakat party in Elisabethville and the
surrounding villages. However, he appears to be trying to raise
morale and to guard against an anti-Conakat uprising, rather than
increase the fighting strength of the Katanga army.

Premier Ileo has protested to the UN against what he al-
leges to be UN assistance to the Gizenga forces in taking over

28 Feb 61    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
Luluabourg on 24 February. Details of what is taking place
are still obscure, but Hammarskjold has said that there is
little the UN can do in view of the absence of any armed clash
and the apparent willingness of the Luluabourg garrison to
welcome the Stanleyville units.

28 Feb 61    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
LAOS

Government forces
Government
Antigovernment
Antigovernment concentrations
Kong Le/Pathet Lao forces
Main route number
Road
Trail
Chinese Nationalist Irregulars

28 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page
[PAGE 10]
Chinese Nationalist Forces in Laos

General Ouane, chief of the general staff, has told an
American observer that the Laotian armed forces plan to
use the Chinese Nationalist irregulars only for the protection
of Namtha Province, where most of them are located. Ouane,
who recently returned to Vientiane from consultations with
the irregulars, puts their number at 4,000 effectives plus an
equal number of dependents. Although Nationalist China has
now indicated willingness to withdraw those irregulars "sub-
ject to its control" from Burma and Laos, a substantial num-
ber may not be in this category.

The People's Daily commentary of 27 February drew at-
tention to a joint statement issued in Xieng Khouang on 23 Feb-
ruary by Souvanna Phouma and Neo Lao Hak Sat leader Prince
Souphanouvong, protesting against "the use of Kuomintang
remnant bandits by the United States." The commentary also
cited a recent statement by Kong Le warning that if the National-
ists are not withdrawn, "measures similar to those adopted
by the Burmese Government" will be taken to get rid of them.

Peiping is using the presence of Nationalist irregulars
in Laos to link Communist China's national interests more
closely to the Laotian crisis. This issue could be used by
Peiping to justify a more active military role in Laos, and
the presence of an old enemy on China's southwestern border
would become a useful issue for Peiping in any international
conference in which it might take part.

28 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Adenauer and Macmillan Talks

Although Adenauer's talks with Macmillan produced no
important decisions, they were conducted in a constructive
and cordial atmosphere and can be viewed as furthering the
good relations established by Macmillan's visit to Bonn last
August. Adenauer's proposal that the Western European
Union be utilized as a means for political consultation be-
tween Britain and the six continental Common Market nations
is probably viewed by the British as a friendly gesture.

Adenauer's failure to give assurances of future foreign
aid contributions appears to conflict with the general commit-
ment Foreign Minister von Brentano made in Washington on
17 February for a continuing foreign aid program for under-
developed countries.

Over the week end, Erhard con-
tinued to stress in speeches in Cologne and Nuremberg that it
is only a matter of "luck" that Bonn has nearly a billion-dollar
surplus available for a special 1961 aid program and that this
cannot be expected every year.

28 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Advisor to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

The National Security Agency
The Director

The United States Information Agency
The Director

The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
