[PAGE 01]
20 October 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. TOP-LEVEL SOVIET DELEGATION IN WARSAW

2. CHINESE COMMUNIST REMARKS ON SOVIET-POLISH
RELATIONS

3. POLE PREDICTS TWO-PARTY SYSTEM IN POLAND

5. JAPAN AND THE USSR RESTORE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS

6. BONN ANNOUNCES NATO FORCE GOALS FOR 1956 WILL
NOT BE MET

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. TOP-LEVEL SOVIET DELEGATION IN WARSAW

A TASS communiqué issued in Moscow early on 20 October confirms that Khrushchev, Mikoyan, Molotov and Kaganovich arrived in Warsaw on 19 October to carry on discussions with leading members of the Polish Workers' (Communist) Party. The communiqué stated that Wladyslaw Gomulka, purged in 1948 for "Titoism" and just reinstated in the central committee, attended the discussions. The statement gave no indication that the four Soviet presidium members are participating in the work of the plenum of the Polish party central committee now in session.

According to the communiqué, a delegation of the Polish politburo will "shortly" go to Moscow to discuss political and economic questions with the Soviet leaders. The fact that Poland will send such a delegation to Moscow for additional talks suggests that Soviet policy toward Poland and the other Satellites is still being formulated. Pending a decision on this policy, the Soviet leaders can be expected to make a strong effort to prevent the Polish plenum from taking further public steps confirming the present trend toward internal democratization and independence from Moscow.

The noncommittal tone of the communiqué and an unusual reference to the atmosphere of "outspokenness" in the talks suggest that there remain divergent views between the Polish and Soviet leaders. The high level of the Soviet delegation is probably intended to impress the Poles with the unity of the Soviet leadership at a time of basic readjustment in Soviet-Satellite relations.

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. CHINESE COMMUNIST REMARKS ON SOVIET-
POLISH RELATIONS

The New York Times correspondent in Warsaw is convinced of the authenticity of the report given him by two members of the Polish party's central committee that the Chinese Communists have assured Polish party leader Ochab of their support for Polish "independence." The American embassy in Warsaw is also inclined to believe the account.

The correspondent states that it was Chou En-lai, not Mao Tse-tung, as originally reported in the Times, who gave the assurances to Ochab on his trip to Peking last month. Chou is said to have declared that he understood the Polish desire for independence and that "Poland should not be dictated to by the Kremlin."

Comment
In making these remarks, Chou did not necessarily intend to question Soviet policy toward the Satellites. His remarks are consistent with the Chinese understanding of Soviet policy pronouncements on "independent roads to socialism."

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. POLE PREDICTS TWO-PARTY SYSTEM IN POLAND

Julian Hochfeld, a former Socialist who is now a member of the Polish United Workers (Communist) Party and the Sejm (parliament), recently told a small group at London University that he envisaged the establishment soon of a two-party system in Poland. He said the "opposition" party would be made up of social democrats or groups inspired by social democratic traditions. When asked whether the Russians would give permission to a two-party system for Poland, he replied, "We shall not ask Khrushchev."

In discussing Poland's economic situation, Hochfeld also said, "We shall approach the United States for economic aid. . ." In other comments, he maintained that the Russians "could not put the clock back" in Poland and that great progress would be made under Gomulka. He stressed that workers' councils along the lines of Yugoslav experiments would be established.

Comment
Hochfeld is expressing the views of a significant segment of those elements within the Communist party who favor liberalization. Hochfeld recently distinguished himself before the Sejm with outspoken criticism of the regime for blaming past excesses on individuals rather than the system.

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
5. JAPAN AND THE USSR RESTORE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS

The declaration restoring diplomatic relations between Japan and the USSR, signed by Prime Minister Hatoyama and Premier Bulganin on 19 October, seems certain to receive Diet approval and probably will be acceptable to most Japanese. The Soviet pledge to return Shikotan and the Habomai Islands when a peace treaty is concluded and to continue discussions on the status of the southern Kurils will probably placate irredentist sentiment critical of the agreement and prevent a serious division in the ruling Liberal-Democratic Party. The present agreement, however, does not remove a major obstacle to concluding a peace treaty, since the USSR may continue to make the return of Shikotan and the Habomai Islands contingent on Japanese recognition of Soviet sovereignty over Sakhalin and the Kurils.

Disappointment over failure to gain the immediate return of the territories will be largely overcome by promises of Soviet support for Japan's admission to the UN--which the Japanese delegation has stated is unconditional--the early repatriation of Soviet-held Japanese prisoners, the assurance that the fishery pacts will be implemented, and optimistic projections of Japanese-Soviet trade.

The USSR will probably increase its economic, cultural and political overtures toward Japan and intensify its campaign for the withdrawal of American forces and for a neutral Japan. As Japanese detainees are released, Communist propaganda can be expected to contrast this with the continued imprisonment of American-convicted war criminals.

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 09]
6. BONN ANNOUNCES NATO FORCE GOALS FOR 1956 WILL
NOT BE MET

The West German government has announced that it will not meet the NATO force goals for 1956. Germany's submission to the NATO annual review will be amended at the next NATO council meeting. The Bonn government has blamed the Western allies for this situation, charging that they have not released barracks as originally planned.

The embassy says the source of the difficulty is the failure of the Refugee Ministry to relinquish occupied barracks and administrative delays in starting new construction.

Comment
These modifications in Bonn's defense effort are designed to win support for Adenauer in the 1957 election in face of the unpopularity of the rearmament program.

Adenauer continues to maintain that the total German force goal of 500,000 will not be affected by these changes. Citing the alleged barracks shortage, the Defense Ministry has halted the recruiting of volunteers.

20 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 10]
