[PAGE 01]
3 October 1954

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Rhee may move against Communist members of NNSC inspection teams (page 3).
2. Comment on Chinese offshore island developments (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Viet Minh reported getting 155 mm artillery (page 4).
4. British officials in Singapore concerned over Communist infiltration of schools (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Comment on Soviet hints of modified position on Austria (page 6).

LATE ITEM
6. USSR rumored preparing new proposal on all-German elections (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Rhee may move against Communist members of NNSC inspection teams:

that the Polish and Czech members
of the inspection teams of the Neutral
Nations Supervisory Commission in Korea "would be picked
up,"

Comment: Rhee issued a warning
that "either the Communist spies must be expelled forthwith or we shall have
to follow our sovereign interests." In a meeting with Ambassador Briggs on 27 September, he likewise threatened to take
action because the United States was "doing nothing."

There are strong indications that South
Korean security agencies have been preparing plans for action
against the Polish and Czech members of the inspection teams.
Provost Marshal General Won Yong-tok, who engineered the
prisoner release last year, often acts as Rhee's hatchet-man and
would be the logical person to carry out any order for such action.

Any South Korean move against inspection
team members would almost certainly involve clashes with
their American military guards.

2. Comment on Chinese offshore island developments:

During the intensified Communist shelling of the Quemoys on 1 October, Communist loudspeakers warned the Nationalist garrison that the island would be in Communist hands by 15 October, a Chinese Nationalist official told a press conference on 2 October.

[PAGE 04]
Although Nationalist press releases
have frequently been proved false, the Communists continue to
possess the capability to launch an attack on the Quemoys or
other Nationalist-held islands at any time.

Nationalist sources continue to report
increased patrol and reconnaissance activity by Communist
aircraft in the Tachen Islands area. There has been no confirmation of a Nationalist press report of 2 October stating that
the Chinese Communists were assembling a "sizable" fleet of
naval craft in the Choushan Islands, a naval base about 100 miles
north of the Tachens.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Viet Minh reported getting 155mm artillery:

155mm artillery was
observed on railway cars moving from
Na Cham toward Langson in northern
Vietnam on 28 September (see map,
page 5). state that this materiel
was going to equip units of the Viet Minh's newly activated 305th
Division near Langson.

Comment: This is the first reliable
report that 155mm artillery is in the hands of the Viet Minh.

The receipt of 155's would be a clear
violation of the cease-fire agreement. An inspection team of
the International Supervisory Commission is now located in
Langson and is presumably in a position to detect the reported
violation.

This is also the first report that the
rail line between Na Cham and Langson is being used. The entire line between Na Cham and Hanoi has been out of operation
since World War II.

[PAGE 05]
Section of rail line reported in use.

VIETNAM
RED RIVER DELTA
2 October 1954

Lang Son - Hanoi rail line

Selected railroad
Selected railroad (inoperable)
Selected road

Scale 1:1,530,000

[PAGE 06]
British officials in Singapore concerned over Communist infiltration of schools:

British officials in Singapore state that
a "critical and explosive" situation has
been created by increasing Communist
infiltration of Chinese schools there.
Chinese elders have told the secretary
for Chinese affairs in the Singapore government that they are
unable to control their youth. The secretary expects tension to
reach a peak during the forthcoming trial of several students
who were arrested for refusing to register for military service
as provided by law. He also fears that the recent release of
captured Communist documents designating students as the key
target to influence and outlining a plan for the assassination of
government officials and anti-Communist Chinese will impress
the Chinese with the extent and strength of the Communist net.

Comment: Chinese schools in the
Federation of Malaya as well as in Singapore are strongly infected with Communism and students are recruited directly
from the schools for military and subversive training in Communist China. Chinese constitute more than 800,000 of Singapore's
million-odd population.

WESTERN EUROPE

Comment on Soviet hints of modified position on Austria:

The USSR has strengthened its current
divisive efforts in Europe with strong
hints that it has modified its terms for
conclusion of an Austrian treaty.

This tactic may be designed to satisfy
the Austrian demand that the USSR show
more flexibility in its terms before new treaty talks are held.
Both Chancellor Raab and Foreign Minister Figl, eager for negotiations, are likely to consider that there is now an adequate
basis for new talks.

[PAGE 07]
A Russian Hour broadcast in Vienna
on 29 September suggested that the USSR is now willing to limit
occupation forces both as to numbers and locations after a
treaty is signed. Also, Soviet officials in Austria have gone
out of their way in the past two weeks to refer to Austrian and
German press predictions of a modification of the Soviet position on Austria.

In the past few weeks the USSR has
also suggested modifications in its positions on world disarmament and has hinted at a change in its attitude on the question of
free all-German elections. Thus the USSR has now intimated it
may modify its positions on the three key points of disagreement
with the West in Europe. These various moves appear designed
primarily to influence the French and block implementation of
any Western agreement on West Germany.

LATE ITEM

6. USSR rumored preparing new proposal on all-German elections:

[PAGE 08]
Comment: Ambassador Bohlen reported from Moscow on 27 September that he knew of nothing
to support the rumors in Berlin, reported to him by the French
embassy, of Soviet-East German consultations regarding the
Soviet position on Germany. Bohlen believes that the USSR may,
as a Pravda editorial has hinted, offer some modification of its
position, but that it would not actually agree to really free elections.

France could be expected to insist on
accepting any Soviet proposal for talks if there were any hint
of concessions, particularly an offer of free elections in exchange for neutralization of a unified Germany. Paris would
not necessarily postpone action on ratifying the London agreement pending an East-West conference, but would probably make
final ratification contingent on failure of such a conference.

Moscow is doubtless aware of the French
attitude and may be expected to exploit it in an effort to prevent
ratification of the agreements reached in London.
