other parts of Iran, are maneuvering to improve their position with respect to the Tehran government. There is no evidence, however, of plans for immediate widespread insurrection.

Although the army units are considered capable of controlling any localized revolt, the reluctance of provincial army commanders to undertake a widespread tribal disarmament program confirms other indications that the army could not control a nationwide revolt.

8. Egypt issues unrealistic strategic evaluation of Suez Canal:

The Egyptian Army Headquarters has issued an evaluation of the strategic importance of the Suez Canal to all Egyptian military attaches "for guidance."

According to the evaluation, the canal would be valueless in time of war since its strategic importance depends on the security of navigation in the Mediterranean. The estimate concludes that the presence of British troops is "militarily useless" for the defense of the canal, which "can easily be undertaken" by the Egyptian Air Force.

Comment: The Egyptian emphasis on the canal alone overlooks the strategic importance that the West attaches to the existence of air and military facilities in this area. This basic difference in approach may complicate Anglo-Egyptian negotiations over the canal, which have reportedly achieved an initial success.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. Austrian vulnerability to propaganda against strategic materials controls cited:

Soviet and domestic Communist propaganda appears to be increasingly effective in dissuading the Austrian Government from cooperation in strategic materials controls. An attack by the Soviet Information Service last week on the Austrian "liaison officer" for East-West trade matters has resulted in his withdrawal from this work.

The Austrian Government is now considering turning the responsibility for trade controls over to a single inexperienced Foreign Ministry official.

Comment: There is mounting evidence of growing Austrian reluctance to assume the political risks and economic burdens of denying Orbit access to strategic materials. Requests for Battle Act exceptions are becoming far more frequent, many of them originating at the top level of the government.
