[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET LEADERS MAINTAIN GENEVA POSITIONS IN
INITIAL TALKS WITH BRITISH (page 3).

2. FLOW OF REFUGEES OF CONSCRIPT AGE FROM EAST
GERMANY REACHES HIGH POINT (page 5).

3. TURKISH PRESIDENT SUGGESTS $100,000,000 AMERICAN
LOAN (page 6).

4. LIBERIAN PRESIDENT DECIDES AGAINST VISIT TO
MOSCOW (page 7).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 8)

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. SOVIET LEADERS MAINTAIN GENEVA POSITIONS IN
INITIAL TALKS WITH BRITISH

In their first private meeting with
British leaders in London on 19 April,
the Soviet leaders made no new proposals on the two main subjects discussed, East-West contacts and Germany. Khrushchev
took the lead in presenting the Soviet position, with Bulganin
interjecting only a few brief comments.

According to an official of the British
Foreign Office, Khrushchev made an "impressive" reply
to Eden's opening statement that Soviet attacks on Britain's
colonial record seemed to belie their friendly protestations.
Khrushchev maintained that the USSR was not unfriendly,
that it was not seeking to divide the United Kingdom from
its allies and was pleased to see that the British are assisting some colonial peoples to independence. He argued,
however, that the USSR must maintain its anticolonial principle regarding areas which are still being denied independence.

Eden's reference to the Satellites as a
cause of tension evoked a sharp reaction from Khrushchev,
who insisted that the Satellites are sovereign and independent nations. He said that if the British desire information on
these countries they should inquire of their respective diplomatic representatives in London. Bulganin, in one of his
rare comments, objected to the term "Satellites."

Khrushchev's comments on German unification were completely negative and merely reiterated the
Soviet position at the Geneva conferences. He contended
there is no connection between unification and European security and again urged the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Germany and declared that unification was a matter for negotiation by "the two Germanies."

The general impression of British officials after this first meeting was that the Soviet leaders are

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 05]
well entrenched and sure of themselves. At one point in
the discussion, the Russians remarked that the circumstances
no longer exist, if in fact they ever existed, where the West
can impose its will on the USSR.

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
2. FLOW OF REFUGEES OF CONSCRIPT AGE FROM
EAST GERMANY REACHES HIGH POINT

During the week of 6 to 12 April, 972
East Germans between the ages of 17
and 24 took refuge in West Berlin.
This is the largest number of refugees
in this age group in any week since the
beginning of November 1955. The total number of refugees
who registered in West Berlin during this week was 3,882.

Comment    The sudden rise in military-age refugees, despite the security controls
over persons of this age group, indicates that strict border
controls and a check of trains leading to West Berlin are not
sufficient to prevent young people from leaving to escape
military service.

Since 1 January 1955, 42,080 East Germans
of military age have escaped to West Berlin alone, and about
as many have fled directly across the West German border.
Approximately three fourths of these refugees, or enough to
man six East German army divisions, are male.

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
3. TURKISH PRESIDENT SUGGESTS $100,000,000
AMERICAN LOAN

President Bayar of Turkey suggested that the United States
consider giving a $100,000,000
loan or grant "to permit Turkey
to complete its present (domestic development) projects," during a private informal conversation with
Director Riley of the US Overseas Mission on 18 April.

Riley reports that Bayar also indicated he had no intention of dealing further with the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
and that regardless of Soviet pressure he will not accept Soviet economic assistance "so long as he is in
power." The president also said that the forthcoming
visit of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) representatives to Turkey would only increase popular suspicions
that currency devaluation was imminent, an action he
would never authorize.

Comment    This latest Turkish approach for a
substantial increase in American
economic assistance indicates that Ankara is as adamant
as ever in its opposition to American recommendations
for stabilizing the Turkish economy. Bayar's attitude
offers little hope for any practical accomplishment during the visit of the IMF representatives to Ankara.

Bayar and Prime Minister Menderes
are the two most influential men in Turkey. Menderes has
consistently pressed for an even larger American loan.

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6

[PAGE 08]
4. LIBERIAN PRESIDENT DECIDES AGAINST VISIT
TO MOSCOW

President Tubman informed the American ambassador in Monrovia on 20
April that he had declined the Soviet
invitation to visit Moscow not only for
himself but also for the vice president and the speaker of
the House of Representatives. He cited internal political
and constitutional considerations which made the trips impossible.

Comment
Tubman personally favored sending Liberian emissaries
to Moscow and was certain that the USSR would not secure
any benefit from such a visit because of Liberia's "avid"
opposition to Communism.

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7

[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 22 April)

The American embassy in Tel Aviv
believes that Israel feels that the crisis "with Egypt is temporarily at an end. Road blocks on the approaches to Tel Aviv
have been discontinued, the home guard brigade has been demobilized, and a portion of the reservists have been returned
to inactive status.

Israeli attitudes toward the future, however, remain pessimistic, and Israeli forces retain a high
capability for immediate action on all borders.

Israel's assessment of the situation is reflected in a statement by the minister of labor to an Israeli
youth conference in Jerusalem on 21 April that it would be
"criminal folly for Israel to assume that the UN had achieved
anything more than a postponement of war in the Near East."
(Press)

UN secretary general Hammarskjold returned to Lebanon after completion of conferences with Israeli
leaders, and prepared for discussions with the governments of
Syria and Jordan during the coming week. (Press)

In recent discussions with Hammarskjold,
Israeli premier Ben-Gurion is reported to have reiterated his
country's intention of resuming work on the Jordan water diversion project at Banat Yacov, an action which Syria has declared
it would consider an act of aggression. An official in Ben-Gurion's
office had previously expressed Israel's determination to begin work on the project by 15 May, while other reports indicate that
Syrian troops opposite the site of the diversion project, at Banat
Yacov, have standing orders to open fire if Israel resumes work
within the demilitarized zone. The American embassy on 19
April re-emphasized the "explosive situation" which could develop from the Banat Yacov problem.

According to the Egyptian press a military
delegation from Jordan, led by the chief of staff of the Arab Legion,

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8

[PAGE 10]
will arrive in Cairo within a few days for conferences on joint
military plans. King Hussain reportedly is unwilling to permit
these talks to result in conclusion of military pacts which would
bring Jordan into the Egyptian-Saudi-Syrian alliance. However,
a strong faction of Arab Legion officers is believed to desire
closer military co-operation with Egypt.

Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen have concluded a military alliance, according to press reports from Cairo.
In addition to adding another Arab country to the military alliance
against Israel, the alignment has strong anti-British overtones.
Both Saudi Arabia and Yemen have serious territorial disputes
with Britain, and Nasr is strongly anti-British. (Press)

Egyptian military camps in the Suez Canal
Zone which were formerly empty now appear to be occupied,
Although no training has been observed, there has been an apparent increase
in personnel and equipment, probably connected with rail movements from the Cairo area last week.

An Israeli ship was to leave Britain on 22 April
carrying 750 tons of military equipment and explosives, including
16 Bofors light antiaircraft guns, according to press reports
from London. (Press)

22 Apr 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9
