[PAGE 01]
4 February 1954
Copy 34
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1.

FAR EAST
2. South Korea planning to demand criminal jurisdiction over UN troops
(page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Opposition Indonesian army commanders reportedly asked to resign
(page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Comment on the Syrian crisis (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. France reportedly sounds out Spain on Moroccan compromise (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST
South Korea planning to demand criminal jurisdiction over UN troops:
Public statements by Foreign Minister
Pyun in the past few days confirm that
the Rhee government is now drafting an
administrative agreement covering the
status of UN forces in South Korea and giving the Rhee government criminal jurisdiction over them, according to the American embassy
in Seoul. The draft aims at arrangements comparable to those provided under the NATO, US-Japan and US-Philippines agreements.

Comment: Some UN members probably
will prefer to withdraw their troops from Korea rather than to subject them to Korean justice.

[PAGE 04]
Rhee is motivated principally by a desire
to gain equal treatment with Japan in all his relations with the United
States. There is neither popular pressure in South Korea for such
arrangements nor political opposition to exploit the issue.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
Opposition Indonesian army commanders reportedly asked to resign:
The Indonesian government reportedly has
asked the two leading anti-Communist
territorial commanders, Colonels Kawilarang
and Simbolon, to resign in order to avoid
dismissal and disgrace. Their reply is not
yet known.

Comment: Kawilarang and Simbolon have been leaders of the army
opposition to the policies of the pro-Communist defense minister. Their removal would pave the way for the government's
use of the army for political purposes as a preliminary to the elections scheduled for 1955.

A demand for the colonels' resignation might result in open resistance by antigovernment army commands.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
Comment on the Syrian crisis:
Syrian president Shishakli remains in
control of the country, thanks to his hold on the army, but his position has been seriously weakened by the current unrest.

Shishakli has failed in a major effort,
undertaken last July, to sell his military dictatorship as a constitutional regime. He is faced with opposition from old-line politicians, left-wing radicals, ex-army officers, fanatical religious leaders and the Druze tribesmen in the south. He must rely increasingly on inexperienced administrators, incompetent army officers and many opportunists in parliament.

[PAGE 05]
In this situation Shishakli must rely on
severe repression to preserve his regime. Fear of popular opposition lessens his ability to cooperate with the United States on an economic agreement, on resettlement of Arab refugees, and on the development of the Jordan River valley.

WESTERN EUROPE
France reportedly sounds out Spain on Moroccan compromise:
On 1 February the Spanish charge in
Tangier confirmed to the American
minister that France has sounded out
Spain on a compromise proposal to replace the present sultan of Morocco with the second son of the former sultan. He stated that Spain is more interested in a "positive reaffirmation" of its rights in Morocco than in who occupies the throne.

The American minister believes the
French proposal could be an "all-around face-saver" if Spain can be persuaded that France is genuinely interested in settling outstanding problems and willing to reaffirm Spanish rights.

Comment: Previous reports indicated
that Paris was marking time on the dispute pending an answer to its protest over Madrid's Moroccan policy.

While the present sultan has wanted to abdicate, the French might have difficulty in persuading the former sultan's son to accept.
