quickie 28 January public opinion poll in Paris showed 68 percent in favor of backing De Gaulle, and only 9 percent against him.

The Independent party is badly split. Ex-Finance Minister Pinay has privately assured De Gaulle of the availability of his "advice and services" in a crisis. Senator Duchet who is firmly on the side of "French Algeria" on 27 January reportedly declared "this is the end of the line for De Gaulle," but he has since moderated his views. Duchet has apparently broken his ties with Former Premier Bidault's Rally for a French Algeria (RAF), which he considers ineffective. Bidault apparently believes that the outcome will be the elimination of De Gaulle, and he considers himself the successor.

The Radicals have called for respect for republican legality, and the Popular Republicans have reaffirmed full support for De Gaulle, as has the Union for the New Republic, which is firmly under control of loyal Gaullists despite Soustelle's previous efforts to commit the party to integration.

Although the Socialists have placed themselves squarely behind the government, they are worried about finding themselves in a difficult position in the future. Secretary General Mollet on 28 January saw no political leader with enough strength to take over from De Gaulle, but he felt that a military coup led by Marshal Juin or General Salan might succeed. Mollet warned that if the right takes any action in metropolitan France, the Socialist party and other left-of-center groups will be forced into unity of action with the Communists, possibly leading to a popular front.

The Communists appear to be trying to exploit the situation to their own advantage by pressing the government to take extreme action against the insurgents and by stimulating other "democratic forces" to join them in public demonstrations. While the Socialist-oriented Workers' Force has reportedly refused to go along with the Christian Workers Confederation's proposal for a national manifestation including the Communists, a Socialist spokesman said his party would approve common strike action.
