[PAGE 01]
21 October 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

3. Vietnamese opposition may aim to paralyze government by prolonging negotiations (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Libyan monarchy reported threatened by provincial unrest (page 5).
5. New Moroccan government reported being formed (page 5).

LATE ITEM

6. Comment on Pakistani prime minister's sudden return to Karachi (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Vietnamese opposition may aim to paralyze government by prolonging negotiations:

Pham Xuan Thai, Vietnamese information minister, told an American embassy officer in Saigon on 17 October he believes Chief of Staff Hinh and the Binh Xuyen organization are stringing out negotiations with the Diem government in order to paralyze it and bring about its eventual collapse.

Ambassador Heath comments that this theory may have a great deal of truth in it and would explain the frequent "backing and filling" of both Hinh and Bay Vien, the Binh Xuyen leader.

Comment: Hinh precipitated the government crisis over a month ago by suggesting that Diem send him on leave and then representing Diem's orders to this effect as an attack on the integrity of the army as a whole. Since then Hinh's objective has apparently been to maintain a state of tension between the government and its opponents and to shift his ground whenever necessary to prevent the reaching of agreement.

[PAGE 05]
General Ely's recently renewed advocacy of Tam, Hinh's father, as the best available successor to Diem suggests that the opposition's tactics may eventually pay off.

During the recent talks in Washington, the French declared Tam "unacceptable" as a candidate for the premiership, but neither this statement nor Ely's insistence that Hinh must be removed has been translated into action.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Libyan monarchy reported threatened by provincial unrest:

discontent among both the townsmen and bedouins of the eastern province of Cyrenaica has reached such proportions that there are indications of a possible revolution against King Idriss and Cyrenaica's ruling family, the Senussi.

The American legation in Tripoli notes that the eight young members of the Senussi family arrested in connection with the assassination of palace adviser Shalhi on 5 October represent important branches of the family. This emphasizes the extent to which the royal family is embroiled in and divided by recent events.

Comment: The monarchy has gained little respect since its establishment in December 1951, and it is unlikely it could survive a serious challenge. Overthrow of King Idriss would delay final approval of the American bases agreement.

5. New Moroccan government reported being formed:

A new Moroccan government to include nationalist Istiqlal party members is being formed in Paris,

[PAGE 06]
Former sultan Mohamed ben Youssef will be moved to Paris from exile in Madagascar. The present sultan will abdicate and be succeeded by a regency council, which in turn ultimately will give way to the re-enthronement of Mohamed ben Youssef.

Comment: The French government may be considering this plan as a solution to the current impasse in Morocco, despite Premier Mendes-France's previous declarations that no dynastic solution is envisaged. However, Istiqlal participation in the initial phases of such a plan would be a major change in the party's policy of demanding the immediate return to the throne of Ben Youssef as a prerequisite to further French-Moroccan negotiations.

Any attempt to effect such a scheme would encounter the concerted opposition of a majority of the French settlers in Morocco and Moroccan functionaries such as El Glaoui, the pasha of Marrakech.

LATE ITEM

6. Comment on Pakistani prime minister's sudden return to Karachi:

The Pakistani ambassador's statement on 20 October that Prime Minister Mohammad Ali had canceled his prospective visit to Canada and was returning from Washington to Karachi "immediately" almost certainly means that the prime minister is in serious political difficulty at home.

This view is supported by the fact that on 18 October former prime minister Nazimuddin, a leader of the dissident Moslem League group responsible for the so-called constitutional coup of 21 September, in which Mohammad Ali concurred, appeared "worried, possibly perplexed, and definitely not confident" in a conversation he had with an American embassy officer. During the conversation, Nazimuddin tried to shake the confidence of the embassy in Governor General Ghulam Mohammad and to build up the reputation of the dissident group.

[PAGE 07]
Neither Mohammad Ali nor Nazimuddin gives the appearance of confidence befitting men invested with new power by the 21 September revision of the Government of India Act. It seems more likely that they foresee defeat in their struggle for power with the governor general.

Though Mohammad Ali may be retained in office for some time for appearance's sake, his star seems definitely waning.
