[PAGE 01]
30 June 1959
Copy No. C 3

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
30 JUNE 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping charges US air intrusions over Paracel Islands; announces new "serious warnings."

II. ASIA-AFRICA
India--Communist administration in Kerala refusing to resign and submit to new elections.

III. THE WEST
Extreme rightist Grivas, former Cypriot EOKA leader, reported planning bid for political power in Greece.
Iceland--Communists suffer reverses; Conservative elements gain strength in 28 June elections.
Dominican Republic--Trujillo tells US ambassador he will not permit Dominican forces to attack Cuba.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Paracel Islands: Peiping's recent "serious warnings"--numbers 50, 51, and 52--protesting "intrusions" of US naval aircraft over the Paracel Islands are the first regarding the South China Sea archipelago, which the Communists assert is part of Kwangtung Province. The Chinese Communists apparently intend the warnings to add weight to their claim to the islands--also claimed by Saigon and Taipei--and probably calculate that if the US should suspend its flights, this would imply a degree of recognition of Peiping's claim. The warnings contain no threat that the Communists intend to take military action against US flights in the area.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India: The national leaders of the Indian Communist party maintain that the Communist-dominated government of Kerala will not resign under opposition pressure and that there is no need for new elections. The high command of Nehru's Congress party is still undecided on what course of action its state organization should adopt. Kerala State Congress leaders are determined to carry on their agitation in an effort to bring about the fall of the Communist government--apparently even to the point of disregarding the advice of the national leadership--and are continuing their opposition activ-

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Greece: Former Cypriot terrorist leader General George Grivas is reported to be planning to enter Greek politics with the hope of becoming premier. The 60-year-old Grivas is anti-Communist and has long been popular in Greece. He would probably draw considerable support from both center and rightist Greek politicians seeking a rallying point against Prime Minister Karamanlis. (Page 1)

Iceland: The position of pro-NATO elements in Iceland has improved as the result of the 28 June general elections. The Communist-dominated Labor Alliance, which campaigned against the presence of US forces in Iceland, lost some 25 percent of its popular support. The Conservative gains assure passage of the electoral reform bill by the new parliament and suggest Conservative forces will be further strengthened for the elections to be held this fall. (Page 3)

Dominican Republic: The new publicity being given a six-month-old congressional authorization for the executive to declare war against any country harboring or aiding military forces training to invade the Dominican Republic was seen by Ambassador Farland on 26 June as a public warning to Cuba and possibly Venezuela to prevent further invasion attempts. Generalissimo Trujillo told Farland on 27 June, however, that he will not permit or sanction his forces to attack Cuba despite a great deal of sentiment in the Dominican armed forces to launch an attack. Trujillo said that if Haiti is attacked, he will, if requested, provide military assistance.

30 June 59
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
No Back-up Material

II. ASIA-AFRICA
No Back-up Material

III. THE WEST

Former Cypriot Terrorist Leader May Challenge Greek Premier

Lieutenant General George Grivas, the only political personality in Greece with sufficient prestige to rival Premier Konstantin Karamanlis, may enter Greek politics this fall.

In March, when he returned to Athens after successfully leading the Cypriot terrorist organization, Grivas disclaimed any intention of playing a political role either in Greece or Cyprus. Now, however, by his sharp public criticism of the moderate Cyprus policies being followed by Athens, Grivas has come into direct opposition to the Karamanlis government. Since he is an austere, patriotic individual who holds a very great appeal for Greek voters, many rightist and center Greek politicians would like to use him as a rallying point for a new political movement to fill the gap left by the decline of the non-Communist opposition to Karamanlis. Another military figure, General Alexandros Papagus, brought an era of stability to Greek politics from 1951 to 1955.

Grivas may be deterred from assuming a strenuous political role by poor health. Four years of underground existence on Cyprus left him in visibly poor physical condition, but recent reports suggest some improvement. He may be deterred from seeking a political role by experience in the 1946 and 1950 elections, when he failed to win any electoral success for his "X" organization, which earlier had been active in Greece as an anti-

30 June 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Communist guerrilla organization. His position is much stronger now, however, because of his record on Cyprus.

Should Grivas come to power he would intensify government repressive measures against the Communists. Despite his strongly anti-Soviet orientation as a supernationalist, he might drive a hard bargain with the United States on questions pertaining to military cooperation. Because of his dissatisfaction with developments on Cyprus, he probably would end the Greek Government's policy of putting pressure on the Greek Cypriots to cooperate in the interest of a new independent Cyprus, thus reducing the chances for a successful settlement next spring.

30 June 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Conservatives Gain in Iceland General Elections

The pro-NATO Conservatives and the rural Progressive Party emerged as victors in Iceland's 28 June general elections. According to fairly complete returns, the Conservatives gained one seat, and their Social Democratic partners lost two in the 52-seat parliament. The Social Democratic seats lost reportedly include that of Prime Minister Jonsson, but he is expected to remain in parliament in one of the supplementary seats awarded to his party.

The Communists, who pushed hard on the popular issue of the fishing limits dispute with Britain and the dormant issue of US forces in Iceland, suffered a sharp setback, losing some 25 percent of their popular support and one parliamentary seat.

The Conservatives and the Social Democrats probably will attempt to form a temporary government for the purpose of obtaining the necessary second passage of the electoral reform bill which provides for redetermining the constituencies. They must rely on Communist parliamentary support, however, to assure its final passage. Under the existing law rural interests are heavily overrepresented and all parties, except the Progressives, support the proposed revision which must be passed by two succeeding parliaments. Elections based on the new system probably will then be held in September or October.

The Conservatives are certain to gain further parliamentary strength in these elections and with the support of the Social Democrats, who are also likely to benefit, the two parties will be in a position to form a viable coalition government. Barring serious incidents with Britain in the fishing dispute, this government would work to strengthen Iceland's ties with NATO and introduce a long-range economic stabilization program.

30 June 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 10]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 June 1959
Copy No. C 32
