[PAGE 01]
30 September 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 26
NO CHANGE IN CLASS. X
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2018
AUTH:
DATE:
REVIEWER:

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
India-USSR: India's second government-owned oil re-
finery is to be built by the USSR under terms of an agreement
concluded in New Delhi on 28 September. Financing to the ex-
tent of $25,000,000 will be provided under the long-term Soviet
credit of $378,000,000 extended in July for the Indian Third
Five-Year Plan (1961-66). India has also requested Soviet
technical assistance in operating the 2,000,000-ton refinery,
to be built at Barauni in Bihar State in east-central India.
Last October New Delhi signed an agreement with Rumania
for construction of a refinery in Assam with a capacity of
750,000 tons annually.

Japan - North Korea: Tokyo has rejected demands by pro-
Communist Koreans in Japan for the elimination of "objection-
able" procedures for repatriation to North Korea, especially a
provision to assure that no Korean is sent against his will. A
Communist-inspired boycott of the repatriation program has
resulted in the application of fewer than 200 Koreans for repa-
triation in the first three days of the registration period.
Tokyo's rejection will provide the Communists with an excuse
for blaming the government for the failure of a significant num-
ber of Koreans to apply for repatriation as the Communists
had predicted.
(Page 3)

Laos: The Tunisian member of the UN subcommittee,
Habib Bourguiba, Jr., was recalled from Laos on 29 Septem-
ber to resume his post as ambassador to France. His presence
in France may be required in connection with the Algerian sit-
uation.

The subcommittee's investigation of areas accessible only
by helicopter, which the American ambassador feels is essen-
tial to its task, has been made almost impossible by the sub-
committee's acceptance of the UN secretary general's recom-
mendation to the mission that no helicopters or pilots of any
permanent member of the Security Council or of any country
bordering on Laos be used.

30 Sept 59
DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

UN Security Council - Poland: Poland stands a good chance
to defeat Turkey for the UN Security Council seat now occupied
by Japan. No Soviet bloc representative has held this elective
office since 1950. The present trend of opinion among UN mem-
bers is such that many members may support Poland for the seat
they have long considered allocated to "eastern Europe." Warsaw
may gain the votes of at least half of the 20-member Latin Amer-
ican bloc, in addition to strong African, Asian, and Soviet-bloc
support, according to the Ecuadoran UN delegate.

30 Sept 59
DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]
Japanese - North Korean Repatriation Program Boycotted
By Pro-Communists

(The Japanese Government has rejected demands by the pro-
Communist General Federation of Koreans in Japan (Chosen
Soren) for the elimination of "objectionable" procedures for re-
patriating Koreans to North Korea, especially the provision for
a final screening to prevent involuntary repatriation. Chosen
Soren has instituted a nationwide boycott of the repatriation
program among Korean residents, with the result that fewer
than 200 applied for repatriation during the first three days of
registration.)

(A representative of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), which is supervising the repatriation program in
Japan, has informed Japanese authorities that the ICRC would not
approve substantive changes in provisions for individual and di-
rect contact between the ICRC and each repatriate at the Niigata
embarkation center or for spot screening at some 3,665 registra-
tion points throughout Japan. The Japanese vice foreign minister
has indicated that the repatriation procedures will not be changed
for the time being, although another Foreign Ministry official says
Tokyo may relax the quarantine at Niigata to permit immediate
relatives to visit the repatriates. Initial sailings to North Korea
tentatively are scheduled for 10 November.)

(Some 117,000 Korean residents signed petitions last spring
expressing their desire to go to North Korea. A considerable num-
ber are known to have done so under pressure from Chosen Soren,
which recently claimed that as many as 170,000 actually desire re-
patriation.)

(The boycott, backed by North Korean and Chinese Commu-
nist propaganda, is intended to place the blame on the Japanese
Government in case the number of repatriation applications falls
short of Communist predictions.)

30 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Polish Candidacy for UN Security Council Gaining Support

(Poland stands a good chance to defeat Turkey for the UN
Security Council seat--now occupied by Japan--which many UN
members consider allocated to eastern Europe. No Soviet-bloc
regime has held this high elective office since 1950, when it was
occupied by the Ukraine. This year at least half of the 20-member
Latin American bloc will vote for Poland, according to the Ec-
uadoran delegate. In addition, Warsaw can count on strong sup-
port from the Asian-African and Soviet blocs. This support would
be sufficient to prevent Turkey from getting the necessary two-
thirds majority and may be impressive enough to cause a substan-
tial swing toward Poland on the second or third ballot.)

(Many UN members, in explaining their support for Poland,
argue that the past practice of relegating Soviet-bloc candidates
to lesser UN offices is inappropriate in view of the present "re-
laxed" atmosphere. The Latin American delegates also question
how the United States could oppose election of a Soviet-bloc mem-
ber to the Security Council, when the West granted parity to the
bloc in the ten-nation disarmament group. Speculation among UN
members that Moscow is willing to permit the Eastern European
seat on the UN's Economic and Social Council to go to an Asian
country this year in return for Poland's election to the Security
Council may have influenced other members, particularly Asian.)

(The Scandinavian countries are known to favor the Polish
candidacy and, according to a Belgian UN delegate, some other
members of NATO may have difficulties in supporting the Turk-
ish candidacy.)

30 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
