[PAGE 01]
31 October 1954

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Comment on Yoshida's blast against US occupation policies (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Hinh flatly refuses to support Premier Diem (page 3).
3. French Socialists press their criticism of Diem (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Tehran plans to disarm Iranian tribes (page 5).
6. France takes steps to wipe out Tunisian fellaghas (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Comment on Yoshida's blast against US occupation policies:

Japanese prime minister Yoshida's unprecedentedly blunt press interview in London on 27 October, in which he blamed Japan's present weakness on the United States' postwar occupation policies, appears to be a calculated effort to obtain large-scale American economic aid on the grounds that Washington is obligated to give such aid. Coming as it did just prior to his departure for the United States, the statement may have reflected the prime minister's uneasiness over his prospects for receiving American "gifts," on which he has strongly hinted his domestic political future is dependent.

Yoshida's pointed remarks disclaiming responsibility for Japan's economic plight and its failure to rearm in earnest appear designed to undercut American arguments that Japan should receive no additional aid until it does more to stand on its own feet.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Hinh flatly refuses to support Premier Diem:

General Hinh told an American embassy officer on 29 October he expects the political crisis to get worse before it gets better. He said it is quite possible that during the next week or two there might be anti-Diem demonstrations and that the Hoa Hao and Cao Dai are seriously reconsidering their decision to support the government. He suggested that Bao Dai might return to Saigon sometime after the American elections.
[PAGE 04]
Hinh flatly refused to issue any statement in support of the "present" government and said any attempt by the United States to maintain Diem by making its aid contingent on his continuation in office would be foredoomed to failure.

The embassy comments that Hinh showed more self-confidence than in earlier talks and appeared sure there would be a change in government.

Comment: The outcome of the Hinh-Diem conflict may hinge on Bao Dai, since Diem has told Ambassador Heath his brother had brought word Bao Dai would shortly intervene to solve the problem of Hinh's insubordination. Bao Dai, who has attempted to conceal his whereabouts from the American embassy in Paris, has refused to say just what he will do. According to Diem's brother, Bao Dai does not plan an early return to Vietnam.

3. French Socialists press their criticism of Diem:

Pierre Commin, assistant secretary-general of the Socialist Party, has expressed to American officials in Paris the Socialists' deep concern over the present situation in Vietnam. In this connection Commin cited recent attacks on the Diem government by the party's newspaper, Le Populaire. He said the Socialists would not make their impending participation in the Mendes-France government conditional on the withdrawal of France's support from Diem, but would make clear that the situation must be corrected immediately to prevent Viet Minh control of South Vietnam.

Comment: There is little support in the present Mendes-France cabinet for the Diem government, and the participation of the Socialists will intensify the French government's search for "an alternative to its professed policy of backing Diem.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Tehran plans to disarm Iranian tribes:

Tehran has decided to disarm the tribes in Iran shortly after ratification of the oil agreement,

Top Iranian army officers in Fars understand that the tribes will be given 30 days to turn in their arms.
[PAGE 06]
No difficulty is expected except from a few subtribes of the Qashqai, whose disarming may require a six-month mountain campaign by the army.

[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]Comment[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]:
The Shah, who has long sought an opportunity to punish the Qashqai for their continued hostility to the throne, ratified the oil agreement on 29 October, and announcement of the disarmament campaign can be expected shortly.

Prime Minister Zahedi's reluctance to use force against the Qashqai may have been overcome by arguments that the army's morale and self-confidence needed improvement after the decimation of the officer corps as a result of the Tudeh roundup. Armed clashes between the army and the Qashqai are likely to render the situation in Fars unstable for some time. They will also increase the general tribal distrust of Tehran.

6. France takes steps to wipe out Tunisian fellaghas:

French war secretary Jacques Chevallier informed an American embassy official on 28 October that the problem of the Tunisian fellaghas--quasi-military outlaw bands--is of growing concern to the French government and that the government is waging a military offensive to annihilate them.

Paris fears that the bands, now totaling about 1,800 men, will move to Algeria, where there are not enough forces to suppress them. The French official feels France cannot permit the fellaghas, which are linked directly to leaders of the important nationalist Neo-Destour party, to attain the stature of a "liberation movement."

Comment: Wiping out of the fellaghas probably would incite widespread anti-French disorders throughout Tunisia. Such disorders could cause a breakdown in the
[PAGE 07]
negotiations now under way in Paris. These talks offer the best hope since World War II that a compromise between the French and Tunisian nationalists can be reached.

Neo-Destour leaders have recently urged the French to establish a mixed commission to accept the surrender of the fellaghas, but the proposal was rejected.
