Situation in Laos

Laotian Premier-designate Souvanna Phouma will probably try to form a broadly based "national unity" government which may range from such left-wing neutralist figures as Bong Souvannavong and Santiphab party leader Quinim Pholsena to some members of the ousted Somsanith government. Souvanna is likely to draw heavily on his own party--the Rally of the Lao People (RLP)--as a roughly representative middle ground between left-wing elements and the strongly anti-Communist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI). The CDNI, with its strong influence in the army through General Phoumi, may go into a period of eclipse.

Souvanna is reported to have told the Indian ambassador that the new cabinet will not include any military figures and that the Ministry of Defense itself will be placed under civilian control. The defense portfolio in the two previous governments had been held by Generals Sounthone and Phoumi, respectively, both of whom were CDNI leaders. In addition, ex-Premier Somsanith has stated, presumably on the basis of the exchanges which led to his resignation, that one of the first acts of the new government will be the reorganization of the general staff. Souvanna has long felt that the army was playing a disproportionate role in the central government's efforts to stabilize the countryside, and he can be expected to exercise close policy guidance over defense matters. He will also undoubtedly devote much attention to foreign affairs, in line with his view that strict neutrality is the only feasible policy for Laos.

Somsanith and most of the Luang Prabang contingent of his ousted government now are in Vientiane and are presumably participating in the consultations looking to the formation of the new government. One exception is ex-Foreign Minister Khamphan Panya, who reportedly is joining General Phoumi in southern Laos and who, along with Phoumi, has probably been a major target of the forces supporting the Vientiane coup. Phoumi, meanwhile, has indicated no abandonment of his plans to undo the coup by military force.

The Kong Le coup group gives little sign as yet of relaxing its military grip on Vientiane despite the fact that its immediate aims

16 Aug 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
