1. SOVIET CENTRAL COMMITTEE DECISIONS

On 25 December the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, following strong criti-
cism of the economic planning organiza-
tions by the party central committee at
its recent plenum, announced a broad
revision in the composition of the State Economic Commis-
sion for Short Range Planning. In a move intended to in-
crease its authority and efficiency M. G. Pervukhin, a mem-
ber of the party presidium and first deputy premier, replaced
M. Z. Saburov as chairman of the commission. Five other
high-ranking officials, Kosygin, Malyshev, Khrunichev,
Kucherenko and Matskevich, were named to assist Pervukhin,
at the same time relinquishing their duties as deputy chair-
men of the Council of Ministers.

The communiqué issued by the central com-
mittee following its plenary meeting was confined almost en-
tirely to a report on the domestic economy. The reports on
state planning indicated that the over-all 1956 economic plan
for industrial production would be overfulfilled and that the out-
put of consumer goods would be more than nine percent greater
than in 1955. The communiqué emphasized the improvement
of the "material well-being" of the people and lauded the advan-
tages of a planned economy over the capitalist system. The re-
port, however, attacked the economic planners for their "short-
comings" and specifically criticized the coal, metal, cement
and timber industries for underfulfillment of production plans
even though 1956 production exceeded that of 1955. It noted that
the plans for housing "have been only partially fulfilled" and in-
dicated that construction would be more tightly controlled than
in the past.

The central committee decreed that the Sixth
Five-Year Plan (1956-1960) be drawn up and submitted to the
USSR Supreme Soviet during the first half of 1957. The decree
indicated that the plan would not differ radically from that en-
visaged when the Sixth Five-Year Plan directives were presented
