Ceylonese Prime Minister Privately States
Anti-Communist Views

The strong anti-Communist line taken by Prime Minister Dahanayake in his first official conversation with the American ambassador since assuming office on 26 September is consistent with previous indications that Dahanayake intends to pursue a moderate course. The prime minister sharply criticized the conditions attached to the Sino-Soviet aid programs in Ceylon, and said he wished to work closely with the West. He also deplored former Prime Minister Bandaranaike's termination of Britain's military base rights in Ceylon in late 1957, and expressed his hope to modify the effects of this mistake.

The import of Dahanayake's statements is reduced considerably, however, by his comment that he cannot express such views publicly, and by his previous public pledges to continue Bandaranaike's neutralist-socialist policies. Dahanayake has said publicly that he will soon implement Bandaranaike's longstanding, popular proposal to change Ceylon's status from that of a British dominion to a completely independent republic. Returning the naval and air bases to British control would not only be incompatible with Ceylon's future status as a republic, but probably would be stiffly opposed by the island's influential Buddhist-nationalist forces, which Dahanayake is considered to represent. Furthermore, any substantial shift to a pro-West orientation probably would not be endorsed by the Ceylonese Parliament, in which Dahanayake has not yet been guaranteed a safe majority.

Dahanayake presumably values congenial relations with all foreign diplomatic personnel in Ceylon, and his conversation with the American ambassador seems primarily a bid for continued American support. He may have conversed with Communist-bloc diplomats in a different vein. At a press conference on 2 October a seven-member Soviet parliamentary delegation which arrived in Ceylon on 16 September reportedly expressed satisfaction with Dahanayake's assurance that Ceylon's foreign policy would remain unchanged.

Should Dahanayake remain in office long enough to take action on his indicated policies, his anti-Communist sentiment probably would be demonstrated primarily in connection with suppressing strikes by labor unions affiliated with Ceylon's leftist political parties.

8 Oct 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
