from the French army in Algeria, has raised the issue with NATO Secretary General Spaak and with General Norstad, and is considering taking the issue to the NATO Council. Meanwhile, on 16 July, the Norwegian NATO representative said that Norway has decided not to grant export licenses for the arms delivery. Debré, who had warned that the shipments may raise the question of France's continued association with the alliance, will probably continue to press the US to withhold its shipment. Tunis can be expected to react sharply to any obvious delays in materiel shipments it expects to obtain from the US, especially if it becomes aware of the latest French demarches.

Finland: The Finns now intend to join the little free trade area consisting of Britain, Scandinavia, and other non-Common Market countries, provided the organization is solely economic and has no political implications. Finland has been apprehensive about the attitude of the USSR but has lately received indications that Moscow would not object to Finnish participation. Moscow apparently feels that Finland's participation would increase the influence of the neutrals in the group and that the little free trade area might undermine the Common Market.
(Page 7)

Argentina: The outburst of discontent within the navy over President Frondizi's refusal to replace Navy Secretary Estevez has shattered a facade of navy unity, which served as a stabilizing factor in several past crises involving the armed forces. The issue will probably be smoothed over, but it may weaken Frondizi's military support, which is necessary to counter continuing Peronista and Communist efforts to exploit popular discontent over living costs.
(Page 8)

Guatemala: A showdown between President Ydigoras and the leftist but anti-Communist Revolutionary party (PR) is almost certain if the government annuls the decisive PR victory in the 5 July mayoralty election in Guatemala City. There is mounting evidence that the government may do so. The American Embassy reported on 15 July that Ydigoras
