II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru to Visit Kabul and Probably Tehran

The Iranian Embassy in New Delhi informed Tehran on
19 August that Indian Prime Minister Nehru would pay an of-
ficial visit to Kabul from 14 to 17 September and wished to
visit Tehran for three days thereafter. The embassy strongly
urged that Nehru be invited to Iran, partly to view conditions
in the country and partly because world opinion would probably
consider a visit by such an outspoken opponent of the Baghdad
Pact an indication that Nehru is changing his viewpoint.

As suggested by the Iranian Embassy, Nehru's trip may
well be motivated by his irritation over Peiping's recent be-
havior in Tibet and along India's Himalayan border. He may
desire to study the relationships of states having common bor-
ders with the USSR. Nehru's visit to Kabul should provide him
with a valuable insight into the extent of Afghanistan's economic
and military dependence on the USSR and give him an opportunity
to describe India's recent experiences with the Chinese. In Iran,
the Shah, who will almost certainly postpone a projected visit
to Jordan in order to receive Nehru, is well equipped to discuss
Soviet border tactics as well as Communist subversive activities.

Should Nehru also meet with Pakistani President Ayub in
early September, as was suggested on 22 August by both the
Indian and Pakistani press, Nehru might well return from his
trip at the end of the month with a more sympathetic understand-
ing of the area's problems. This could be reflected in Indian dip-
lomatic actions in Southeast Asia and at the Afro-Asian economic
conference now scheduled to be held in Colombo next December.

The Shah will probably welcome Nehru's visit in the hope that
it will bolster his prestige at home and abroad. The Shah may
also ask Nehru's assistance in convincing Afghanistan of the dan-
gers of close association with the Soviet bloc and in urging Kabul
to reach a settlement of the current Afghan-Iranian dispute over
distribution of the waters of the Helmand river.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
