[PAGE 01]
030 September 1951
Copy No
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

USSR

FAR EAST
3. Peiping admits difficulty in selling Soviet "friendship" to Chinese (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
4. Tito expresses willingness to enter into staff talks with NATO officials (page 5).
5. Czechoslovakia hopes to conclude new payments agreement with Mexico (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

USSR

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Peiping admits difficulty in selling Soviet "friendship" to Chinese:

An official of the Sino-Soviet Friendship Association has publicly admitted that the Chinese people remain suspicious of the USSR and resist Peiping's efforts to persuade them of Soviet "friendship."

The Deputy Managing Director of the Association, speaking over the Peiping radio on 21 September, conceded that it will be a difficult task to "expose and refute" the "rumors and slanders" about the USSR which have gained widespread currency. He denounced the "Chinese people's narrow nationalism" and the "resulting doubt and uneasiness."

[PAGE 05]
about the USSR, attitudes which are "incongruous with internationalism." The official recommended an intensified membership-drive and propaganda effort by the association.

Comment: The Sino-Soviet Friendship Association, which claims 16 million members in Communist China, is devoted to justifying Soviet policy in China and elsewhere.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Tito expresses willingness to enter into staff talks with NATO officials:

an interview given by Tito to the British High Commissioner and the Commander of British troops in Austria on 16 August.

Tito stated then that he was prepared to enter into staff conversations with NATO officials to determine the common defense of Austria and Yugoslavia. He declared that he was pleased to learn of the NATO decision to defend Austria, and that in case of war he certainly would not withdraw his troops southward to the Bosnian Mountains. Tito added that NATO could depend on him to protect its southern flank and to hold the Ljubljana Gap in northern Yugoslavia.

Comment: Tito's expressed willingness to enter into staff talks with NATO officials is the first indication that Yugoslavia is prepared to coordinate its defense program with that of NATO. There is no evidence, however, that Tito at present contemplates joining NATO. He is not known to have altered his previous position that Yugoslavia is unwilling to join the Western defense alliance but is prepared to make reciprocal commitments with individual countries.

[PAGE 06]
5. Czechoslovakia hopes to conclude new payments agreement with Mexico:

Comment: The Czechoslovak Government is faced with the expiration at the end of this year of the existing payments agreement which was signed on 20 October 1950. It obligated Czechoslovakia to liquidate its debt of about one million dollars through the delivery of tractors, water pumps, road machinery and other specified goods, the account to be balanced at the end of 1951 by dollar payments. Mexico, in turn, agreed "not to obstruct" the export of lead, zinc, copper, sisal, coffee and other products, although no obligation existed to export specific quantities.

The conclusion of the agreement was followed by a marked increase of Czechoslovak exports to Mexico in early 1951 and by increased Czechoslovak attempts to obtain strategic materials from Mexico through cover firms located in Western European countries. There is no evidence that more than a small portion of Mexico's production of strategic materials has reached Czechoslovakia. The importance of maintaining Mexico as a source of supply is indicated by the present trade campaign, which will facilitate negotiations for a new payments agreement.

[PAGE 07]
