III. THE WEST

New French Proposals on Bizerte

The French charge in Tunis has resumed talks with Tunisian officials on the future status of the Bizerte base. The charge informed the Tunisians on 31 March that France has decided "as a unilateral action and a major concession" to withdraw all French forces from the town of Bizerte and to pull small outlying units back into the main base. This action is scheduled to begin "in the coming days and be completed in several months."

He said Paris also is willing to demilitarize the French naval arsenal and shipyard on Bizerte Lake and transform these installations into a joint Franco-Tunisian industrial enterprise, and is prepared to agree that the use of the Bizerte base will be limited substantially to naval and air forces. These arrangements would include a guarantee that the base would not be involved in the Algerian war. About 75 percent of the 10,000 French military personnel now stationed at the Bizerte base are naval forces, and approximately 4,000 French civilians are employed at the shipyard.

French withdrawal inside the Bizerte base perimeter should provide President Bourguiba with an adequate "face-saving" formula to avoid reviving the evacuation issue which he forced early this year. It should also add a hopeful note to the discussion of Tunisian-French relations with which he is committed to open the Tunisian National Assembly on 7 April. Anticipating this speech, Bourguiba made both friendly and critical remarks about France on 1 April to the Tunisian labor congress. He, nevertheless, will continue to pursue his policy of demanding a French commitment for eventual evacuation of the Bizerte base.

Paris probably fears that any commitment to withdraw French forces from Tunisia would increase the already intensive pressure from Morocco for a French commitment to evacuate French bases there. In view of the present forecast of a long continuation of the Algerian war, France is unlikely to make such concessions voluntarily.
