[PAGE 01]
11 May 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 MAY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR launches test ICBM to full 3500-nautical-mile range on 9 May.

Soviet party central committee to convene on 24 June to discuss implementation of economic program.

USSR population 208,800,000, according to official census. Males number 94,000,000, or 5,000,000 fewer than estimated in US.

Moscow commentator says Secretary Herter in his 7 May speech has "compromised faith in good intentions of Western powers."

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR reiterates policy of "positive neutrality" to its diplomats abroad.

Yemen - Imam and Crown Prince quoted as wanting to "disengage" from commitments to Sino-Soviet bloc.

Government crisis in Somalia.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-ICBM: A valid operation began on the Tyura Tam missile test range at 0701 EDT on 9 May 1959. The countdown proceeded smoothly and culminated in the launching of an ICBM test vehicle at about 1459 EDT. The test ICBM traveled the full 3500-nautical-mile range, probably impacting northeast of Klyuchi on the Kamchatka Peninsula. The success of the re-entry and guidance is not known.

This is the fifth ICBM event occurring on the Tyura Tam range this year: three were successful; one was canceled just prior to launch; and the last previous ICBM firing--on 30 March 1959--did not reach the impact area and is considered a probable in-flight failure.

An ICBM firing at this time would not interfere with a possible attempt to launch a Venus probe on or about 8 June 1959.

USSR: Soviet news media have announced that the Soviet party central committee will convene on 24 June and have outlined its agenda. Publication of such a meeting so far in advance is contrary to past practice. The convening of the plenum reflects determination to maintain heavy pressure for fulfillment of its Seven-Year Plan economic goals. The plenum is to discuss implementation of key sectors of the economic program--expansion of the chemical industry and further mechanization of industry--only a few months after the party congress formally approved the plan. Economic officials apparently have been put on notice that they can expect periodic accountings to high party authorities. The plenum may also be given a formal briefing on the outcome of the Geneva foreign ministers' meeting.

(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
USSR - census: The Soviet Union has announced that its total population was 208,800,000 in January 1959, as indicated by the results of the first general census taken since 1939. This total is only about 800,000 smaller than current US estimates, but the number of males is about 5,000,000 smaller and the urban population about 5,000,000 larger than estimated. The Soviet population is currently growing at a rate of 1.7 percent per year, which is about the same as that of the United States. (Page 2)

USSR-Geneva: A Soviet commentary on Secretary Herter's speech of 7 May claims that he has "compromised faith in the good intentions of the Western powers" by his stand on Western rights in West Berlin--"that the West would not yield one inch." The broadcast, maintaining that the Western package plan for Germany was based on the concept of free elections, attacked it as a sign that the West intends to follow "a line of rigidity and pressure" at Geneva.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR: Cairo to continue a policy of "positive neutrality" and not to become a "cat's paw" in the cold war. The UAR and the Philippines are in basic agreement in the struggle against the Communists. UAR heads of missions were advised to avoid any Western efforts to "draw us away" from neutrality and to avoid being "deceived" by praise of the UAR's anti-Communist campaign. Cairo's continuing suspicion of the West and its desire to maintain the appearance of neutrality.

Yemen: The Imam told the Italian ambassador to Yemen and Crown Prince Badr agree that now is a good time for Yemen to "disengage" from its commitments with the USSR and Communist China. The Imam said that if Western countries, meaning the United States, will finance and continue road and port construction, he is inclined

11 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
to end his agreements with the Communist countries. The Italian ambassador believes that the reported plan for closing all diplomatic missions in Yemen is a sincere effort to oust the Communists, but a top Yemeni official told him that it would take months to carry out the plan. (Page 3)

*Somalia: Prime Minister Issa's action in accepting the resignation of Minister of Interior Bogor, an influential tribal leader, has precipitated a government crisis in the Italian Trust Territory of Somalia and threatens to cause a split along tribal lines in the governing party, the Somali Youth League (SYL). The issue of a party split is expected to come to a head at the SYL party congress, scheduled to begin on 16 May. Political instability resulting from a party split along tribal lines would provide an atmosphere conducive to further outside influence, especially from the UAR.

(Page 5)

11 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Central Committee Meeting Scheduled

Moscow announced on 9 May that a plenum of the Soviet Communist party central committee is scheduled to begin on 24 June. The plenum will discuss implementation of directives laid down at the party congress in January on the extension of mechanization and automation in Soviet industry.

For various reasons--preoccupation with maximum output at the expense of efficiency being one of the more important--the level of Soviet technology varies both between and within the several sectors of the economy. Under the theme of "catching up with the West," the gap between "average" and "best" practices in Soviet production is to be narrowed considerably by 1965; the agenda for the June meeting suggests that such improvements are to receive immediate impetus.

The plenum will also review the first year of the program to expand the Soviet chemical industry by an outlay of between 15 and 20 billion dollars. This program, outlined by Khrushchev at a May 1958 plenum, appears to be in jeopardy unless increased amounts of chemical equipment can be procured from the West.

Before last December's central committee meeting, which the Soviet press reported on a day-to-day basis, public announcement of plenums had always been withheld until their conclusion. The advance notification of the June meeting and of its principal agenda topics may be a further step in stripping the secrecy from central committee sessions in cases where this secrecy is self-defeating. In the present instance, fuller publicity for the central committee proceedings will help goad economic officials toward maximum performance and will indicate that the party intends to maintain constant pressure for fulfillment of the Seven-Year Plan goals.

Although the central committee has little or no substantive role in the formulation of foreign policy, the timing of the plenum would permit the Soviet leadership to review the results of the Geneva conference and the USSR's pre-summit position for the benefit of top party officials.

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
USSR Census

The USSR has announced that its total population at the beginning of 1959, as determined by a nationwide census conducted during the week of 13-22 January, was 208,800,000. This figure is essentially in line with the last Soviet estimate--200,200,000 in April 1956--and with subsequent Soviet statements of the rate of increase. The announcement states that the total population has increased 18.1 million, or 9.5 percent, since 1939, the date of the last Soviet census, and places the total urban population at 99,800,000--about 5,000,000 more than estimated by the United States.

If the latest census was conducted as planned, the results should be quite reliable. It was planned as a house-to-house canvass of the entire country, to be carried out by a staff of 500,000 persons.

The figures show there are 94,000,000 men and 114,800,000 women in the USSR, the excess of women being the result of two world wars. Since US estimates had placed the number of men at about 99,000,000, the United States may have overestimated the size of the military age group.

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Imam Favors Yemeni Disengagement From Sino-Soviet Commitments

The Imam of Yemen has informed the Italian ambassador that Yemen is now inclined to "disengage" itself from commitments made with the Sino-Soviet bloc, provided the West--meaning the United States--will "take over." He added this would involve financing and continuing Sino-Soviet work now in progress in Yemen, as well as taking care of the debt incurred for work already performed.

Bloc commitments to Yemen under the economic aid program consist of a $25,000,000 Soviet credit and a $16,000,000 Chinese Communist interest-free loan; about $25,000,000 of the total commitment has actually been allocated. Soviet technicians are engaged in constructing port facilities and airfields, opening industrial and agricultural schools, and other projects. Communist China is building a road from the Red Sea at Al-Hudaydah to the capital at Sana and, along with some of the European satellites, is providing aid for the development of light industrial enterprises.

Soviet military aid to Yemen, under which the Imam received aircraft, armor, artillery, and other weapons, amounts to over $30,000,000. Yemen, however, presumably is required to repay only about one third the amount--probably in the form of exports, such as coffee.

There are believed to be more than 400 bloc personnel in Yemen, including over 50 military specialists. Approximately 300 of those working on economic projects are Chinese Communists engaged in road building.

There have been indications that Crown Prince Badr, who previously favored closer ties with the bloc, is moving to curtail

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
Sino-Soviet influence, presumably with UAR encouragement. Sino-Soviet missions appear to be the primary target of a reported plan to close all diplomatic installations in Yemen; a top-ranking Yemeni official reportedly stated, however, that this action cannot take place for many months. Foreign relations would be conducted through Cairo for the United Arab States--the UAR-Yemeni federation.

Badr has recently expelled a number of Soviet doctors from Yemen and may be taking steps to strengthen his control over other bloc personnel. The recent arrival of an Egyptian economic mission and plans for accepting a similar mission for agricultural training appear to be additional moves to reduce dependence on Sino-Soviet aid.

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 11]
Split in Somalia's Governing Party Appears Imminent

The long-expected split in Somalia's moderate governing party--the Somali Youth League (SYL)--may be imminent following the government's acceptance on 8 May of Minister of Interior Hagi Musa Bogor's resignation. Hagi Musa is the recognized leader of the Darots--the country's second largest tribal group--and they, together with the politically advanced Hawias, constitute the coalition SYL. The Darots frequently have charged the Hawias with using their government positions to increase their control over the SYL and their prestige in the government. This issue prompted Hagi Musa to precipitate a government crisis in December 1957.

Hagi Musa's surprise resignation, which set off a governmental crisis, resulted from his unilateral order--against the will of the prime minister, who is a Hawia--to withdraw the 25 February ban imposed by the government on two smaller parties accused of inciting violence preceding the March parliamentary elections. The resignation must be confirmed by the Italian administrator, but in the past he has always supported the prime minister.

As a result of his resignation, Hagi Musa probably will either leave the SYL voluntarily or be expelled from the party at its forthcoming party congress, which is scheduled to begin on 16 May to consider the composition of the government for the next five years. Hagi Musa then may join the UAR-supported Greater Somalia League--one of the two parties banned by the government on 25 February--or form a new party composed largely of Darots.

The semblance of political unity which the SYL sought to preserve before the world and the United Nations, at least until the country achieved independence in December 1960, will end abruptly if the party splits along party lines. Moreover, the political instability which would result from such a split would provide an atmosphere conducive to further outside influence, especially from the UAR.

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 13]
