Comment: While China's position in North Korea has been strengthened as a result of the war, there is no evidence that Peiping is challenging Moscow's control, or that North Korea has been integrated into the Chinese sphere.

Soviet-oriented Koreans occupy most of the important government and party posts and there is no indication of the presence of Chinese advisers at important industrial installations or at high government levels.

3. Third Chinese Nationalist pilot in two months defects to Communists:
On 21 February the pilot of a Chinese Nationalist air force B-25 on a local training flight tried to induce his radio operator to fire on the city of Taipei and his co-pilot to join him in flying to Communist China, according to the co-pilot concerned. The pilot shot and killed the radio operator and forced the co-pilot to bail out, then flew on toward the mainland.

The crew had been together for several months and that the pilot, who was American-trained, left his wife and family on Formosa.

Comment: Two other Nationalist pilots are reliably reported to have defected with their trainer aircraft in late December.

Although the Nationalist armed forces on review before foreign visitors give an impression of high morale, American military observers on Formosa have recently reported that service morale has been deteriorating.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Vietnamese premier discusses problems of coming independence negotiations:
Premier Buu Loc has told Ambassador Heath in Saigon that his government has not yet decided on its course in negotiations for Vietnamese independence which begin in Paris on 8 March. He stated that he was fully aware that if complete Vietnamese independence were agreed on before the opening of the Geneva conference on 26 April, French sentiment for quitting Indochina might become crystalized and Vietnam be left to fight alone.

Heath believes that Buu Loc will seek definite French assurances on continuation of military aid to Vietnam and on treating the Associated States as equal partners in preparing a position for Geneva. Regarding the Geneva conference itself, Buu Loc said "if they are going to request Communist China to stop aiding the Viet Minh, that is fine; but if they are going to negotiate an armistice with Ho Chi Minh, that is something quite different."
