EASTERN EUROPE

4. French Legation reports governmental crisis in Albania:

US Emb Belgrade
30 Mar 51

The French Legation in Tirana reports that disagreement among high-level government officials has broken out over implementation of the harsh law against terrorist activities decreed on 26 February as a result of the bombing of the Soviet Legation on 19 February. The Minister of Justice, Dr. Manol Konomi, has reportedly resigned in protest against the decree, which deprives the accused of all legal rights and includes arbitrary arrest, trials in camera without defense counsel, conviction without appeal, and execution immediately after sentence. According to the French Legation, Konomi, Vice Premier Tuk Jakova, and Major General Spiro Moisiu, commander of the Tirana Garrison -- with the support of Premier Enver Hoxha -- are sympathetic with popular feelings against the decree. The Minister of Interior, Maj. General Mehmet Shehu, who is generally regarded as the eventual successor to Hoxha, leads the opposing pro-Soviet faction. The Legation reports that the divergence of views between the two groups explains the tension prevailing in the ministerial residential quarter, which is under military guard not only for security purposes but also because several dissident ministers are reported to be confined to their homes. The Legation concludes that, because of the profound domestic disturbance, the Soviet grip on Albania has been accelerated and strengthened.

Comment: Other reports bear out the French Legation's conclusion that Soviet influence and direction in Albania have greatly increased during the past six months. Premier Hoxha has been reported to be merely a figurehead in Albania. Shehu, on the other hand, has the reputation of being the leading agent of Soviet policy in the country.

5. Soviet consulates in Yugoslavia closed:

US Embassy Belgrade reports that the Yugoslav Government has requested the USSR to close its consulates in Zagreb and Split and to remove their eight staff members from Yugoslav territory immediately. The request was based principally on the grounds of lack of reciprocity, since the USSR
