The Situation in Laos

The American Embassy in Vientiane reports indications
that Laotian Army commanders representing the Souvanna
Phouma government and the Savannakhet Revolutionary Com-
mittee are beginning to carry out their pledge, given to the
King in Luang Prabang on 28 September, to work toward the
reunification of the army command structure and to present
a common front toward the Pathet Lao.

Progress in this direction seems especially noticeable in
the Second Military Region, which has jurisdiction over Sam
Neua and Xieng Khouang provinces. Following the ouster of
the pro-Savannakhet commander of that region on 28 Septem-
ber by his subordinate in Xieng Khouang, both sides apparent-
ly agreed to install General Amkha, who had been acting as
Vientiane garrison commander, as temporary commander of
the Second Military Region. He was ordered to launch a united
effort, involving both pro-Vientiane and pro-Savannakhet ele-
ments, against the Pathet Lao in Sam Neua. According to press
reports, the pro-Savannakhet garrison which abandoned Sam
Neua town on 28 September and subsequently established it-
self at Muong Peun has declared its loyalty to Vientiane. It
is presumably at Amkha's disposal for whatever action he
chooses to take.

The actual military situation in Sam Neua remains obscure.
The embassy reports no indications of any fighting after 28 Sep-
tember. Pathet Lao propaganda has hailed the "liberation" of
Sam Neua town from the "traitorous" Savannakhet group. Pathet
Lao guerrilla units may be in control of the town, although the area
is nominally under the Souvanna government.

Tentative progress toward reunification of the army com-
mand structure could be quickly undone by Premier Souvanna's
order calling for dismissal from the army of General Phoumi
and 26 other pro-Savannakhet officers. This order is a follow-
up of a previous warning issued by Vientiane that all officers
must declare their loyalty to the Souvanna government by 30
September. The order now is before the King for signature.
