I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Findings of a Special Watch Committee Meeting, 28 February 1958

The apparent low level of Soviet air activity which has been evident since 23 February has affected in varying degree all Soviet as well as satellite military air units. The lull is of a greater scope than would be warranted by either weather factors or maintenance requirements after the exceptionally high level of activity during the past week, although additional influencing factors are present in the armed forces holiday of 23 February and in the expected communications change on 1 March.

The USSR has encountered no major internal or diplomatic reverses recently which might prompt the USSR to resort to hostilities to achieve its objectives and the evidence available concerning naval, ground forces, logistic, internal or clandestine preparations does not denote a concerted effort by the USSR to improve its general readiness for early hostilities. We know of no US or Allied actions which would prompt the Soviets to assume a ready posture which, in the air context, might be reflected in a maintenance standdown.

Thus, the low level of Soviet flying could be attributed to a preplanned period of inactivity which has no relation to hostilities; it could also be preparatory to forward deployment for attack, but this cannot be supported by available evidence. (It is possible, though not probable, that a forward deployment could be taking place under radio silence.) Therefore, while the Watch Committee does not recommend a change in either Conclusion A. or B., the intelligence community is maintaining a condition of special watchfulness.

CONCLUSIONS A. and B. from Watch Report No. 395, 19-26 February 1958:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the orbit in the immediate future.
