Communists Meeting in Moscow on Bloc Unity Issues

The meeting of the Bloc's Economic Mutual Aid Council (CEMA) on 20 May involved top Soviet and Eastern European leaders in addition to economic representatives from both the European and Asian satellites. This meeting will be followed by a "Conference of the Political and Consultative Committee of the Warsaw Treaty Organization" involving heads of governments, foreign ministers, and defense ministers.

During his visit to Hungary last month, Khrushchev stated that a meeting between East European and Soviet leaders would be held shortly on the subject of implementing Soviet bloc economic integration. Khrushchev pointed out that increased economic cooperation and industrial specialization within the bloc was required to overtake the West. The USSR may now be proposing that CEMA decisions be made legally binding on all members. The USSR presumably also is eager to counter the growing economic unity of Western Europe. Working level CEMA conferences have already engaged in developing coordinated economic plans to run through 1965, the terminal date of the soon-to-be announced Soviet seven-year plan.

The Communist leader may also discuss ways of bolstering bloc unity as a result of the bloc-Yugoslav ideological dispute. This would confront Poland's Gomulka with a different problem. Various Poles have already told the American Embassy in Warsaw that they expect stronger bloc pressures on Poland to alter its conciliatory stand on Yugoslavia's party program and that Tito's scheduled trip to Warsaw will not take place. A recent Soviet Central Committee plenum is reported to have passed a resolution calling all Communist parties to wage an uncompromising fight against Tito. The bloc leaders may also agree to economic sanctions against Yugoslavia.

In his drive to tighten Soviet control over the satellites, Khrushchev probably will re-emphasize the dangers posed by the West German decision to arm with nuclear weapons. The Moscow meeting may also elaborate on Soviet and Warsaw Pact countermeasures hinted at in Gromyko's 31 March speech to the Supreme Soviet.

21 May 58
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
