[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

US OFFICIALS ONLY

13 June 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. France and Britain insist on immediate four-power talks (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

2. Soviet air defense shows increasing proficiency in Odessa area
(page 3).

FAR EAST

3. MIG-15's down B-29 on Korean night mission with air-to-air
rockets (page 4).

5. Tam appointment benefits Viet Minh (page 5).

****
- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. France and Britain insist on immediate four-power talks:

The French Government has modified its
proposal for four-power talks on Germany.
It suggests that discussions begin immedi-
ately among the four High Commissioners
or other designated officials on a limited
agenda. Despite American opposition to
such talks, Schuman, with British support,
remains "very firmly" attached to his
position. He insists that should the Russians accept the proposal,
the talks would be of short duration and would strengthen the Allied
position.

Meanwhile, West German government
leaders say that talks at this time might encourage wishful thinking
on unity and would jeopardize ratification of the Bonn and Paris
treaties. However, these leaders would welcome four-power dis-
cussions following German ratification of the treaties.

Chancellor Adenauer believes that for the
moment the exchange of notes should continue since it will either
demonstrate Russian insincerity or improve the chances for success
in any future talks.

American officials assert that even though
there is little official pressure in Germany for the meetings, it will
be very difficult to dissuade the French and British from their present
position.

SOVIET UNION

2. Soviet air defense shows increasing proficiency in Odessa area:

The Soviet Air Force used twin-jet IL-28
light bombers as target aircraft in two air
defense exercises involving MIG-15 inter-
ceptors near Odessa during the hours of
darkness on 26 May. The target planes operated at computed speeds
of 390 to 400 knots and at altitudes between 20,000-26,000 feet.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
Comment: The use of high-speed targets
in interception problems of this type indicates an expanding program
for increasing the proficiency of Soviet air defenses. Conventional
engine TU-4's have previously been noted in similar exercises in the
Black Sea area.

FAR EAST

3. MIG-15's down B-29 on Korean night mission with air-to-air rockets:

Rockets fired by MIG-15's downed a B-29
on the night of 10 June over northwest
Korea, according to the US Far East Air
Force. Another B-29 was lost from un-
known causes and a third was seriously damaged, but returned to
South Korea.

The Far East Air Force comments that
"this attack was a well-planned, integrated effort, with seeming
ground-to-air and air-to-air coordination" and that "the proficiency
and aggressiveness of the Red attack may indicate the initiation of a
concerted effort by well-trained Communist air and ground teams."

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
5. Tam appointment benefits Viet Minh:

The US Consul in Hanoi believes that the
creation of the Tam government has pro-
vided the Viet Minh with a highly exploitable propaganda tool for the recruitment of
new personnel at a time when the military balance in Tonkin is delicate.
The Tam appointment, widely regarded as a "major victory for the
Viet Minh," has even disgraced Letourneau's deputy in Tonkin and his
staff.

The Consul observes that while another
regime might have rallied considerable popular support, thus denying
manpower to the Viet Minh more effectively than could military force
alone, the best that can be expected from the Tam regime is that it
will not too seriously harm the war effort. This, he emphasizes, is
"a poor return for French blood and American money."

Comment: Recent French clearing opera-
tions have resulted in heavy Viet Minh losses, and a concomitant drop
in rebel morale has been reported. The recruitment of personnel and
the psychological reconditioning of present forces by the Viet Minh are
therefore of first priority. The Tam appointment will considerably
further their realization.

- 5 -
