[PAGE 01]
30 May 1960

Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

30 May 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: In his speech in Moscow on 28 May, Khrushchev carried forward his effort initiated last week in Berlin to reconcile his arguments for a policy of detente with his performance in Paris. His unusual step in denying Western reports of opposition to him at home and pressure on the USSR from Communist China reflects his effort to portray Soviet actions under his leadership as carefully considered and basically consistent. Although he again expressed hope that a new summit meeting would be held in six to eight months, Khrushchev added that he would not be surprised if this did not happen. He also reverted to an earlier position that Communist China, India, Indonesia, and others should be included in future meetings.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: An 18-man cabinet has been announced, and a committee of law professors has been appointed to draft a new constitution and electoral law. Prime Minister Gursel has said he will hold elections as soon as possible but believes he will need from one to three months beforehand to restore the situation to normal. Gursel has told American officers he is firmly resolved to turn power over to the new parliament as soon as it is elected.

[PAGE 04]
Ethiopia: Haile Selassie plans for the time being not to accept the Soviet offer of 30 April of military assistance for about 40,000 men. The Emperor, is interpreting the forthcoming visit of two high-ranking American military officials as a favorable answer to his 11 May request for more American military equipment.

Cameroon: Foreign Minister Okala recently told the American Charge in Yaounde that Felix Moumie, exiled terrorist leader, is planning to overthrow the Cameroon Government following expiration of the country's present security agreement with France on 30 June. American and British representatives in Yaounde consider it "fairly plausible" that Moumie's rebels might make a last-ditch effort. The Cameroon Government probably hopes this threat, which the Cameroonians may be exaggerating, will increase support for President Ahidjo's recent plea for US military aid.

III. THE WEST

France: Despite De Gaulle's solidarity with the United States on East-West issues, he will never be satisfied if consultation among the Western Big Three is limited to the German problem and Western tactics toward the USSR, according to Premier Debre. In particular, he said, de Gaulle wants "real" consultation on African problems with a view to working out a common line and considers cooperation on nuclear weapons an integral part of three-power cooperation.

Cuba: The Peiping opera company which has been touring Latin America will spend most of June in Havana. The Cuban Government is emphasizing cultural ties with Communist China and may soon proceed with the long-foreseen establishment of diplomatic relations. A group of students arrived in Peiping from Cuba on 25 May, the latest of numerous Cuban visitors there, and Cuba seems to be a key target of Peiping's stepped-up propaganda activities in Latin America.

30 May 60
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 05]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 06]
