[PAGE 01]
30 May 1960

Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
30 MAY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's 28 May speech continues effort to reconcile his arguments for a policy of detente with his performance in Paris.

North Korea steps up number of planes scrambled against possible intruders into air space.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Gursel promises elections in Turkey as soon as possible but believes he will need from one to three months beforehand to restore situation to normal.

Ethiopia, in expectation of additional US military aid, reportedly plans not to accept Soviet arms offer at this time.

Cameroun's foreign minister claims terrorist leader Moumie plans to overthrow government after country's security agreement with France ends next month.

III. THE WEST

Debre stresses De Gaulle's desire for close Western Big Three cooperation on nuclear weapons and Africa.

Cuban regime emphasizes cultural ties with Communist China; may soon proceed with establishment of diplomatic relations.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 May 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

A. USSR: In his speech in Moscow on 28 May, Khrushchev carried forward his effort initiated last week in Berlin to reconcile his arguments for a policy of detente with his performance in Paris. His unusual step in denying Western reports of opposition to him at home and pressure on the USSR from Communist China reflects his effort to portray Soviet actions under his leadership as carefully considered and basically consistent. Although he again expressed hope that a new summit meeting would be held in six to eight months, Khrushchev added that he would not be surprised if this did not happen. He also reverted to an earlier position that Communist China, India, Indonesia and others should be included in future meetings.

North Korea: During the past month there has been a marked increase in reporting on the North Korean and Chinese Communist air-defense networks of actual or potential air violations of the Demilitarized Zone in Korea. North Korea has stepped up the number of aircraft scrambled against possible intruders. No clashes have occurred, and the North Koreans may be using these incidents primarily for training purposes in ground-control intercept. This activity, however, increases the possibility of air encounters in the border area.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: An 18-man cabinet has been announced, and a committee of law professors has been appointed to draft a new constitution and electoral law. Prime Minister Gursel has said he will hold elections as soon as possible but believes he will need from one to three months beforehand to restore the situation to normal. Gursel has told American officers he is firmly resolved to turn power over to the new parliament as soon as it is elected.

[PAGE 05]
30 May 60
DAILY BRIEF

Ethiopia: Haile Selassie plans for the time being not to accept the Soviet offer of 30 April of military assistance for about 40,000 men. The Emperor is interpreting the forthcoming visit of two high-ranking American military officials as a favorable answer to his 11 May request for more American military equipment.

Cameroun: Foreign Minister Okala recently told the American charge in Yaounde that Felix Moumie, exiled terrorist leader, is planning to overthrow the Cameroun Government following expiration of the country's present security agreement with France on 30 June. American and British representatives in Yaounde consider it "fairly plausible" that Moumie's rebels might make a last-ditch effort. The Cameroun Government probably hopes this threat, which the Camerounians may be exaggerating, will increase support for President Ahidjo's recent plea for US military aid.

III. THE WEST

France: Despite De Gaulle's solidarity with the United States on East-West issues, he will never be satisfied if consultation among the Western Big Three is limited to the German problem and Western tactics toward the USSR, according to Premier Debre. In particular, he said, De Gaulle wants "real" consultation on African problems with a view to working out a common line and considers co-operation on nuclear weapons an integral part of three-power cooperation.

Cuba: The Peiping opera company which has been touring Latin America will spend most of June in Havana. The Cuban Government is emphasizing cultural ties with Communist China and may soon proceed with the long-foreseen establishment of diplomatic relations. A group of students arrived in Peiping from Cuba on 25 May, the latest of numerous Cuban visitors there, and Cuba seems to be a key target of Peiping's stepped-up propaganda activities in Latin America.

[PAGE 06]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 07]
