Algerian Rebels Designate Negotiating Team

The rebel negotiators are Vice Premier and Foreign
Minister Belkacem Krim, and Minister of Interior Lakhdar
Ben Tobbal, Minister of Finance Ahmed Francis, and Min-
ister of Information Mohammed Yazid. Krim and Ben Tobbal
are former rebel military commanders and are now members
of the Interministerial War Committee of the rebel provisional
government (PAG), the top military authority of the rebel
movement. Both of them have great influence and popularity
among rebel fighting men in Algeria. They are generally con-
sidered to be among the "hard" faction of the PAG, but they
now have agreed that the PAG should seek a negotiated settle-
ment.

Krim is highly regarded within Algeria and in the other Arab
states. He has a long record as a militant and has been a vice
premier of the PAG since it was founded in September 1958. He
headed a PAG group to Communist China in 1960, and has twice
led the rebel "delegation" to the UN General Assembly. There
are indications, however, that his power within the PAG may
have waned within the last year. Ben Tobbal accompanied Pre-
mier Ferhat Abbas to Moscow and Peiping in the fall of 1960,
and is reported to have been impressed with the achievements
of the Communist states.

Both Minister of Information Yazid and Minister of Finance
Francis have long advocated a negotiated settlement of the Al-
gerian problem. Francis has little stature as a revolutionary
and is relatively unknown among the Algerian masses. He is
respected within the PAG, however, for his technical ability. A
brother-in-law of Premier Abbas, he shares Abbas' moderate
outlook. Yazid has a solid reputation as a nationalist leader be-
fore the outbreak of the rebellion in 1954. His standing within
the PAG comes largely from his ability as a political adviser.
Yazid, who is married to an American, is well known in France,
and is considered the most pro-Western of the rebel leaders.
There are reports that Krim and others are distrustful of his
moderate attitude.

Minister for Algeria Louis Joxe is expected to head the
French negotiating team. De Gaulle reportedly has full confidence

21 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
