New South Korean Cabinet

The new South Korean Government, which Prime Minister Chang Myon has formed largely from his faction of the Democratic party, is not strongly based. Chang controls slightly less than half his party's two-thirds majority in the House of Representatives, and his factional opponents, having rejected his offer of cabinet posts, have announced their intention of forming an opposition party--presumably with the objective of forcing the new cabinet from power. However, the prime minister's constitutional authority to dissolve the lower house and call new elections after a vote of no confidence may act as a restraining influence on the opposition.

The factional conflict in the Democratic party basically is the result of personal rivalries rather than policy differences. Most of the new cabinet members are long-time supporters of Chang and, like him, are believed to be friendly toward the United States. The new minister of finance, however, has on occasion been critical of American aid and other policies in South Korea. The new defense minister, who presumably will be responsible for carrying out the Democrats' campaign pledge to cut back military manpower, already has been criticized for his lack of experience in military affairs.

Prolonged factional strife for personal power could undermine public confidence in the post-revolution leadership and eventually result in expressions of resentment against the United States. Many South Koreans appear to expect an increase in American aids as a mark of Washington's approval of their new leaders. At the same time, there has been a marked increase in local press criticism of alleged attempts by the United States to interfere in South Korean domestic affairs. Some politicians may attempt to further their own personal interests by exploiting such issues as aid and Seoul's long-time desire for a status-of-forces agreement with the United States.

24 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
