6. Long illness of Saudi Arabian King arouses interest in royal successor:

The continuing illness of King Ibn Saud, who occasionally lapses into a semi-comatose state, has aroused considerable speculation regarding future political developments in Saudi Arabia.

According to Ambassador Hare in Jidda, the King has already designated Crown Prince Saud as his successor. Unless the King reconsiders, Saud should succeed to the throne without undue difficulty despite rumored opposition to him. Hare believes, however, that Prince Saud's greatest test would come after his accession to power, for it would be difficult to control a political situation which has already been "cracking at the seams" under the "ultra-forceful rule" of the aging Ibn Saud.

Comment: There has been considerable speculation over the probable course of events in Saudi Arabia if Ibn Saud's death should be sudden. Internal tensions might increase as the Crown Prince attempted to consolidate his popular support. On the other hand, friction between the Saudi Arabian Government and the Arabian American Oil Company might diminish, since the younger Saud would probably attempt to strengthen relations between his country and the West, toward which he has exhibited considerable friendliness.

7. Farouk's adviser offers suggestions for Anglo-Egyptian settlement:

Amr Pasha, recently Egyptian Ambassador to London and now a political adviser to King Farouk, informed the American Ambassador in London that a reduction of the number of British troops in the Canal zone to the figure specified in the 1936 treaty would give Egypt a boost in morale. This would enhance the possibility of gaining full cooperation from all the Arab States in the defense of the Middle East.

He added that if Great Britain made the gesture of formally scheduling the departure of its remaining forces in the Suez Canal zone, the Egyptian Government would probably permit some British troops to remain until Egyptian replacements could be trained and equipped. He also stressed the importance of recognizing the symbolic tie between the crown of Egypt and the Sudan.

Amr Pasha warned that the continued impasse had enabled the Soviet Union to increase its propaganda activity in Cairo and that this had had a marked effect upon the simple Egyptian public. He added his belief that Prime Minister Ali Maher might not be able to continue in office if he did not soon show some success in solving this problem.
