7. Syria appeals to Egypt for aid in Syrian-Israeli border dispute:

US Ambassador Caffery in Cairo has been informed by the Egyptian Foreign Minister that Syria has appealed to Egypt for aid in connection with the current Syrian-Israeli border troubles, and that Egypt is "on the spot" and must do something about the appeal. The Foreign Minister stated that since the UN is not taken seriously in his part of the world, he was requesting Ambassador Caffery to submit an appeal to the US to take some positive action. The Foreign Minister indicated that he was taking the matter up personally with Caffery so as not "to throw monkey wrenches into the machinery."

Comment: The type of aid Syria has requested from Egypt is not defined. Syria would logically turn to Egypt, the most influential of the Arab countries, since Egypt has long supported an independent Syria against proposals for incorporating it with Iraq and Jordan. The serious concern felt by the Arab States generally over the current Syrian-Israeli border incidents is underlined by the fact that a special meeting of the Arab League Political Committee is scheduled to meet in Damascus on 14 May to discuss the border situation.

8. Some improvement noted in Egypt's attitude toward Anglo-Egyptian defense issue:

The US Ambassador in Cairo reports that the situation involving the Anglo-Egyptian treaty negotiations has taken "a momentary turn for the better." Egyptian Foreign Minister Salahuddin recently told the US Ambassador that if the forthcoming British reply allows Egypt "to save some face," the Egyptian public will be told that the door to further discussions is still open and Salahuddin will then go to London for subsequent negotiations. Salahuddin indicated that Egypt would be prepared for discussions throughout the summer but that if no progress had been made by November, Egypt would denounce the 1936 Treaty. The US Ambassador believes that the King's desire to prevent a breakdown in negotiations at this time is the main reason for the present change in the Egyptian attitude toward the treaty problem.

Comment: King Farouk's opposition to a break in Anglo-Egyptian treaty discussions, coupled with Salaheddin's more moderate attitude toward the defense problem, should help considerably in bringing about a continuation of the talks. Nevertheless, a wide gap remains between British and Egyptian thinking on the defense issue.
