economy and trade. The Embassy feels that aside from the propaganda aspects of these proposals, it is also possible that the USSR, consciously or unconsciously, is betraying its concern over the economic situation of Red China if traditional Japanese economic relationships in Asia are not re-established.

Comment: Although in the past the Soviet position regarding the inclusion of France in a Council of Foreign Ministers on a Japanese peace treaty has been ambiguous, it appears that the USSR has never specifically proposed that France should join the US, USSR, Great Britain and China in drafting the treaty. On the other hand, the USSR has on several occasions made specific references to the other four powers in this regard. Its latest note makes it clear that the Soviet Union believes France is not entitled to a major role in the preparation of the peace treaty on the grounds that it did not formally declare war on Japan and was not a signatory of the Japanese surrender document. (A Free French representative actually signed the surrender document).

3. Comment on recent developments regarding Soviet and American wheat for India:

According to the New Delhi radio, Prime Minister Nehru told an applauding Parliament on 10 May that Soviet vessels were already on their way to India with the first shipments of a total of 50,000 tons of wheat recently purchased from the USSR for cash. Deliveries of the full amount were to be completed by the end of June. At the same time, Nehru announced to Parliament that, in his opinion, the two food bills now before the US Congress had no political or discriminatory conditions attached to them and that "on these grounds" there should be no objection to accepting either of them. He added that he preferred the terms of the House bill because they were simpler.

Strong representations were necessary to get Nehru to make the above statement on the US food bills. It is noteworthy that, in making the statement, Nehru maintained his independence
