[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

30 May 1961

Copy No. C

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. South Korea. (Page ii)

5. USSR: Turnover of almost half of central committee members expected at 22nd party congress in October. (Page iii)

7. West Germany: Planned 6 June meeting of SPD in West Berlin will probably be attacked by bloc as "provocation." (Page iv)

8. Turkey: Status report one year after military coup. (Page iv)

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
South Korea: Constitutional and administrative actions of the South Korean regime suggest that the leadership envisages an extended period of military rule. According to press reports, the present constitution has been suspended, and Foreign Minister Kim Hong- i told the American charge on 27 May that a provisional constitution was being drafted to legalize the reforms that have been made, principally the transfer of the powers of the now dissolved National Assembly to the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction. The council's proposal to submit the constitution to a popular referendum appears to be designed to develop popular support. The council's reported plan to appoint military personnel to administrative positions at all levels of local government, including that of county chief, is almost certainly an effort toward long-term entrenchment in power.

30 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
USSR: The shake-up in the Soviet bureaucracy which began in late 1960 and which Khrushchev accelerated this year in an effort to bolster lagging agricultural production and purge the party and government bureaucracies of corrupt and incompetent officials shows no signs of diminishing. As a result of the current campaign and earlier attrition, the turnover in the membership of the central committee elected at the 22nd party congress in October will certainly be greater than occurred in 1956, when 35 percent were replaced; current indications point to a turnover of almost 50 percent. Further high-level changes are probably in the offing.

30 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
West Germany: The announcement that the Social Democratic party (SPD) is planning a meeting of SPD Bundestag deputies in West Berlin on 6 June will probably be attacked by the bloc as an example of the type of "provocation" which makes a Berlin settlement urgent. This action is planned by SPD leaders in lieu of a plenary session of the Bundestag which Chancellor Adenauer opposes because he feels it would increase East-West tensions

Turkey: The 27 May anniversary of the Turkish military coup passed without incident, and the ruling Committee of National Union (CNU) used the occasion for final Assembly approval of the new constitution, another step in the gradual return to civil government. Chief of State General Gursel has again reaffirmed the regime's intention to hold popular elections and organize the new parliament no later than October 1961. The previously reported arrests which took place in mid-May for plotting against the military regime apparently resulted from over-sensitivity of a few members of the regime rather than from any serious threat to the government, Meanwhile, the trials of political prisoners from the ousted Bayar-Menderes regime, now in their eighth month, are likely to be completed by mid-July. Some of the leaders of the previous government will probably be sentenced to death.

30 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Under Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
TOP SECRET
