[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

29 November 1960

Copy No. C 74

DIA review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

29 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran: Iranian Prime Minister Sharif-Emami is discouraged at the Shah's continued interference in government operations and fears that the Shah is planning to rig the new parliamentary elections as blatantly as those of last August, which the Shah canceled following widespread protests. Former Prime Minister Eqbal is working hard, according to Sharif-Emami, to persuade the Shah that the last elections were actually satisfactory and that the same procedures should be followed again. The prime minister also expects the Shah to schedule elections before the new American administration takes office in the belief that this would avoid American pressure for freer elections.

The Shah appears unwilling to give up his day-to-day concern with governmental affairs--although he has insisted several times that he would do so--and Sharif-Emami is facing the same situation which reduced the former Prime Minister virtually to the status of a "yes man" for the Shah.

Indonesia: President Sukarno is pursuing plans to bring Communists into the cabinet despite opposition from army officials. Communist appointments to the national government have so far been limited to rubber-stamp legislative bodies and advisory groups which have not effectively challenged the army's political power.
[PAGE 05]
Laos: A government good-will mission, possibly led by Premier Souvanna Phouma himself, is scheduled to visit Hanoi and Peiping in early December. The dispatch of such a mission was one of the major points of agreement between Souvanna and the Pathet Lao in their mid-November accords.

A National Assembly delegation, headed by assembly president Tiao Somsanith, apparently will fly to Savannakhet on 30 November in an effort to find some basis of negotiation with General Phoumi. The Somsanith delegation will probably be unable to bridge the chasm between Phoumi and Souvanna;

29 Nov 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii
[PAGE 06]
there is even some possibility that it may be convinced by the Savannakhet group of the necessity for assembly action aimed at Souvanna's ouster.

III. THE WEST

El Salvador: The Communist-dominated labor federation of El Salvador has announced it is proceeding with plans to organize peasant committees throughout the country. Should the junta, contrary to the practice of previous governments, permit the organization of the peasants, this would provide the Communists with a potent political weapon. Salvadoran peasants, a generally depressed group with real socio-economic grievances, can easily be manipulated politically. More than any other development, this Communist tactic would probably strengthen the resolve of anti-Communists, particularly among the military,

Venezuela: President Betancourt decreed a partial suspension of constitutional guarantees on 28 November and called in the army to reinforce other government security

29 Nov 60     DAILY BRIEF     iii
[PAGE 07]
forces in an effort to control four consecutive days of rioting in Caracas. The disturbances, which may be a decisive phase in the contest for power, are almost certainly being promoted by pro-Castro leftists as part of a campaign of violence initiated in October to undermine Betancourt. The long-widening rift in Cuban-Venezuelan relations seems to be nearing an open break. Betancourt is believed still to have the backing of most of the armed forces; moderate political elements and much of organized labor are likely to rally to his support.

29 Nov 60     DAILY BRIEF     iv
[PAGE 08]
Iranian Premier Dissatisfied With Shah's
Continuing Interference

Iranian Prime Minister Sharif-Emami is discouraged over the Shah's failure to consult with him on policies and key appointments and by the monarch's continued involvement in day-to-day government operations. Sharif-Emami has claimed several times recently that the military in particular are bypassing him and going to the Shah for support. The prime minister also fears that the Shah has not learned from the elections last August--which the Shah canceled after widespread protest over blatant rigging--and will again use government pressure to ensure the election of his chosen deputies. Sharif-Emami expected the Shah to schedule elections before the new American administration takes office in the belief that this would avoid American pressure for freer elections.

According to Sharif-Emami, former Premier Eqbal is attempting to persuade the Shah that the August elections were actually satisfactory and that similar procedures should be followed in new elections.

The Shah, despite his assurances on several occasions that he would withdraw from day-to-day personal control of governmental affairs, is unwilling to do so. Sharif-Emami now finds himself in the same situation which has reduced previous prime ministers to impotence. He must accept the role of a virtual "yes man" to the Shah, as Eqbal chose to do, or resign.

29 Nov 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1
[PAGE 09]
Indonesian President Plans to Include Communists in Cabinet

President Sukarno is pursuing plans to bring Communists into the cabinet despite opposition from the army. Communist appointments to the government so far have been limited to rubber-stamp legislative bodies and advisory groups which have not effectively challenged the army's political power. Sukarno's concept of "guided democracy" calls ultimately for an amalgam of nationalist, religious, and Communist elements from which government leaders will be selected and from which all party lines eventually will disappear.

Sukarno apparently will press his efforts to overcome army objections on the inclusion of Communists in the cabinet. Should the army remain adamant, however, he is likely to shelve his plan until a more favorable opportunity arises.

29 Nov 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Salvadoran Communists to Organize Peasant Committees

The Communist-dominated labor federation of El Salvador (CGTS) has announced it is proceeding with plans to organize peasant committees throughout the country. Should the junta, contrary to the practice of previous governments, permit the organization of the peasants, this would provide the Communists with a potent political weapon. Salvadoran peasants, a generally depressed group with real socio-economic grievances, can easily be manipulated politically. The organization of peasant committees could also be the first step by the Communists toward organizing a peasant militia with which to defy any attempt by the armed forces to dislodge the Communists from the provisional government, where they and their supporters have become entrenched at all levels.

The CGTS, which has operated virtually without government restrictions since the ouster of the Lemus regime last month, reportedly invited peasants to a meeting on 6 November, where they heard a Salvadoran Communist recently returned from Peiping and Cuba speak on methods used in disarming an army and in organizing a civilian militia. On 20 November peasants were brought from outlying towns to San Salvador where they participated in a mass meeting sponsored by the CGTS and pro-Communist and pro-Castro students. Dr. Roberto Carias Delgado, secretary general of the Communist-front April and May Revolutionary party, told the crowd, estimated at 7,000 to 10,000, that "a foreign country"--meaning the United States--"was using ships and planes" as a means of interfering with their fight to rid themselves of "dictators and oppressors."

The Communist tactic of organizing the peasants, more than any other development, would probably strengthen the resolve of anti-Communists, particularly among the military, the army and the wealthy landowners have long feared that the large peasant population might revolt, as in 1932, when a Communist-led insurrection was suppressed by the army only after thousands had been killed.

29 Nov 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 5
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
