[PAGE 01]
1 November 1960
Copy No. C 74

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1 NOVEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Reports of serious food shortages in cities.
Albanian premier, in major speech on 25 October, in effect reaffirmed support for Peiping in Sino-Soviet dispute.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Situation in the Congo.

III. THE WEST
Bonn government apparently now trying to reduce tensions over Berlin access issue by seeking some improvement, at least for time being, in relations with Moscow.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

China: Press reports of serious food shortages in urban areas of Communist China are describing actions to reduce urban populations. In both Peiping and Lanchou--and, we believe, probably other cities as well--authorities are forcing persons to return to rural areas, evidently in an effort to conserve city food supplies. Stringent controls over food rations and domiciliary registrations are being used to enforce these departures.

Albania: In a major speech to the Albanian National Assembly on 25 October, Premier Shehu in effect reaffirmed his country's support for Communist China in the Sino-Soviet dispute. Shehu had just returned from the UN General Assembly, and directed a major portion of his remarks to Khrushchev's proposals there; in contrast to the positions taken by the other European satellites, however, he strongly implied these proposals were impractical. Shehu's speech, which, as in previous cases, reflected a view of the world situation similar to that held by the Chinese Communists, came at a time of new manifestations of Sino-Albanian amity and further evidence of Soviet-Albanian friction. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Republic of the Congo. The reported capture on 30 October of four white officers by UN troops attempting to curb Baluba depredations in Kasai Province has been followed by a new Soviet demand that Hammarskjold suppress "the subversive activities of Belgian agents" in the Congo.
[PAGE 05]
some Belgian officers have remained in Kasai, possibly at Brussels' behest.
In Leopoldville, Lumumba has urged to the UAR ambassador that UAR officers disguised as civilians be sent to train pro-Lumumba forces in Orientale Province. He stated that his supporters in Stanleyville, led by Vice Premier Gizenga, were "in complete control" of the situation there. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

West Germany: The Bonn government apparently is trying to reduce tensions over the Berlin access issue by seeking some improvement in relations with the USSR, at least for the time being. According to a West German official, Adenauer is considering a visit to Moscow for this purpose. Foreign Minister Brentano, meanwhile, reportedly has indicated that the current negotiations with the USSR for a new trade agreement will be dragged out, possibly until March or April, in the expectation that Moscow will not put pressure on Berlin during these negotiations. Brentano is also quoted to the effect that interzonal trade with East Germany will be allowed to continue beyond 31 December so long as there are no further harassments of Berlin. (Page 4)

1 Nov 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
Albanian Premier Reaffirms Support for Chinese

Albanian Premier Mehmet Shehu, speaking on 25 October to the National Assembly on the current international situation, in effect re-endorsed Albania's support for Communist China while at the same time paying lip service to certain of the Soviet leader's positions. He implied that some of Khrushchev's proposals made at the current UN General Assembly session are impractical, and he used arguments advanced in the past by the Chinese Communists to show why these proposals cannot be implemented. On the disarmament question, for example, he stated that while Albania supports Soviet proposals on this question, Albania believes the "imperialists will never accept" disarmament merely through "discussions." He went on to say that only through a determined struggle of all "peace-loving" peoples can disarmament be forced on the West.

Shehu, who implicitly criticized Khrushchev's meetings in New York with Tito, also directly disagreed with two Soviet-sponsored proposals advanced earlier by satellite leaders. He condemned the idea of total disarmament in the Balkans--proposed prior to the General Assembly meeting by Gheorghiu-Dej of Rumania and Zhivkov of Bulgaria--as "absurd and dangerous" as long as "imperialism" surrounds the bloc. He also disagreed with Gomulka's suggestion that a first step toward disarmament could be the acceptance of existing military bases on foreign soil if new bases are prohibited. He said this would involve acceptance of the presence of "hundreds of US bases" around the "socialist camp." Tirana probably sees in such Soviet bloc actions a threat to its importance as an "outpost of socialism" on the Adriatic and perhaps even to its existence as a state.

Shehu's speech comes at a time of continuing signs of Sino-Albanian amity and Soviet-Albanian friction. In a 24 October cable of thanks to Albania, China again congratulated Tirana for its consistency and for its struggle to keep Marxism-Leninism "pure." Deputy Premier Kellezi, in a speech on 26 October, following his return from Peiping, broadened Albania's support of Peiping to include Chinese internal policy, hailing the communes and the "leap forward" as "extremely correct" and

1 Nov 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 07]
creative developments of Marxist theory. According to an unconfirmed French report, the Soviet ambassador to Albania has been out of the country for several weeks "ostensibly because of illness." The Soviet charge allegedly has been denied access to the Foreign Ministry, while the Chinese ambassador is daily received in the ministry as well as by the party politburo and secretariat. The report also claims that Soviet technicians have been withdrawn from Albania.

Shehu also strongly implied that the shake-up in the Albanian party may continue. He stated ominously that revisionists and opportunists, who describe China as "dogmatic" and predisposed toward war, can still be found in Tirana and elsewhere in the bloc.

1 NOV. 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in the Congo

The reported capture of four white officers--three Belgians and a Northern Rhodesian--by UN troops attempting to curb Baluba depredations in Kasai Province has been followed by a new Soviet demand that Hammarskjold suppress "the subversive activities of Belgian agents" in the Congo.

some Belgian officers have remained in Kasai; Foreign Minister Wigny advised Brussels on 14 October that no action need be taken concerning resignations submitted by "officers at present in Kasai," and that the resignations "must be accepted to be valid."

In Leopoldville, Lumumba has urged to the UAR ambassador that UAR officers disguised as civilians be sent to train pro-Lumumba forces in Orientale Province. He stated that his supporters in Stanleyville, led by Vice Premier Gizenga, were "in complete control" of the situation there. Pro-Lumumba elements appear to view Orientale Province both as a base for military training and as the possible seat for a rival Congo government should Lumumba be unable to return to power in Leopoldville.

The three Soviet cargo ships--the Voroshilov, Krasnodar, and Dolinsk--which have been operating off the southwest African coast since mid-September apparently now are returning to the USSR. These ships, possibly carrying military cargoes originally destined for the Lumumba regime, did not put in to the Congo port of Matadi nor did they offload their suspected arms cargoes.

1 Nov 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 09]
Bonn Seeks to Reduce Tensions Over Berlin

The West German Government apparently is trying to reduce tensions over the Berlin access issue by seeking some improvement in relations with the USSR, at least for the immediate future. The Soviet ambassador in Bonn reportedly told leaders of the opposition Social Democratic party on 20 October that Chancellor Adenauer may visit Moscow next May, and a West German official on the High Authority of the Coal-Steel Community has stated that the chancellor is considering such a trip.

Adenauer is reported encouraged by Khrushchev's friendly overtures to the West German ambassador in Moscow in response to Adenauer's letter on renewed repatriation of Germans from the USSR. Although there is little prospect that such a meeting would produce any real understanding between Bonn and Moscow, Adenauer may view a meeting with Khrushchev as a means of postponing new negotiations on Berlin until after the German elections in September 1961. He may also feel that direct talks with Khrushchev--which could produce an agreement on repatriation--would enhance his prestige with the German voters.

Foreign Minister von Brentano reportedly has indicated that the present negotiations with the USSR for a new trade agreement will be dragged out, possibly until March or April, in the belief that Moscow will not put pressure on Berlin while the negotiations continue. He added that at the last minute Bonn will demand that the agreement must also apply to West Berlin and will insist on new negotiations if the USSR objects.

Brentano is also quoted to the effect that West German interzonal trade with East Germany will be allowed to continue after the present agreement lapses on 31 December if there are no further harassments of Berlin. Brentano explained that although Bonn's aim is to return eventually to the status quo, its immediate objective is to buy time--"well into the spring or summer of 1961."

The present German-Soviet trade agreement, concluded early in 1958 and scheduled to expire on 31 December this year,

1 NOV 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 10]
provided for an exchange of goods totaling $744,000,000. Emphasis has been placed on West German shipments of producer goods--including steel pipe, chemical plant equipment, and machinery--and Soviet deliveries of raw materials and foodstuffs. West German chief negotiator von Zahn-Stranik has assured American officials in Bonn that he will firmly resist expected Soviet demands for a five-year agreement, but he indicated that the USSR, as in 1958, would probably not accept anything less than three years.

American officials have observed that although Bonn has successfully withstood the more unreasonable Soviet demands for high trade quotas, each succeeding round of talks has produced substantial increases, and they expect that this will continue to be the case in the future. Under the present agreement, quotas have generally been about 75 percent fulfilled.

1 Nov 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
