Cuba: The regime is moving against private schools in Cuba following Castro's 1 May announcement that laws will be passed "in the next few days" to nationalize private and parochial schools and expel foreign priests. Ramiro Valdes, Communist chief of Cuban army intelligence, instructed his subordinate in Santiago, "take over" the parochial schools with militia "in order to prevent sabotage in them."

There are some 250 parochial schools in Cuba, with a normal enrollment of about 130,000 students. The American-founded Villaneuva University was specifically slated for nationalization in Castro's May Day speech. The church has never exercised great strength in Cuba outside the educational field and has had relatively little political influence. Over 500 of Cuba's approximately 700 priests are non-Cubans, most of them Spaniards. Castro, in his speech, said "honest" foreign priests may remain in Cuba if they ask permission and said there is no reason why the Catholic Church cannot "coexist with the new social system in Cuba, now that the "bourgeois republic" is disappearing.

Portugal: The cabinet changes made by Prime Minister Salazar on 3 May in the Foreign Affairs, Interior, Education, and Corporations ministries are a continuation of the reshuffle begun on 13 April when he took over the defense portfolio and replaced the overseas and army ministers. These changes reflect Salazar's determination to strengthen further the loyalty of the cabinet to his policies of maintaining the status quo at home as well as in Portugal's overseas territories. The replacement of Foreign Minister Marcello Mathias, who has been generally friendly toward the US, suggests that Portugal may take a tougher stand in its future relations with Washington. (Backup, Page 2)

USSR: Activity of the seven probably nuclear-powered submarines comprising the Northern Fleet's sixth division has been at a high level this spring. During the past two weeks, at least three of these units have been engaged in local operations in Northern fleet waters and one unit operated in

4 May 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii
