[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
28 December 1951

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST

1. Iranian Prime Minister refuses to sign Mutual Security Act agreement (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

3. De Gaulle attacks European integration plans (page 4).
4. The Netherlands opposes other European Defense Community nations on internal defense force issue. (page 4).
5. Italian ratification of Schuman Plan expected (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST

1. Iranian Prime Minister refuses to sign Mutual Security Act agreement:

Prime Minister Mossadeq has again refused to consider signing the agreement required by the Mutual Security Act which provides among other things that the recipient country contribute to the "defense of the free world." He insisted that if formal signatures are required, the matter must be presented to the Majlis and the Senate. He stated that he would be neutral in presenting the matter and suggested that Ambassador Henderson might judge for himself whether or not Parliament would be willing to give the required assurances.

Comment: There are no indications that Mossadeq will become more amenable to signing the agreement provided for in the Mutual Security Act. In their present mood the two Iranian Houses will hardly act quickly or favorably on a political matter of such explosive nature.
[PAGE 04]
WESTERN EUROPE

3. De Gaulle attacks European integration plans:

A recent statement by General de Gaulle is interpreted by the US Embassy as a possible forerunner of attacks against the US and French Governments for having failed at European unification by allowing Germany to become too powerful.

At a recent press conference, De Gaulle gave the first indications that if his current bitter attacks against the European Army should fail, he would then launch an assault on the alleged German comeback, saying that German "hegemony" could have been prevented had he been granted power in time. The General predicted that the present "weak piecemeal approach" to European integration would lead to "disappointment and disgust" with the European idea, and would result in the failure of European union and in "Atlantic disunity."

Comment: Both the current Gaullist line and these indications of future party tactics spell continued difficulty for the middle-of-the-road government. De Gaulle's criticism closely parallels Communist vituperations against the European Army and the "American occupation of France." Such a propaganda assault is especially serious in France, where popular sentiment is innately apprehensive both of foreign troops on French soil and of the rebirth of a German war potential.

4. The Netherlands opposes other European Defense Community nations on internal defense force issue:

The Dutch delegates to the Paris Conference on a European Defense Community will accept the plan favored by the French, Germans and Italians, whereby all internal defense forces would form part of the European Defense Force, provided that only the national governments -- and not the Defense Community -- have the authority to commit these forces to SHAPE.

The German delegate, suspecting that the Dutch are trying to retain the nucleus of a national army, states that if the Dutch plan is adopted West Germany will also have to create some national forces in order to secure Bundestag ratification.

Comment: The German delegate's remark is prompted by his Parliament's insistence on equal treatment in the European Defense Community. Since the Allies, and especially the French Government, oppose the formation of any German national forces under a wholly German command, the Dutch proposal would in effect discriminate against West Germany.

The Netherlands and Belgium have intimated a willingness to accept a common budget under international control in exchange for a longer transition period. This may lead to conciliation on the less important issue of internal defense forces.
[PAGE 05]
5. Italian ratification of Schuman Plan expected:

The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Italian Chamber of Deputies has already begun consideration of the Schuman Plan treaty, but the US Embassy in Rome believes ratification by both Houses will probably not be achieved until some time in February. With ratification in principle supported by all the democratic parties, it is practically certain that Parliament will take favorable action after some debate.

Comment: The majority Christian Democrats, with the support of other moderate parties, should experience no difficulty in securing the bill's passage, even though nationalistic right-wing elements may join the Communist Party in opposition. Implementation of the treaty may be hampered, however, by interested industrial groups which have consistently opposed the Schuman Plan since its inception and have been largely responsible for the long delay in its presentation to Parliament.
[PAGE 06]
hindered, however, by interested industrial groups which have consistently opposed the Schuman Plan since its inception and have been largely responsible for the long delay in its presentation to Parliament.
