The Embassy, while expressing "disappointment" at not being informed earlier of this important development, comments that the cooperation necessary to make the scheme work is a possibility under the new Tam government.

Comment: This organization should increase the efficiency of the military effort; but it does run directly counter to Vietnamese aspirations for greater autonomy. It could have far-reaching significance in the maintenance of French control over a wide range of political, military, economic and social activities in Vietnam.

The American Embassy is apparently still not receiving full and timely information from the French.

3. Communists in Burma reportedly striving for alliance of all insurgents:

The present policy of the Burma Communist Party is to form an alliance among all insurgents, including the Karens, and a Karen-Communist merger would not necessarily result in the overthrow of the government, but that it would severely strain the Burmese armed forces.

Comment: As the Karen position becomes increasingly desperate, and as older, pro-West leaders are replaced by younger ones, the Communist offers for an alliance are becoming increasingly appealing.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British persist in support of present Greek Government:

Ambassador Peurifoy reports that British Ambassador Peake asked him on 10 July what the American attitude would be if the present Greek Government were forced by the defection of a few of its supporters to depend on the Communist front faction in Parliament to stay in power.

Ambassador Peake said Lord Mountbatten had advised him that he would not receive opposition leader Papagos during his forthcoming visit to Greece unless the interview were approved by King Paul.

Comment: The Ambassador's question was undoubtedly stimulated by current opposition attempts to cause the government's fall because of the defection of its parliamentary supporters. The British, however, have tended to side with the government and the Palace against Papagos, who is favored by the United States. The refusal of Lord Mountbatten to interview Papagos will spur Greek efforts to exploit any difference of opinion between American and British representatives in Greece.
