Thailand - Cambodia - South Vietnam: Thai and South Vietnamese officials will meet secretly in Vietnam this month to plan future covert operations in Cambodia. Both countries--particularly South Vietnam--have supported Cambodian dissident elements engaged in anti-Sihanouk radio and pamphlet propaganda following the abortive Dap Chhuon coup plot last February. These activities have not only served to consolidate Sihanouk's position and influence him toward the Communist bloc, but are basic to Cambodia's suspicious attitude toward the US.
(Page 4)

Japan - South Korea: South Korea's efforts to imply US support for the unilaterally established "Rhee line" on the grounds that it derives from lines established by US authorities during the occupation of Japan and the Korean war have damaged American interests in Japan, according to Ambassador MacArthur. Japanese leaders in the past have indicated they believed that the failure of the United States to intervene in the high seas fishery controversy encouraged President Rhee to continue seizing Japanese fishing boats and use the fishermen in "hostage diplomacy." Prime Minister Kishi has stated that he is under pressure from elements in the government party to take the issue to the United Nations, and continued aggressive Korean action against Japanese fishing will strengthen sentiment for such a move.
(Page 5)

III. THE WEST

France: De Gaulle is reported indifferent to pleas of high French officials that he permit the storage of American atomic warheads in France. He was unmoved by warnings from these officials that some of the nine US Air Force strike squadrons in France may be withdrawn and that France's defense posture would be weakened. Despite the pressures of the Berlin crisis, he will probably continue to oppose storage not only as a derogation of French sovereignty, but also because he hopes to further his objective of French "equality" in Western tripartite global military and political policy determination.
(Page 6)

16 May 59 DAILY BRIEF
