area. Neither the Israeli nor the UAR press, however, has given heavy play to the recent border actions. While further local incidents can be expected, there seems little likelihood of a significant clash at this time.

Cameroon: The French-administered UN trust territory of Cameroun, which becomes independent on 1 January, will retain, at least for the present, close ties with France under a series of provisional cooperation agreements. Cameroun, an underdeveloped country of about 3,200,000 people, emerges with internal problems which pose a serious threat to political stability. A major threat to the government is the continuing and apparently increasing terrorist activity, supported by external Communist sources, in the southwest.

Ethiopia - British Somaliland: British officials in Ethiopia fear that the deteriorating situation along the Ethiopian - British Somaliland border, where a number of Ethiopian troops and nomadic Somali tribesmen have been killed in clashes this month, will further exacerbate relations between London and Addis Ababa. An additional source of misunderstanding will arise when Britain implements its plans to accelerate the protectorate's political evolution by giving Somalis considerable executive responsibility in the new protectorate government to be formed after elections in February. Addis Ababa is concerned that any moves toward autonomy in British Somaliland will encourage Somali hopes for a "Greater Somalia" state which would include large portions of Ethiopian territory.

III. THE WEST

Austria-Italy: The recent decision of the Italian Government to bar from Italy three prominent Austrian leaders of the South Tirol autonomy movement has increased the influence of extremists on both sides of the South Tyrolean dispute. The Italian ambassador in Vienna, who had tried to persuade Rome to reconsider this "stupid move," believes the strong Austrian reaction will discourage Rome from offering to refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice and will force Vienna to attempt to obtain a UN General Assembly hearing in 1960. Even the moderate press in Austria is urging the Vienna government to break off talks with Italy and come out in support of full self-determination for the South Tirol.
