Chinese Communist National Day Celebrations

Communist China has used its 1 October National Day
celebrations to rebut criticism that China is belligerent. A
principal theme of the celebrations has been China's adherence
to peaceful coexistence, and Peiping is saying that the Sino-
Burmese boundary treaty--signed on 1 October by Prime Min-
ister U Nu and Premier Chou En-lai--is proof of its intentions.
Possibly for the same reason, Peiping eliminated its usual
military parade.

The Chinese have also attempted to gloss over current
Sino-Soviet differences by emphasizing "socialist unity" in
their 1 October propaganda, but they continue to adhere to hard-
line positions in the dispute. At a public lecture on ideology
in Moscow on 29 September--two days before the Peiping cele-
bration--the speaker identified the Chinese as "dogmatists" and
asserted they should engage in self-criticism and admission of
error. Ambassador Thompson speculates that this public label-
ing of the Chinese may foreshadow a sharper stage in the quarrel.

The absence from the Peiping celebrations of high-ranking
personalities from any bloc country except Albania points up
continuing Soviet efforts to isolate Peiping. The celebrations ap-
parently were snubbed by Polish Premier Cyrankiewicz, who
was scheduled to complete a visit to Ceylon on 30 September
and could easily have arrived in Peiping in time for the festivi-
ties. Albanian party leader Hoxha's 30 September speech in
Tirana endorsed several Chinese positions in contrast to East
German Premier Grotewohl's restatement of his regime's "cor-
rect" position in the dispute.

Peiping confined its comments on the domestic scene to
complaints that agriculture has suffered the most serious "nat-
ural calamities" since the regime came to power, but said
that the communes had minimized the damage to crops. Al-
though there is no evidence that industrial plans--which sched-
ule a 29-percent increase in value of industrial production as
against a 40-percent increase achieved in 1959--have bogged
down, Peiping continued silent on the performance of the econ-
omy in 1960.
