Future of German Interzonal Trade Still Uncertain

The Bonn government is apparently awaiting East German re-
actions to its 30 September renunciation of the 1961 interzonal
trade agreement before deciding on specific steps to take against
interzonal shipments. The cabinet--meeting on 30 September,
with the unprecedented attendance of opposition Socialist leaders,
including West Berlin Mayor Brandt--made no decision on wheth-
er a new agreement with East Germany would be negotiated in
the face of continued Communist harassment of West Berlin, or
whether any moves would be made against interzonal shipments
during the rest of 1960; it even recognized the possibility that
interzonal trade could continue after 31 December 1960 in the
absence of a new pact.

Bonn and West Berlin authorities are considering a plan designed
to enhance West Berlin's position. If a new pact is negotiated, all
interzonal trade shipments to East Germany would go through West
Berlin, thereby making it difficult for the East Germans to tamper
with Berlin access routes without blocking their own imports--in-
cluding vital iron and steel shipments--from the Federal Republic.
Berlin officials, moreover, have suggested that West German
exports to the USSR and other bloc states could also be sent via
West Berlin. Bonn hinted publicly that the deteriorating Berlin
situation may have a deleterious effect on Soviet-West German
trade negotiations which are scheduled to begin late this month.

On 30 September, while maintaining that intra-German
trade should continue as "the last tie in relations" between
the two states, East German Foreign Trade Minister Heinrich
Rau charged that Bonn's action was part of the Federal Repub-
lic's aggressive policy toward East Germany, and warned that
West Germany would be held responsible for the consequences.
Rau denied any connection between the questions of access to
Berlin and trade, and rejected allegations that the four-power
agreement governing Berlin had been violated, since "Berlin is
no longer under four-power control."

Emphasis was added to Rau's statement that night when it
was announced that henceforth visitors to the West Berlin exclave
of Steinstuecken--completely surrounded by East German terri-
tory--would be required to apply for East German residence per-
mits. This move constitutes the first East German harassment
of West Berlin residents since the beginning of the month-long
campaign against West German access to Berlin.
