[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 September 1953
Copy No. 67

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Molotov again seeks French support on German rearmament question (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. Large shipments of Chinese aid to Viet Minh reportedly continuing (page 4).
5. French losing support of Thai tribesmen in western Tonkin (page 5).
6. French postpone fall offensive plans in Indochina (page 5).
7. Burma denies Peiping pressure for settling Chinese Nationalist problem (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
8. Shah and Zahedi reportedly disagree over control of Iranian army (page 6).
9.
10. Anglo-Egyptian talks on Suez base seem headed for deadlock (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
11. Rome government seeks Italian de facto "occupation" of Zone A of Trieste (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Molotov again seeks French support on German rearmament question:

Ambassador Bohlen has reported another
attempt by Foreign Minister Molotov, in a
2 September interview with French ambassador Joxe, to win French support for the
Soviet policy of opposition to German rearmament. Molotov expressed
the fear that Germany would break out of "the shell of EDC" and embark
on a militaristic course. He stated that the Soviet Union was primarily
interested in safeguarding itself from Germany and preventing German
rearmament.

Joxe reiterated the French position that the
German problem was not one to be discussed by France and the USSR
alone, and that there was no possibility of dividing the Allies on this
question.

Comment: Both Molotov and Soviet ambassador Vinogradov in Paris have approached Joxe during the last two
months with similar arguments on the German problem.

SOVIET UNION
2.

[PAGE 04]
3.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Large shipments of Chinese aid to Viet Minh reportedly continuing:

Traffic along two important supply routes
from China to Viet Minh marshaling areas
in northern Tonkin has been heavy during
the past two or three weeks,

Heavy traffic between northern
Tonkin and Hoa Binh, an important Viet Minh supply depot just west of
the Tonkin delta,

[PAGE 05]
5. French losing support of Thai tribesmen in western Tonkin:

Some guerrillas of the Thai tribes in
western Tonkin, who have long been
"useful allies of the French, are now
going over the Viet Minh with their
materiel and supplies,

Comment: Consolidation of the Thai
territory by the Viet Minh would put an end to the reconnaissance
and harassing activity carried out by the French in conjunction
with the Thai tribesmen, and would facilitate the flow of Chinese
Communist supplies to the Viet Minh from Yunnan.

6. French postpone fall offensive plans in Indochina:

The 1 September progress report on the
Navarre plan from the chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Saigon
states that the French are now planning to
counterattack in the event of a Viet Minh attack on the delta in late
September or early October. If the Viet Minh does not attack in
the delta, the French will undertake a diversionary action against
enemy forces north of that area.

Comment: This planning differs from
the original Navarre program, which called for an "offensive to
forestall the enemy attack."

[PAGE 06]
7. Burma denies Peiping pressure for settling Chinese Nationalist problem:

The Burmese foreign minister has informed
the American ambassador that the Chinese
Communist attitude toward the presence of
Nationalist troops in Burma is one of "disinterested correctness" and that his government has not been pressed
to expedite their removal. The minister admitted, however, that he
had fully explained to Peiping his government's proposed courses of
action, including its pending appeal to the United Nations.

Comment: Such forebearance would create
confidence among the Burmese and might encourage them to approach
Peiping for aid in settling the Nationalist problem if other methods fail.
This course is known to be under consideration by some influential
Burmese leaders.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

8. Shah and Zahedi reportedly disagree over control of Iranian army:

Ambassador Henderson reported on 7 September that the shah's insistence that he,
not the prime minister, should control the
Iranian armed forces has led to disagreement
between the two. The difference apparently
arose when Zahedi opposed the shah's plan
to appoint Deputy Minister Vosuq as minister
of national defense.

Zahedi allegedly said that as long as he is
prime minister, orders to the armed forces would come through him.

Comment: Dispute over control of the armed
forces, constitutionally vested in the crown, was a major cause of the
break between former prime minister Mossadeq and the shah.

[PAGE 07]
Although an open rift is not expected at
this time, disagreements between the shah and Zahedi, whom the
monarch does not fully trust, will probably increase.

9.

10. Anglo-Egyptian talks on Suez base seem headed for deadlock:

Egyptian vice premier Nasr has indicated to
Caffery that he would accept an agreement
with Britain which allowed one year for the
British to evacuate troops from the Suez base
in addition to a five-year agreement covering base operations. He also
agreed to modify his position on the procedure for gradually reducing
the number of technicians at the base. Nasr emphasized that these
concessions were "his last word."

An official of the British embassy in Cairo,
on the other hand, believes Anglo-Egyptian talks are "still in a poker-game stage" and that the offer of a five-year duration will be lengthened
if Britain stands firm. The British embassy also discounts Nasr's
statement that political opposition makes it impossible for the Egyptian
military regime to accept a longer agreement.

[PAGE 08]
Comment: The position as outlined by
the British official would support an intention to remain adamant
on a duration period of ten years for the agreement.

There is no indication, however, that the
Egyptian military regime is willing to go much beyond its present
position.

WESTERN EUROPE

11. Rome government seeks Italian de facto "occupation" of Zone A of Trieste:

According to a high official of the Rome
Foreign Ministry, a de facto occupation
of Zone A of the Free Territory of Trieste
by Italian forces on the same terms as
Yugoslavia's present "occupation" of Zone B would satisfy Italian
public opinion. Such a move, he told Ambassador Luce, would
also strengthen the Rome government, pave the way for Tito-Pella
negotiations, and enable Premier Pella to continue pro-NATO
policies when parliament reconvenes on 22 September.

The Foreign Ministry official believes
that Pella would order the withdrawal of the troops dispatched to
the vicinity of the Yugoslav border if he were assured of the West's
immediate acceptance of his plan. He stated that otherwise Pella
would probably resign or be defeated on a vote of confidence, either
of which might result in Italy's withdrawal from NATO and an increase
in neutralist and extreme rightist influence.
