Communist China's Propaganda Campaign on Sino-Indian Border Dispute

Chinese Communist measures to publicize Peiping's side of the Sino-Indian border issue are assuming the proportions of a major propaganda campaign, with all the trappings of long press editorials and public rallies. Speakers in the standing committee of the National People's Congress have echoed Premier Chou En-lai's condemnation of Indian activities along the border, reiterated his readiness to negotiate a solution, and urged his proposal to preserve the "status quo" pending a final settlement.

Embarrassed by their bad press in India and probably irritated as well by the failure of the USSR to voice unqualified support for the Chinese position on the border issue, the Chinese are voicing a sense of outrage that New Delhi by its charges should give encouragement to elements hostile to Sino-Indian friendship. Chinese stiffness toward New Delhi is based further on apparent confidence that Communist China's legal position in the border issue is every bit as strong as India's. Peiping cites British maps to support its position, and the American Consul General in Hong Kong points out that the Chinese could also draw on American maps for this purpose, including military maps that were widely available during World War II which give the Chinese version of the Tibet-Assam boundary.

The Chinese are adamant in their insistence that the McMahon line is "illegal" and unacceptable. They have not indicated, however, their minimum demands in the border area. None of their statements so far insists that the line presently shown on their maps is beyond discussion. New Delhi's position is that the McMahon line is not subject to negotiation except for minor modifications.

Some Indian Parliament members and newspapers in recent days have queried why Nehru hid from the Indian public the news of early Sino-Indian border clashes. They are now beginning to question the validity of the moderate stand Nehru is taking in Parliament on the border issue and are pressing him to take firm action against the Chinese Communists.

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
