[PAGE 01]
7 March 1956

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ISRAEL MAY BE SEEKING TO IMPROVE RELATIONS WITH USSR (page 3).

2. YUGOSLAVIA INDICATES READINESS TO ESTABLISH PARTY RELATIONS WITH USSR (page 4).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]3. VIET MINH FACES MAJOR POLICY DECISION IN LAOS[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).

4. SUSPENSION OF CYPRUS TALKS WIDENS GREEK-TURKISH BREACH (page [[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 7)
[PAGE 04]
1. ISRAEL MAY BE SEEKING TO IMPROVE RELATIONS
WITH USSR

Israel may be moving away from a pro-West foreign policy, according to the American embassy in Tel Aviv. The speaker of the Israeli Knesset announced on 28 February that an exchange of parliamentary delegations between the USSR and Israel will soon take place. Israel notified the representative of the UN technical assistance board on 23 February that Israel will gratefully accept such additional equipment and aid as may be supplied from the USSR contribution or other sources. When it was pointed out that this could open the way for Soviet technicians, an Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman replied that Israel understood this.

Moderate Israeli newspapers are beginning to support a line previously taken only by leftist newspapers that if arms are not delivered by the US, they should be sought elsewhere. One independent newspaper has suggested that "Israel can recognize the fact of Soviet regional penetration and request a Soviet status quo guarantee in the area similar to the France-UK-US declaration. An even better solution would be a Soviet joining of the tripartite declaration." The paper also said that the "Arab states are not the only ones which can take a neutral stand between the two giant blocs fighting one another."

Comment
Israel followed a foreign policy of non-identification with the Western and Soviet blocs for several years after its establishment in 1948. The main drawback to a return to such a policy is the possibility that the contributions from world Zionism, on which Israel is economically dependent, might be jeopardized.
[PAGE 05]
2. YUGOSLAVIA INDICATES READINESS TO ESTABLISH
PARTY RELATIONS WITH USSR

Comment on:

A speech by Vice President Kardelj on 29 February to a regional Yugoslav Communist Party meeting indicates that Belgrade is now ready to establish party-to-party relations with the Soviet Communists. Kardelj called the events at the Soviet party congress, and particularly the affirmation of the "various roads to socialism" thesis, "a clear basis for democratic co-operation and relations between countries which are on the path to socialism, as well as between their leading "socialist forces," the latter a term that includes Communist parties.

Kardelj's number-two position in the Yugoslav hierarchy lends authority to his policy pronouncements. His statement that "the congress proves once more how very correct our orientation was, in new circumstances, to establish friendly relations and co-operation with the USSR and with its leading force, the Communist Party," may mean that interparty relations have already been established, possibly before the congress. Yugoslav spokesmen, as late as 23 February, said that party relations had "not yet" been established.

Belgrade's willingness to go beyond state-to-state relations indicates that it no longer fears this would lead to domination by Moscow and that it believes it can now persuade the West that interparty relations do not mean Yugoslavia has returned to the Orbit.
[PAGE 06]
3. VIET MINH FACES MAJOR POLICY DECISION
IN LAOS

the Viet Minh fears that under a general attack, Pathet Lao strongholds would be lost and the political-military structure destroyed. The generally deteriorating situation urgently requires greater participation of the Viet Minh to bolster the Communist effort, but the Viet Minh is reluctant to commit more personnel for fear of inducing censure by the international truce commission and of exploding the fiction that the Pathet Lao is conducting its own revolution.

The Pathet Lao and its Viet Minh backers foresee a long-term struggle for Communist control of Laos, with widescale guerrilla action necessary to retain the north, and an increased political struggle throughout the remaining provinces.

Comment
The growing success of the Laotian government's own guerrilla program

Military harassment of the Pathet Lao and the government's encouragement of popular hostility to the Communists reportedly have forced the Pathets to commit large numbers of troops to guard duty along their supply lines and apparently have also resulted in considerably lowered morale. The Viet Minh is more likely to commit more personnel in support of the Pathet Lao movement than to permit its collapse.
[PAGE 07]
4. SUSPENSION OF CYPRUS TALKS WIDENS GREEK-
TURKISH BREACH

Comment on:

Athens' decision to review "the entire question" of Greek relations with Turkey reflects Greek frustration over the collapse of the Cyprus negotiations and resentment at Turkey's role in limiting British freedom of action in dealing with Archbishop Makarios, leader of the island's Greek majority. The Greek ambassador in Belgrade says this review is necessitated by the Turkish criticism of Greece voiced by Foreign Minister Koprulu before the Turkish parliament on 26 February.

The ambassador intimated that Greece would withdraw its consent to an early meeting of the Balkan pact ministerial council and said a council meeting could not succeed while the British and Makarios still disagree on Cyprus.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Greece will not participate in NATO exercises with Turkey or attend a Balkan pact meeting until Ankara gives more adequate compensation to the victims of the anti-Greek riots in Turkey last September.

Greece would again refer the Cyprus issue to the United Nations if Britain did not resume negotiations soon.
Greece expects Cypriot terrorist attacks against the British to continue indefinitely[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 6 March)

An Israeli spokesman has announced that Israel will call the attention of the UN Security Council to "the worsening situation in Palestine," but does not intend to ask the council to meet. (Press)

the incidents of 3-4 March involving Israeli reconnaissance parties on the eastern shore of Lake Tiberias may have been deliberate provocations, since the Israelis already knew the disposition of Syrian forces in that area.

the preliminary investigation by UN truce observers indicates some of the Israelis may have been in Syrian territory when they were killed.

reports of Israeli troop movements toward Lake Tiberias and the belief of UN personnel in Jerusalem that Israel would launch a full-scale attack against Syria in "two or three days."

the Syrian ambassador in Washington urged his government to maintain an uncompromising position on the Jordan waters dispute. The ambassador, who has displayed a vehement anti-Western attitude, argued that the United States, Britain and France are "strongly opposed to the occurrence of fighting of broad scope" and that "Israel's dependence upon the tripartite nations compels her to be bound by their policy."

had learned of the arrival at Tel Aviv of an American ship carrying heavy antiaircraft guns.
the Israelis were awaiting the arrival of another shipment consisting
[PAGE 09]
of antitank guns, and it concluded "America has agreed to supply Israel with defense weapons only, and they have begun to ship them"

Egypt is ready to sell Saudi Arabia 25 Vampire jet fighters,

five of these British-designed aircraft could be delivered at once, and delivery of the others would begin in two months. Since Egypt is known to have only 19 Vampires, it presumably would have to buy the aircraft from abroad before selling to the Saudis.
