[PAGE 01]
5 June 1961
Copy No.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 June 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Laos: Souvanna Phouma says he intends to be in Geneva on
7 or 8 June; Phoumi may go to Nice. (Page 1)

2. Dominican Republic: Trujillo's heirs promulgate late dic-
tator's propaganda line. (Page 3)

3. Guatemala's charges against Mexico may backfire. (Page 5)

4. USSR may be withdrawing diplomatic and trade specialists
from Albania. (Page iii)

5. South Korea: Leadership concerned to establish legal con-
tinuity with prior regimes. (Page iii)

6. Moscow giving Somali Republic long-term credits. (Page iv)

7. Iranian prime minister believes he has Shah's support for
reform program. (Page iv)

8. Chinese Communist trade mission in Latin America meet-
ing with some success. (Page v)

[PAGE 04]
NORTHERN LAOS

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 June 1961

DAILY BRIEF

Laos: Souvanna Phouma has stated that he intends to be
in Geneva on 7 or 8 June, according to Western newsmen who
interviewed him at the Plaine des Jarres airfield on 2 June.
Souvanna, prior to his departure with Souphannouvong by IL-14
for Hanoi, repeated that he wants neutralism, not Communism,
for Laos and that he had so informed Communist leaders in
Moscow, Peiping, and Hanoi.

Kong Le is reported to have told the visiting correspond-
ents that he had done much recruiting and now has five bat-
talions of parachutists. The newsmen felt that the Plaine des
Jarres area had been thoroughly sanitized; only a few military
personnel were in sight, and almost all of these were Kong Le
troops.

Meanwhile, plans for a meeting of Souvanna, Souphannouvong,
and Boun Oum in Nice, with Phoumi participating, apparently are
proceeding. Phoumi, who has heard unofficially that the meeting
of the three princes under Sihanouk's auspices has been agreed to,
plans to leave for Nice on 5 or 6 June if the meeting is confirmed.

The Pa Dong area was generally quiet on 3 and 4 June.
No Bloc airlift operations were scheduled for 4 June.

(Page 1) (Map)

[PAGE 06]
Dominican Republic: The press conferences on 3 June by
President Balaguer and General "Ramfis" Trujillo, in which
they emphasized the regime's "democratic" goals, indicate
no change from the propaganda line promulgated by the late
dictator, who often went to considerable lengths to try to con-
vince world opinion that his regime was moderating its pol-
icies. While President Balaguer may possibly wish he could
play a part in democratizing the regime, there is no indication
that he has the courage and leadership to play any role other than
his accustomed one as a puppet for those exercising real power.

Balaguer's statement that John Abbes was removed as de facto
head of the Military Intelligence Service (SIM) prior to the as-
sassination is belied by a reliable American citizen who ob-
served Abbes in SIM headquarters on 1 June. "Ramfis," other
members of the Trujillo family, and their close associates are
dominant in the regime and clearly understand that they will
lose everything the moment they permit a free opposition.
(Page 3)

Guatemala: President Miguel Ydigoras, confronted with
mounting criticism from the anti-Communist factions of his
divided opposition on the one hand and with increasing Com-
munist activity on the other, has publicly charged that Cuban-
supported revolutionary forces are preparing to attack Guatemala
from bases in Mexico. The Mexican Government, apparently
confident that the charges lack substance, has called on the OAS
for an immediate investigation. Current information fails to
substantiate the Guatemalan charges and refutes the Guatemalan
claim that Raul Castro was in Mexico preparing the "Commu-
nist invader force."

Guatemalan army garrisons in the western and southern parts of
the country have been alerted to expect imminent uprisings. Ydigoras has many
enemies civilian as well as military and one or more of these

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  ii

[PAGE 07]
groups may attempt an uprising in the near future, but there
is no information to suggest that a major Communist and
Castro-led movement is about to break out in Guatemala.
(Page 5)

Albania-USSR: The USSR may be withdrawing some of
its diplomatic and trade specialists from Albania.

flight
reservations for one-way trips from Tirana to Moscow were
made for ten persons constituting families who may be asso-
ciated with the Soviet Embassy in Tirana and for one person
associated with the USSR's trade representation there.

the Albanians
in late May expelled the Soviet naval attache and an unspecified
number of military experts. In another development, one of
the two Soviet cargo/transport vessels that arrived in Albanian
waters on 19 May was scheduled to pass through the Bosporus
into the Black Sea on 4 June. The usual turn-around time for
such ships in Albania is four or five days. Meanwhile, there
has been no indication of any replacement for the submarines
which left Vlone Bay on 26 May.

South Korea: South Korean insurgent leaders reportedly
are considering the adoption of a new constitution patterned on
that of the French Fifth Republic, providing for a strong execu-
tive. After the fall of the Rhee government last year there was
considerable interest among more conservative South Korean
elements in such a constitution. However, a spokesman for the
ruling Supreme Council for National Reconstruction has vigor-
ously denounced as "absolutely groundless" and "irresponsible"
recent press speculation forecasting an early return to civilian
control. US Charge Green in Seoul notes that, so far, embassy
contacts with government officials and members of the junta tend
to indicate that those insistent on an extended period of military
rule continue to exercise decisive influence in the Supreme Coun-
cil.

Meanwhile, the regime is moving ahead with plans to promul-
gate a "basic law" that will in effect set aside those provisions of

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii

[PAGE 08]
the present constitution dealing with civil rights and the National
Assembly and "legalize" the assumption of power by the Supreme
Council. The leadership is concerned that unless legal continu-
ity is maintained with the Rhee and Chang Myon governments,
Seoul's claim to be the only legitimate Korean government will
be regarded as no more valid than that of Pyongyang. The for-
eign minister has announced that special missions will visit
various noncommitted nations to win greater support in the UN
for South Korea.

USSR - Somali Republic: Moscow, continuing to broaden
its ties with African states through the extension of long-term
economic aid, announced on 2 June that it will provide the Somali
Republic with $44,400,000 in long-term credits for industrial and
agricultural development and with a $7,800,000 credit to finance
commodity deliveries. The Soviet Union will also build two hos-
pitals, a printing plant, a school, and a radio station as gifts.
The announcement was contained in the communique marking
the end of a ten-day visit to the USSR by Somali Prime Minister
Abdirascid. The economic agreement is in line with the an-
nounced intention of the moderate Somali Government to accept
aid from all sources; it has been pending since last April when a
Soviet good-will mission visited the East African nation. Moga-
discio appears to be headed toward early conclusion of similar aid
programs with Czechoslovakia and possibly Communist China.

Iran: Following a conversation with the Shah on 31 May,
Prime Minister Amini was reported "greatly encouraged" by
the Shah's reaffirmation of support for the government and for
Amini's reform program. The Shah demonstrated this support
by not countermanding Amini's order canceling the appointment
of former Prime Minister Eqbal as ambassador to Spain. This
appointment apparently had been ordered by the Shah about the
middle of May without consultation with Amini and was regarded
by many Iranians as evidence of the Shah's intention to undercut

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  iv

[PAGE 09]
the prime minister. Amini hopes to see the Shah frequently to
sustain his support for the government. The Shah and Amini
have no essential differences on foreign policy and particularly
on the necessity of Iran's membership in CENTO. In spite of
the present appearance of cooperation, however, there has been
no change in the basic source of conflict between the two--the
monarch's unwillingness to refrain from direct participation in
the government.

Latin America - Communist China: The Chinese Com-
munist trade mission which recently visited Brazil and Chile
and is now in Argentina is arousing interest, particularly in
business circles. Representations from important business
firms in Argentina overcame the Foreign Ministry's initial re-
luctance to admit the group. Brazil and Chile plan to send trade
missions, and Brazil may sign a trade agreement. However, it
is still reluctant to grant political recognition.
(Page 7)

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  v

[PAGE 10]
The Situation in Laos

Souvanna was
seen off for Hanoi by Russians in civilian clothes;
they were from the official Soviet installation appar-
ently at Phong Savan.

food seemed plentiful, although there was a shortage of salt.

Phoumi's plans to go to Phnom Penh for a meeting with
Souvanna and Souphannouvong apparently were changed by a
request from Sihanouk and Boun Oum.
Nice was proposed as a meeting place to pre-
clude the need for Sihanouk and Boun Oum to travel to Phnom
Penh.

A drop zone in the Pa Dong area has been arranged by enemy
forces there at the request of GHQ, Plaine des Jarres.

Two further examples of friction between Kong Le and Pathet
Lao troops have been noted recently. An
unidentified Kong Le unit complained on 2 June that it had "no place
to stay. . . . The post is occupied only by the Pathet Lao. . . .
They are assuming the entire control."

"We are living outside the post be-
cause the brethren and the Pathet Lao are still in control and as-
suming full responsibility. Whenever they leave there will be a
shortage of mosquito nets and clothing."

the presence of North Vietnamese and Chinese in the Route 9 area
of Laos, east of Tchepone. there are two

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1

[PAGE 11]
South Vietnamese special forces teams observing in the area,
said his men had reported that most of the Communist troops
there are Vietnamese, identifiable by their North Vietnamese
dialect and their color, which is lighter than that of the Pathet
Lao. He also claimed that many of the radio transmissions in
the area were in "Peking dialect."

Peiping and Hanoi are continuing their charges that Laotian
forces, aided by the US, are violating the Laotian cease-fire.
Chinese broadcasts of 3 and 4 June attacked Vientiane's resup-
ply operations in the Pa Dong area, while Hanoi charged on
3 June that two more US aircraft had flown over North Vietnam-
ese territory.

Airlift operations for 3 June were apparently canceled, and
preliminary field information indicates that no flights were sched-
uled into Laos for 4 June. Weather conditions could account for
this inactivity.

A Soviet IL-14 and a Soviet IL-18 are en route from Moscow
to North Vietnam, both of them apparently involved in freight-
carrying missions. A Soviet AN-10--the commercial passenger
version of the AN-12--which arrived at Peiping from Irkutsk on
1 June continued on to Canton on 3 June. There are indications
that the flight of seven Soviet LI-2s from Hanoi to Canton on 1 June
is associated with the arrival of this AN-10. The LI-2s were
scheduled to return to Hanoi on 2 June, but this schedule was can-
celed because of the delay in the arrival of the AN-10 at Canton.
One load report indicated that the AN-10 was carrying 42 pas-
sengers but no freight.

It is possible that some of the Soviet airmen who have been
flying airlift missions into Laos are being replaced by new crews
which may have arrived at Canton aboard the AN-10. The AN-12
which arrived at Canton from the USSR on 31 May left Haiphong
on 3 June, apparently in a return flight to the USSR.

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2

[PAGE 12]
The Dominican Republic

The American consul doubts that anti-Trujillo forces con-
trol any portion of the national territory. The consul is con-
vinced that a provisional government could quickly be assem-
bled by the opposition if current police terrorism were to be
relaxed, but that no anti-Trujillo leader can be expected to
step forth under present circumstances. General Estrella,
the dissident army brigade commander who sent a note to the
consul on 2 June requesting urgent military assistance to help
"maintain public order and prevent foreign intervention," is
believed by the consul to be in hiding without means of com-
municating to the public.

400 to 500 persons have been ar-
rested in the capital since the assassination. many
Dominicans are now "prepared to take great risks to do what-
ever is necessary," this would require US
military help.

the terrorism reported by the consulate
in the capital is also occurring in rural areas.

a brigade commander near the Haitian
border to inspect all vehicles with diplomatic license plates.
Any "fugitives" traveling in them are to be captured, "alive if
possible."

Ramon Grullon, a Dominican Communist leader now in
Mexico, told associates on 31 May that "all of you should pre-
pare to go to the Dominican Republic immediately,"
Grullon had contacted colleagues in New
York and Havana and they had agreed to hold a meeting in Cuba
on 9 June. They reportedly hope to obtain funds there. On 2
June, leaders of the Dominican People's Socialist (Communist)
party in Cuba issued a statement warning of an impending "im-
perialist maneuver" designed to prevent the Dominican people

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3

[PAGE 13]
from establishing an "independent and democratic" regime.
The statement was carried the next day in English by the
Czechoslovak news agency.

Castro had ordered clan-
destine organizations in Cuba and Puerto Rico to prepare to
leave immediately for the Dominican Republic. The Castro
regime will almost certainly attempt to infiltrate clandestine
groups into the Dominican Republic, but no large-scale or
overt operations are likely at this time.

3 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4

[PAGE 14]
The Guatemalan Situation

In recent weeks the Guatemalan press and various rightist
and moderate opposition leaders have repeatedly pointed to in-
creased activity among the Guatemalan Communists as indicat-
ing that the Communists may regain their domination of the
country.

Communist leaders are, in fact, acting more boldly now
than at any time since the fall of the pro-Communist Arbenz re-
gime in 1954, and they are presumably actively reorganizing
their party and front groups. The Communists, with some 1,100
party members and perhaps an equal number of sympathizers,
still have a long way to go, however, before they can regain their
1954 strength.

There are reports that the Communists have reached a tac-
tical agreement with the President whereby they will be given
relative freedom of action in return for their promise not to at-
tack him. While such reports are unconfirmed, they are con-
sistent with Ydigoras' divide-and-rule tactics, which have kept
his diverse opposition off balance for the past three years.
Ydigoras has in the past shown a willingness to work with the
Communists when he thought it would be to his temporary bene-
fit.

Currently, Ydigoras blames his anti-Communist opponents
for the increased Communist activity because the Guatemalan
Congress watered down his proposed anti-Communist legislation
last March. He recognizes, however, that he cannot permit the
Communists unrestricted freedom without risking strong action
against his government by the firmly anti-Communist military in
cooperation with anti-Communist factions among the political op-
position. It is possible that the President's current charges are
designed to pave the way for a new crackdown on domestic Com-
munists.

Whether or not Ydigoras has a temporary alliance of expediency
with domestic Communist leaders, he does recognize the ultimate
danger to his regime represented by the Communists and the Castro

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5

[PAGE 15]
regime. He realizes that he is probably Castro's primary tar-
get in Latin America. Former President Arbenz, now an
honored exile in Cuba, inaugurated a regular Cuban radio pro-
gram beamed at Guatemala in a speech on 30 May. Arbenz
was careful in his speech not to implicate the Castro regime
in any overt action against the Guatemalan Government, say-
ing that "revolutions are not exported. . . (but) made by the
people" inside their countries. He urged Guatemalans, how-
ever, to "organize and unite. . . for the (ultimate) liberation
of Guatemala."

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6

[PAGE 16]
Latin America - Communist China

The Chinese Communist trade mission, headed by Nan Han-
chen, chairman of Peiping's Committee for Promoting Inter-
national Trade, aroused interest in political as well as eco-
nomic relations.

the UAR maintains diplomatic
relations with Nationalist China and, if so, whether it is grad-
ually evolving toward a break in those relations. In fact, the
UAR has recognized Communist China for several years. The
Brazilian Government announced last February that it would
vote to discuss placing the question of Chinese UN representa-
tion on the UN agenda but has stated that the question of diplo-
matic relations with Taipei or Peiping is unresolved.

Brazilian President Quadros agreed to the establishment of
a permanent "nonofficial" trade office in Brazil and, according
to a Cuban press report, will establish a Brazilian trade office
in Peiping.

the Brazilian Government will send an economic mission to
Communist China as well as to other Far Eastern countries "in
the near future." The visiting Chinese mission is reported to
have signed contracts to purchase hides and leather during a
visit to the southern Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul, and
expectations were aroused for the eventual signing of a bilateral
trade agreement. Two members of the mission are said to have
met secretly with leftist Labor Minister Castro Neves.

A trade exposition held during the mission's visit to San-
tiago is said to have sold $50,000 in goods, and the Central Bank
of Chile plans to send a trade mission to Communist China.

A group of Argentine businessmen representing some eight
export-import firms left Argentina for Communist China on 6
May. After attending the Chinese Export Commodities Fair in
Canton, they were guests of honor at a banquet given in Peiping
by the vice chairman of the China Council for the Promotion of
International Trade.

5 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7

[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Under Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 18]
5 June 1961
Copy No. 508

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
