[PAGE 01]
17 March 1953
Copy No. 60
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]GENERAL
1. Yugoslav official advises Burma on form of projected UN appeal (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. Kashani attempts to organize religious support for Shah (page 3).
3. Egypt and Syria propose strengthening Arab League pact (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
4. Czechs consider shift to barter trade with non-Orbit countries[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).

LATIN AMERICA
5. Stability of Bolivian government reportedly threatened by RFC decision (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Yugoslav official advises Burma on form of projected UN appeal:

Comment: Burma's socialist leaders feel a close ideological relationship with Yugoslavia's Communist leaders and respect the latter's attainment of a Marxist state free from Soviet domination. Any Yugoslav counsel, therefore, may be expected to receive serious consideration in Rangoon.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Kashani attempts to organize religious support for Shah:

Comment: Organized support of the Shah by religious groups could be a strong weapon against Prime Minister Mossadeq. Kashani and Behbehani, whose religious and political views have differed in the past, apparently are now willing to work together to support the Shah.

Another anti-Mossadeq faction, the ten-man "Freedom" group, has just been formed in the Majlis. Together with other opposition elements, it could cause Mossadeq considerable difficulties.
[PAGE 04]
3. Egypt and Syria propose strengthening Arab League pact:

Comment:
The Egyptian-Syrian interest in making the league a more effective organization may be in preparation for a proposal that the league's military pact, rather than MEDO, be the basis for Middle East defense. In any event, a more effective league organization would be used chiefly to put more pressure on Israel and to attempt to obtain more concessions from the West.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Czechs consider shift to barter trade with non-Orbit countries:

Comment: Czechoslovakia has for almost a year pursued a policy designed to increase its commercial and political activities in such areas as Asia, Africa and Latin America. It is apparently now attempting to circumvent troublesome West European middlemen and to overcome its serious shortage of dollars and sterling.
[PAGE 05]
LATIN AMERICA

5. Stability of Bolivian government reportedly threatened by RFC decision:

The Reconstruction Finance Corporation's decision not to discuss a contract for the purchase of Bolivian tin ores is a blow from which the present Bolivian government may not recover, in the opinion of Ambassador Sparks. He added that without the assurance of a US market for half of the country's tin production, economic chaos with the attendant political consequences will be hastened.

The RFC decision, which has not yet been made public, "came as a bombshell" to the Bolivian cabinet and caused it to wonder whether the United States is trying to force the Paz government out of office.

Comment: Bolivian Ambassador Andrade in Washington has been informed that the RFC decision is based on the fact that the United States now has sufficient tin to meet its estimated requirements.
[PAGE 06]
The decision is likely to be distorted in Bolivia as US retaliation for the government's tin nationalization decree of last October.
