New Laotian Cabinet Confirmed by National Assembly

Premier Tiao Somsanith's government, which was invested by the Laotian National Assembly on 5 June by an overwhelming margin, is heavily weighted in favor of the Party of Democracy and Social Progress (PDSP)--the party recently created by the Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI). Former Premier Phoui's Rally of the Lao People (RLP) has received only one post, the relatively minor justice portfolio, which will be held by Phoui's brother, Ngon Sananikone. The rest of the 13-man cabinet, except for two or three lesser appointees who could be classed as "independents," is made up of PDSP members. Despite some weak spots, the new cabinet appears to be one of the abler ones in Laos' post-independence history; its viability will largely be determined by the ability of Somsanith and Phoumi to work together.

Brigadier General Phoumi, the most powerful of the CDNI leaders, heads the Defense Ministry, the same position he held in the recently resigned caretaker government. Another CDNI leader, Khampan Panya, is the foreign minister, as he was in the caretaker government and in the Phoui government prior to the CDNI-RLP split last December. Somsanith will act as his own interior minister, a post for which he is well suited in view of his past experience as national police chief and because of his more intimate knowledge of village-level problems than most of his colleagues. There are also signs he may personally undertake the reorganization of the government's administrative structure.

Perhaps the most noteworthy of the independents is Touby Lyfoung, leader of the Meo tribal minority group. His appointment as secretary of state for information may encourage the minority groups, which comprise nearly half of Laos' population, to believe that the new government will take a greater interest in their problems than did previous governments.

The Somsanith government can be expected to push repressive measures against local Communists and perhaps to make more vigorous efforts than previous regimes to extend the central government's control in the remoter areas of the country. Internationally,
