South Korean Unrest

The revolution which overthrew Syngman Rhee last April failed to produce a leader capable of rallying the support and confidence of a majority of South Koreans. Prime Minister Chang Myon is not a dynamic leader, and his administration has failed to curtail effectively the graft, nepotism, and political factionalism associated with the old regime. As a result there is a growing polarization between older, conservative leaders who accept such practices and younger, educated Koreans who realize that graft and corruption must be reduced if the country is to progress.

The Chang administration is probably most vulnerable for its failure to convince the public that it is making an optimum effort to improve economic conditions. Those actions which it has taken--adoption of a realistic unitary exchange rate, conclusion of the new American aid agreement, implementation of more realistic public utility rates, and steps to modernize the electric power industry--were necessary and will be beneficial in the long run. Their immediate effect, however, has been to increase the burden on a population afflicted by rising consumer costs, electricity shortages, and unemployment. About 2,000,000 out of a 10,000,000-man work force are out of work or underemployed. The initial impact of the new National Construction Service, the most hopeful program to date for providing immediate work for those in need, has been dulled by the "politics-as-usual" manner in which necessary funds are appropriated.

The lack of an effective alternative to the Chang administration, the absence of an emotional issue, and the loyalty of the military to civil authority militate against any major attempt to oust the government in the immediate future. The government's confidence is indicated by its willingness to allow student organizations to sponsor a major rally in Seoul on 19 April with the city providing assistance in the background. However, the possibility of violent incidents will remain, as demonstrations continue throughout the country.

An ti-American sentiment which has begun to develop, probably will be inhibited by the negotiation of an agreement

17 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
