1. COMMENT ON LATEST SOVIET DISARMAMENT PROPOSAL

The USSR's latest disarmament proposal, presented in a bilateral discussion with the US on 26 April in London appears, according to the preliminary impression of the US delegate, to be "the beginning of hard, difficult negotiating in a genuine attempt to put together a limited partial agreement." As such it may be a Soviet effort to force negotiations to a higher level with the addition to the agenda of such other subjects as European security and the Middle East.

The Soviet proposal for a partial disarmament agreement is less conciliatory than the Western delegates had expected, than Soviet delegate Zorin had hinted before his recent trip to Moscow, and than Soviet propaganda had suggested. In general the USSR proposes more disarmament and less inspection and control than the Western powers have indicated would be acceptable.

Zorin explained to the US delegate that cessation or suspension of nuclear tests and a pledge not to use atomic and hydrogen weapons of any type is prerequisite to any partial disarmament agreement. Implicit in the wording of a declaration proposed by the USSR is the intention of all signatories eventually to eliminate all such weapons from their arsenals.

With regard to conventional weapons, the USSR proposes a 15-percent reduction in armaments and defense budgets instead of the US proposal of 10 percent, and a commitment to proceed from Western force level proposals of 2,500,000 for the US, USSR and China and 750,000 for the UK and France to a second stage of 1,500,000 and 650,000. Claiming "that Soviet forces have been reduced by 1,840,000 in the past year and a half," the Soviet proposal contrasts the geographical size of the US and the USSR and their length of borders, and concludes that the USSR "is therefore unable to agree to an equal level of forces if there is no substantial reduction."

On inspection and control of the proposed disarmament measures, Moscow's proposal appears to regress. The inspection functions would be handled "within the framework"
