Comment: French officials in Indochina have recently argued, though without convincing evidence, that the Viet Minh has an overriding desire for a negotiated peace. The Viet Minh's strategy for the past three years has appeared to be that of expanding the territory under its control without seriously risking its regular forces.

3. French-Vietnamese situation in Tonkin delta worsening:

Sabotage and terrorism in the Tonkin delta are increasing, according to the American consul in Hanoi. On 31 January a troop train en route to Hanoi from Haiphong was blown up, and five DC-3's were sabotaged at an airfield near Haiphong. The Tonkin commander had previously expressed concern that the sending of reserve parachute battalions to central Laos had weakened his air base security.

A ranking French official in Tonkin believes the Viet Minh will undertake a still wider program of terrorism, particularly against occidentals, and will intensify efforts to sabotage critical installations. At the same time, the enemy will step up its more conventional military activities throughout the delta.

Comment: The French mobile reserve in the delta, already reduced from 25 battalions to 19, faces the prospect of a further drain to meet the developing threat in northern Laos. The Viet Minh, on the other hand, has since mid-January increased its regular strength in the delta from 9 to 18 battalions and in addition has some 50,000 irregulars there.

SOUTH ASIA

4. India reportedly may act unilaterally to end Kashmir stalemate:

The American embassy reports that on 3 February the government of Indian-held Kashmir will probably ratify the Indo-Kashmiri agreement of July 1952 formalizing many of India's relationships with that state. The embassy adds that there is a "strong possibility" that action will also be taken to ratify Kashmir's accession to India, to argue that this eliminates the need for a plebiscite, and to pave the way for withdrawal of the Kashmir case from the UN Security Council.
