[PAGE 01]
28 April 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Britain-UAR: (London, impatient with Cairo's delay in restoring diplomatic relations, has made a financial maneuver which jeopardizes Nasir's efforts to secure an IBRD loan to improve the Suez Canal. Under the terms of a 1958 agree-ment, release of an Egyptian blocked sterling account would require the UAR to compensate stockholders of the old Suez Canal company. The British have unblocked this account earlier than scheduled, and say they will vote against the IBRD loan if the UAR is in default on its compensation agree-ment. This action will tend to confirm the impression held by many UAR officials that the British are continuing to work against Nasir.)

Argentina: To counter continuing strikes and agitation against the US-backed stabilization program, President Fron-dizi has issued a decree banning all activity by the Communist party and associated groups, at least for the duration of the present state of siege. He believes the Communists and Peron-istas are mainly behind this agitation. Several antigovernment demonstrations may be attempted on 1 May.

28 Apr 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

British Financial Maneuvers Against Egypt

(London, impatient with Cairo's delay in resuming diplomatic relations, has made a financial maneuver which seriously jeopard-izes Egyptian efforts to secure an IBRD loan for expanding the Suez Canal. Under the terms of a 1958 agreement, London's re-lease of Egyptian blocked sterling would require the UAR to com-pensate stockholders "forthwith" to the amount of 22,960,000 as part of an accelerated repayment schedule. The Bank of England now has removed all restrictions on Egypt's blocked sterling account earlier than scheduled, thereby apparently bring-ing into effect this hitherto unimportant clause. If Cairo fails to make payment "forthwith," it probably will be in technical default and its credit standing will be seriously impaired. In such an event, the British state, they would be unable to vote for a World Bank loan to Egypt)

Cairo has not responded to the Bank of England, but apparently will not make payment and will not compromise its position that holds the bank's action illegal)

28 Apr 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Argentina Bans All Communist Activities

Argentine President Frondizi issued a decree on 27 April banning all activity by the Communist party and associated groups. He evidently hopes to curtail the Communists' capa-bilities and to undercut any Peronista moves to collaborate with the Communists, especially in forthcoming union and pro-vincial elections.

Frondizi is convinced that the Communists and some ex-tremist Peronistas are fomenting the present agitation against the US-backed economic stabilization program, such as the Communist-led bank strike and the riots of 3 April which led to the expulsion of five Soviet diplomats. New demonstrations by Communists and Peronistas and by the Communist-led stu-dent federation are reportedly planned for 1 May.

As Frondizi had warned, the government's austerity and stabilization measures since 1 January have caused hardship for labor. The cost of living has risen about 47 percent, and real wages are the lowest since Frondizi took office on 1 May 1958. On the other hand, the government has signed additional development contracts with private petroleum companies, and crude production during the first quarter of 1959 increased 33 percent. This, together with a favorable export movement and reduced imports, indicates to some officials that a "reasonable" trade balance for the year may be achieved, reversing the past decade of heavy trade deficits.

28 Apr 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 12]
