The press is speculating that a cabinet reshuffle may be imminent. A new flare-up of violence involving the left-wing Moroccan Labor Union and its Istiqlal-created rival, the General Union of Moroccan Workers, has also contributed to the growing instability in Morocco.
(Backup, Page 6)

Jordan: Reaction in Jordan to King Husayn's announcement on 1 May of his engagement to a British girl has ranged from dismay to anger, with a number of Jordanians predicting that this "ill-advised" step will lead to the King's "finish." Husayn's authority is such that he probably can proceed with his marriage plans in the face of a sullen but not openly rebellious people. The American ambassador nevertheless believes the danger to the King's position is real and that as the depth of adverse feelings become more apparent to him he may possibly consider abdication.
(Backup, Page 7)

Britain: The American Embassy in London sees in two separate trade union votes last week a strong trend of support for Labor party leader Hugh Gaitskell's pro-NATO policy, and against the position of last year's Labor party conference calling for British unilateral nuclear disarmament. The votes of these two unions should be more than enough to bring the annual party conference this fall back into line with the party's leadership on defense issues and should help repair the party's popular standing. Some trade union elements who support Gaitskell's pro-NATO policy, however, continue to oppose US air and naval nuclear bases in Britain.
(Backup, Page 9)

Venezuela: The economic austerity program presented to Congress on 5 May is a comprehensive effort by President Betancourt to restore business confidence and halt the deterioration in Venezuela's financial situation. The government, which has been under strong pressure from both rightist and Communist-leftist elements, had thus far generally resorted to financial expedients instead of politically unpopular remedial measures. The new program calls for a 10-percent reduction

9 May 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
