[PAGE 01]
1 October 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. BOURGES-MAUNOURY'S FALL SHARPENS
ECONOMIC AND ALGERIAN ISSUES
(page 3).

3. FRICTION AMONG THAI ARMY COUP GROUP
LEADERS SEEN

5. INDONESIAN CHIEF OF STAFF MOVES TO
PLACATE REGIONAL LEADERS
(page 8).

1 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. BOURGES-MAUNOURY'S FALL SHARPENS
ECONOMIC AND ALGERIAN ISSUES

The defeat of the Bourges-Maunoury
government by a vote of 279 to 253
over the proposed basic statute for
Algeria precipitates a political crisis
in France at a time when the area of maneuverability for
a prospective successor has been reduced to a minimum.
The willingness of numerous conservative deputies to
vote against the premier despite his plea for unity in the
face of the pending UN discussion of Algeria emphasizes
the weight of economic considerations in this vote.

Rightists' apprehensions that the gov-
ernment's proposal would lead to the secession of Algeria
had intensified in the past week despite the premier's ef-
forts to meet objections. Pressure from the strong agri-
cultural interests which are firmly opposed to Bourges-
Maunoury's price controls swayed enough Independent and
Peasant deputies who might otherwise have abstained.

By disavowing the Algerian policy
strongly backed by the Socialists, the Independents and
Peasants have widened the breach dividing the moderate
forces in the Assembly. Without Communist support, no
government is likely to be formed over the objections of
the Independent and Peasant bloc, and President Coty's
nomination of a candidate will be governed by this circum-
stance. Continuing pressure from labor and farmers for
relief from Finance Minister Gaillard's anti-inflation drive
may hasten a compromise, and a new government may be
able to obtain support for the Algerian statute provided it
eases unpopular anti-inflation measures.

President Coty has formally refused to
accept Bourges-Maunoury's resignation and will probably

1 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]
wait until he can name a premier-designate. He had re-
portedly begun consultations on a possible new government
before the Algerian debate but announcement of his decision
will be delayed by the formalities incident to the opening of
the new session of the Assembly on 1 October.

Ex-premier and Socialist leader Guy
Mollet has been regarded as a possible replacement for
Bourges-Maunoury since the time the latter took office
less than four months ago. Another prospective candidate
is ex-Gaullist and former governor of Algeria Jacques
Soustelle who played a major role in rallying rightist op-
position to the Algerian statute. Ex-premier René Pleven
and Education Minister René Billères, both representa-
tives of center parties which might become the nucleus
of a compromise coalition, have also been mentioned.

1 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. FRICTION AMONG THAI ARMY COUP GROUP
LEADERS SEEN

The American attaché in Bangkok, in
assessing the recent Thai army coup,
foresees that friction may develop among
the top levels of the new ruling clique.
He indicates that in any new struggle for
power, General Prapat, Bangkok garrison commander and
newly appointed minister of interior, is in a good position
to emerge as a strong contender in his own right. The at-
taché notes that several of Prapat's friends and relatives
also hold key posts.

Comment
Although Marshal Sarit is presently in
firm control of the Thai government,
stability in Thailand over the long run will probably depend
on his ability to keep his ambitious subordinates in line.

Prapat, who has long been associated
with Sarit, is considered one of the most able and ambitious
officers in the Thai army. His rise, under Sarit's protec-
tion, has been rapid, and prior to the coup he was reputed
to be the man who actually ran the army.

1 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
5. INDONESIAN CHIEF OF STAFF MOVES TO
PLACATE REGIONAL LEADERS

Two recent events suggest that Indo-
nesian army chief Nasution may now
be attempting to placate dissident
provincial leaders in hope of modify-
ing their demands that he resign. On
28 September, Lt. Col. Gintings, the
pro-Djakarta commander in northern
Sumatra, arrested Lt. Col. Macmour,
a pro-Communist regimental commander,
and two subordinates for their activities against anti-Djakarta
elements in the area. Macmour's supporters, both in his com-
mand and in the Communist-led civilian defense corps he has
armed, have the capability of reacting forcefully.

On the same day,
Nasution installed Maj. Somba, a close
collaborator of Lt.
Col. Sumual in East Indonesia, as commandant of a new mili-
tary command there.

Nasution's actions would appear to be a
blow to Sukarno. Until now, Nasution's behavior has been that
of a loyal supporter of the President.

1 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 09]
