[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

1 August 1959

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
South Korea: President Rhee's personal direction of Korean policies and governmental operations may be weakening.

Aug 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 04]
Governmental decisions are reportedly being made by certain members of the Liberal party and the presidential secretariat, most of whom have been identified with the faction of the Liberal party that has advocated extreme measures to retain power.

Somalia-Italy: Somalia, the Italian-administered UN trust territory scheduled for independence next year, has recently asked Italy for $5,600,000 worth of arms to be used for internal security. Rome has not yet reached a decision, but Italian officials have speculated they might provide funds to permit Mogadiscio to buy some equipment. Such action could lead to an aggravation of existing tensions between Ethiopia and Somalia. Each state fears territorial expansion on the part of the other; arms assistance to Somalia would probably prompt Ethiopia to seek more arms aid.

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Syngman Rhee's Control Over Government Seen Weakening

President Rhee's personal direction of Korean policies and governmental operations may be weakening. Since the latter part of May, Rhee has shown increasing inability to focus his attention on government problems and to grasp even the most elementary of new ideas.

Ambassador Dowling, in a personal meeting with Rhee on 13 July, noted that the President appeared to have difficulty focusing his attention on the problem under discussion.

There is some indication that leadership has been assumed by a triumvirate comprising Minister of Home Affairs Choe In-kyu, Minister of Justice Hong Chin-ki, and Minister of Finance Song In-song, and by the "hard" faction of Rhee's Liberal party. The presidential secretariat also appears to exercise considerable influence over governmental decisions by controlling what and whom the President sees. The most influential member of the secretariat--Pak Chan-il--is reported to be more anti-Japanese than Rhee.

If knowledge of President Rhee's apparently failing mental powers becomes widely known, confidence in the government may decline, and South Korea could face a protracted period of instability prior to the presidential election next year. Moreover, those persons reported to be exercising leadership have demonstrated in the past their willingness to use drastic measures to ensure their retention of power. The lack of any constitutional provision for the removal of an incapacitated president would provide them with justification for blocking the succession to the presidency of opposition Vice President Chang Myon.

1 Aug 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Somali Arms Quest May Heighten Tensions with Ethiopia

Somalia's recent request to Italy for $5,600,000 worth of arms and equipment may aggravate tensions between Somalia and neighboring Ethiopia. These were intensified earlier this month when the Somali prime minister publicly accused Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie of seeking during his current trip abroad international support for a policy aimed against Somalia's independence and toward the eventual absorption of Somalia by Ethiopia. This is violently opposed by Somali nationalists, who hope instead to bring about the union in one state of the approximately 2,500,000 ethnic Somalis who are now divided among five separate political jurisdictions, including Ethiopia.

While the materiel sought by the Somalis is allegedly for internal security purposes only, the list provided the Italians includes such items as light tanks or scout cars, mortars, and bazookas intended for Somali border guards along the disputed and already highly volatile frontier with Ethiopia. Even if these items were omitted, however, Addis Ababa could be expected to react strongly against any significant strengthening of Somalia's present 3,500-man security force. New efforts by Ethiopia to bolster its own military establishment would probably follow and could lead ultimately to the acceptance of arms from the Soviet bloc, with which Addis Ababa has recently expanded its ties.

Rome has not yet reached a decision on the Somali request. However, an Italian Foreign Ministry official, who indicated on 29 July that Italy would have difficulty fulfilling it, also hinted that Rome might provide the Somalis with limited funds with which to purchase at least some of the equipment they desire from other Western suppliers. Failure to provide some satisfaction to Somali officials on the arms issue--about which they feel strongly--might prompt Mogadiscio to look to non-Western sources.

1 Aug 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 5

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
