[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

13 May 1956

Copy No. 103

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. TITO STATES VIEWS TO FRENCH LEADERS
(page 3).

2. BRITAIN REPORTEDLY TO PROCEED WITH DRAFT
CONSTITUTION FOR CYPRUS
(page 4).

3. FIRST DESTROYER LAUNCHED AT SHANGHAI
(page 5).

4. USSR MEETS BURMESE REQUEST FOR BROAD
AGRICULTURAL MISSION
(page 6).

5. CZECH CHARGES AGAINST SLANSKY OF TITOISM
TERMED "ILLEGAL"
(page 7).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 8)

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. TITO STATES VIEWS TO FRENCH LEADERS

Yugoslav president Tito reiterated to French government leaders in Paris his view that a real change is now taking place in the USSR. In reporting this to the American embassy, the director of political and economic affairs in the French Foreign Ministry, Roland de Margerie, said he was considerably impressed by the strong anti-Soviet feeling of Tito's party, particularly among the military men, but also including Foreign Minister Popovic.

Tito said he believed the Soviet developments constitute a completely irreversible trend despite the fact that incidents may occur which might be interpreted as a backsliding toward Stalinism. He said the evolution would take a long time since the Soviet bureaucracy is still filled with Stalinists. Tito cautioned against any Western actions toward the Satellites that would either alarm the Soviet leaders or incite "foolish actions" in the Satellites, since in either case the USSR would again tighten the grip it now seems to be relaxing.

French premier Mollet responded to these views cautiously, saying that France was following the Soviet developments with interest, but not too much optimism.

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 04]
2. BRITAIN REPORTEDLY TO PROCEED WITH DRAFT
CONSTITUTION FOR CYPRUS

The British colonial secretary probably will announce soon that the government intends to proceed with the drafting of a constitution for Cyprus, according to information received by the American consulate at Nicosia.

Present plans call for the appointment of a commission which would invite expressions of views in Cyprus and elsewhere. London will make clear, however, that this step implies no abandonment of its sovereignty over Cyprus, nor an attempt to establish a constitution before order is restored.

Comment

This step is presumably to be taken at the suggestion of Governor Harding on Cyprus, who has felt that his efforts to restore order would be aided by an attempt to dispel the Cypriot suspicion of Britain left by the negotiations with Archbishop Makarios.

Despite a growing belief on the part of some British officials, including Foreign Secretary Lloyd, that Britain's present approach to the Cyprus problem has no chance of success, the prime minister and a majority of the cabinet apparently remain convinced that any alternatives must inevitably lead to the loss of Britain's vital strategic position on the island.

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. FIRST DESTROYER LAUNCHED AT SHANGHAI

A destroyer of the 1,500-ton, 300-foot, Soviet Riga class was launched at the Hutung shipyard in Shanghai on 28 April.

Construction of this destroyer, the largest and most modern type of naval vessel to be built by the Chinese, is believed to have started last summer. With extensive Soviet assistance, the Chinese, in their first effort, apparently have matched timetables of Soviet yards, which have required about nine months from the beginning of construction to launching of this type of ship. Fitting out and shakedown trials, probably requiring nine to 12 months, will be necessary before the vessel is ready for delivery to the fleet.

At least one other ship, believed also to be a Riga, is well along in construction at the Hutung yard. Shanghai naval shipbuilding, which includes a submarine program, is being carried out under the supervision of large numbers of Soviet advisers. Machinery and electronic equipment for the vessels are supplied by the USSR. (Concurred in by ORR)

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 06]
4. USSR MEETS BURMESE REQUEST FOR BROAD
AGRICULTURAL MISSION

The USSR has accepted Burma's suggestion for the composition of a 14-man group of agricultural and irrigation experts.

Comment

Burma's request for these experts is an outgrowth of the Soviet offer to provide Burma, in exchange for rice, with extensive economic and technical assistance, particularly in the field of agricultural development.

The inclusion of such personnel as state farm and machine-tractor station experts suggests that an effort will be made to persuade Burmese officials to adopt Soviet methods of agricultural organization. Many influential Burmese are already favorably inclined toward collective farming, for which provision is made in Burma's constitution. (Concurred in by ORR)

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6

[PAGE 07]
5. CZECH CHARGES AGAINST SLANSKY OF TITOISM
TERMED "ILLEGAL"

Czech premier Siroky, in a speech at a meeting of the Slovak Communist Party on 10-11 May, admitted the "illegality" of the anti-Yugoslav aspects of the trial in which Slansky was charged with Titoism. He said these charges were based on "documents faked by the Beria gang." Siroky, however, reiterated that "Slansky and his clique" had been guilty since, from 1949-1952, they had been instrumental in "violating socialist legality and introducing illegal methods into the work of the security organs."

Siroky also defended the sentences passed on former foreign minister Clementis, who was tried and executed with Slansky, and on Slovak nationalist Husak. He admitted there had been certain miscarriages of justice, but that these were now being investigated, and said that some individuals had already been rehabilitated.

Comment

Although the anti-Yugoslav aspects of the Slansky case were of a secondary nature, Siroky's admission indicates that the Czechs feel that further efforts to remove obstacles to closer relations with Yugoslavia are necessary. Siroky's reference to Beria as the prime cause of the Yugoslav-Cominform split resembles Khrushchev's initial comments in Belgrade in May 1955 which were subsequently termed "insufficient" by the Yugoslavs.

Siroky's statement suggests that the regime apparently intends to leave untouched the major charge made against Slansky in 1952, which implicated the latter as the leader in a Zionist conspiracy to overthrow the "people's democracy."

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 13 May)

Some indications of a partial demobilization of Israeli personnel and materiel have been noted. The Israeli defense forces have returned to their normal stations but major units are still at or near full strength.

Installation of POL storage tanks has been observed at various collective farm settlements throughout Israel. Tanks with an estimated capacity of 25,000 gallons have been noted in some cases.

The Arab press, in commenting on the announcement from Paris that France was shipping Mystere jet fighters to Israel, is taking the line that such shipments will be countered by the Arabs with additional arms from the Soviet bloc. The theme that the West has decided to arm Israel will be exploited fully by the Arabs and may encourage further adverse political developments in Jordan.

At Almaza airfield there are 11 Soviet IL-14 (CRATE) transport planes. The planes have not been flown since their arrival on 8 May.

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8

[PAGE 09]
There were also strong indications that some of the IL-14's were equipped with radar and may have engaged in radar mapping or attempted to obtain information on Greek radar facilities. As a result the Greek air force has indicated it will be more hesitant in the future in recommending that Soviet bloc countries be granted overflight privileges.

13 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9

[PAGE 10]
