Bloc Economic Overtures to Brazil

As in all bloc aid programs, details of the Rumanian credit must be worked out later. The agreement, however, is the largest credit arrangement ever offered by Bucharest and is the first in which Brazil has accepted substantial economic aid from the bloc. The only previous bloc aid to Brazil has been in the form of medium-term commercial credits, amounting to less than $4,000,000 to finance Czech and Polish exports.

Khrushchev, in a conversation with the head of the Brazilian trade delegation now in Moscow, stated that the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries would provide a "strong stimulus" for a significant expansion of trade. Since Quadros was inaugurated, Brazil has expanded its diplomatic ties with Eastern Europe to include all the satellites except East Germany. These countries now are responding favorably to Brazil's requests for credits, technical assistance, and expanded trade. The Brazilian mission touring Eastern Europe is likely to conclude further aid agreements, and Moscow probably will offer a sizable credit to Brazil if arrangements are made for the eventual exchange of diplomatic representatives.

The Chinese Communist trade delegation now in Brazil is assessing the opportunities for Sino-Brazilian trade. Peiping's contacts with Latin American countries, except Cuba, have been extremely limited. Leftist Brazilian Vice President Goulart reportedly has said he will visit China in June to "formalize" the trade contacts being made now. The Chinese probably envisage the conclusion of a trade agreement as a prelude to political recognition.

The initiation of a Soviet bloc aid program in Brazil will serve to promote bloc interests far better than normal trade contacts, which in Brazil have not proved particularly successful. Bloc-Brazilian trade rose moderately last year to nearly $150,000,000--some 6 percent of Brazil's foreign trade. Poland and Czechoslovakia accounted for more than half this amount, while the USSR's share increased to nearly 20 percent. Despite

10 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 8
