New Iranian Cabinet

Prime Minister Amini gave in to the Shah's insistence that General Naqdi be retained as minister of war and General Amir-Azizi as minister of the interior. Both Naqdi and Amir-Azizi are capable officers with whom Amini feels he can work. Amini had, however, earlier demanded that he be free to choose his cabinet without interference; his apparent willingness to compromise on this point may indicate the extent to which he is willing to go to remain prime minister, as well as a realization that the Shah is not likely to tolerate any interference with the army. In 1953, the attempt by Mossadeq, then prime minister, to take over control of the army was a turning point in his relations with the Shah and one of the major factors which led to his downfall.

The new minister of justice, Nur ed-Din Alamuti, was once a member of the Executive Committee of the Communist Tudeh party, but he claims he broke with that party in 1946. Minister of Industry Gholam Ali Farivar, although apparently not a Tudeh member, has supported and been supported by the Tudeh in the past. Minister of Agriculture Hassan Arsenjani has been described by various sources as a leftist, but there is no evidence that he was ever a Tudeh member, and he has in the past publicly opposed the Tudeh. Arsenjani has, however, frequently been associated with groups opposed to the monarchy. The over-all composition of the cabinet suggests an attempt by Amini to establish a balance between right and left and thus prevent the pressure on him from either side from becoming too strong.

The Iranian constitution requires that elections for a new parliament must begin within a month after dissolution of the previous parliament. New elections would give Amini an opportunity to establish a parliamentary base of power. He had earlier been reported reluctant, however, to hold new elections until he had an opportunity to make some progress in other areas. The Shah, in his decree, said that a new electoral law must be drafted before new elections are held, and it is probable

10 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
