I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bulgarian Party Warns Against Opposing "Leap"

An editorial in the June issue of the Bulgarian central committee publication, Novo Vreme, shows that there is still extensive opposition to the country's seven-month-old "leap forward," even in the highest echelons of the party. Citing as an example Boris Taskov, who was removed as minister of trade in March and as a politburo and central committee member in April, the editorial states "there are individual cases in our party" where "tested cadres and fearless revolutionaries... are afraid of difficulties and hold back." This suggests that at least some of the party cadres may be breaking under the strain imposed by the "leap" on the party and masses alike.

The most significant point of the editorial, however, was that some party members have "incorrect" attitudes toward "collectivism," and that the minority must accept decisions. Attempts to "bypass the central committee and politburo" were noted, as well as "attempts to undermine party unity" and "whispers against the party line and leadership." These are extremely serious charges, and, in the past, have been used to justify action against important party figures in bloc countries.

While the editorial clearly implies that serious charges will be leveled against opponents of the "leap" unless their attitude changes, it may also be laying the groundwork for a shake-up of the party which could begin with changes in the government at the National Assembly session scheduled for 3 July. Such a shake-up would probably include several officials at the medium and lower levels of party and state administration and might extend into the politburo. It would be designed to repress further signs of opposition to the "leap" as well as encourage greater efforts toward fulfilling the program. Party First Secretary Todor Zhivkov, desirous of consolidating his leadership, may also take the opportunity to eliminate reported supporters of ex-party boss Vulko Chervenkov, such as politburo member Georgi Tsankov, whose imminent demotion has long been rumored.

2 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
