[PAGE 01]
8 October 1953
Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 23
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 20/12/79 REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Possibility of partial French withdrawal from Cambodia seen (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA

3. Pakistani prime minister solves major block to constitution (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Formation of Bonn cabinet delays consideration of Saar question (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

9. Britain plans to arrest Guiana Communist leaders and revise constitution (page 8).

- 2 -

8 Oct 53
[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Possibility of partial French withdrawal from Cambodia seen:

Ambassador Heath in Saigon believes there is a possibility that the French command might remove all French residents from Cambodia and accept a "condition of anarchy," maintaining troops in the eastern part, by force if necessary, to protect the line of communication to Laos. This move, which was under consideration by DeLattre three years ago, might result from the continuing refusal of the Cambodian king to accept French control of Cambodian units for possible use outside the kingdom.

- 3 -

8 Oct 53
[PAGE 04]
Comment: A complete withdrawal of French forces from Cambodia would strengthen the already great popularity of the king, and probably would provide a considerable degree of insurance against anarchy. A partial withdrawal, such as envisioned above, would only aggravate French-Cambodian tensions.

Continuing pressure on Cambodia to accept French military control has served only to increase Cambodian intransigence.

SOUTH ASIA

3. Pakistani prime minister solves major block to constitution:

Pakistani prime minister Mohammed Ali has broken the deadlock in efforts to draft a constitution by obtaining the unanimous agreement of the cabinet and provincial leaders to a formula for provincial representation in a bicameral legislature, according to Ambassador Hildreth in Karachi. Hildreth states that Ali has accomplished what his predecessors failed to do in six years and that even Moslem League dissidents have praised the agreement.

Comment: This compromise on one of the knottiest problems blocking a constitution will probably result in the adoption of an interim document which would sidestep other controversies such as the dispute over a secular or theocratic state and the question of a national language.

This decision apparently ensures the continuation of the present government and the unity of the country.

East Pakistan, with 60 percent of the population, will dominate the lower house of the legislature on the basis of popular representation; West Pakistan will control the senate on the basis of state representation.

- 4 -

8 Oct 53
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Formation of Bonn cabinet delays consideration of Saar question:

Ambassador Conant reports that West German chancellor Adenauer is having much greater difficulty in putting his

- 6 -

8 Oct 53
[PAGE 07]
new cabinet together than he expected and will not be in a position to discuss important issues before 12 October. The chancellor seems unwilling to discuss any aspect of the Saar problem even informally with American officials at this time.

Conant believes, however, that State Secretary Hallstein will stress to Adenauer the importance of early negotiations on the Saar, so that a settlement might be reached in time to allow the EDC treaty to be brought before the French parliament in November.

Comment: Vice Premier Paul Reynaud on 1 October reiterated Premier Laniel's opinion that only the Saar issue is holding up French EDC ratification. The French expect Adenauer to begin preliminary talks with High Commissioner Francois-Poncet as early as 15 October.

Unless EDC debates in the National Assembly start in November, they will probably be postponed until next year because of the French presidential election in December.

- 7 -

8 Oct 53
[PAGE 08]
LATIN AMERICA

9. Britain plans to arrest Guiana Communist leaders and revise constitution:

Following the arrival of British troops in British Guiana, Governor Savage on 9 October is to assume control of the government and arrest leaders of the Communist-dominated People's Progressive Party, including some cabinet ministers. This action will be taken under emergency authority granted him by London on 4 October.

The Churchill government will introduce special legislation formally suspending the Guiana constitution as soon as parliament reconvenes on 20 October in London. A royal commission of inquiry is to be appointed to recommend appropriate revision of the constitution.

Comment: There have been no reports of rioting in British Guiana, although the Communists are charged with fomenting anti-British demonstrations in recent weeks. Although the planned British moves could spark riots, the British forces can be expected to retain control.

- 8 -

8 Oct 53
