Reaction to De Gaulle's Algerian Proposal

The initial French domestic reaction to President De Gaulle's new program for Algeria has been generally favorable, with publicly expressed opposition limited to the extreme right and to Communists. Louis Terrenoire, president of the Union for the New Republic, hailed the program as a "noble charter of French good faith," and the senior Independent party statesman, Paul Reynaud, also praised it. De Gaulle's strongest support thus far has come from the center and non-Communist left, with the Catholic Popular Republican party expressing "unreserved" and the Socialists "a large measure" of approval.

Evidence of French Community support came from one of the African leaders whose position had been most in doubt--Modibo Keito, president of the Mali Federation--who welcomed the speech as an alternative to war in settling the Algerian dispute.

Although the press has reported bitterness among junior French army officers in Algiers over "shedding our blood and then abandoning Algeria," General Challe's public pledge of the army's loyalty to De Gaulle's authority and the immediate imposition of military censorship on any inflammatory public expression of opposition suggest that no army support for any extremist European settlers is likely. Other opinion in Algeria has been largely confined to disapproval by veterans' organizations and some European newspapers. However, a few Moslem officials, including one senator, have commented favorably.

Foreign press reaction is divided between France's European allies, all favorable, and the Arab nations, which generally are withholding comment pending reaction from the Algerian rebels.

(The American Embassy in Paris believes that by making a sharp break with the past and staking his personal reputation on the new plan, De Gaulle has cut the grounds for objection from under all but the most extreme elements and now stands a good chance of "winning his gamble." The embassy also commented, however, that his increasingly desperate domestic French opponents could enormously complicate his position.)

Paris has welcomed President Eisenhower's 17 September statement as a "serious blow" to the insurgent leaders.

18 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
