1. BOHLEN ANALYZES BASIC SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY OBJECTIVES

Ambassador Bohlen believes that the Soviet press campaign emphasizing that the Geneva conference has enhanced the outlook for world peace has aroused general relief and satisfaction among the Soviet people. As a result, he feels it would be more difficult now than in the past for the Soviet Union to return to a campaign of anti-Americanism and hostility to the outside world. Bohlen also points out that the series of high-level visits abroad planned for well into next year makes a swift reversal of the Soviet official attitude unlikely.

Bohlen believes that Soviet policy objectives, particularly in Europe, were set forth with unusual clarity at the Geneva conference. For the present the USSR is seeking to gain the acceptance of the status quo, particularly the division of Germany. Equally clear is the longer-range objective of dissolving NATO and achieving the withdrawal of American and British forces from the European continent.

Bohlen believes that the disarmament question may offer an area of agreement with the West, particularly in view of the common recognition of the need for safeguards against surprise attack.

He suggests four factors accounting for the USSR's adoption of this new attitude: the institution of committee rule in place of one-man rule, which he sees as the key factor in post-Stalin development; the final official acceptance by Soviet political leaders of the implications of modern nuclear warfare, which Stalin deliberately avoided, and which Marshal Zhukov probably had a hand in achieving; the apparent realization by the Soviet leadership that self-isolation was harmful to Soviet technical and industrial development; and the influence of Western strength and cohesion and particularly the adoption of the Paris accords. In connection with the last factor, Bohlen points out that while the USSR has not primarily yielded to pressure, it has recognized that its former policies were increasing the danger of war.
