New Prime Minister Appointed in Ceylon

Wijeyananda Dahanayake, 57-year-old Education Minister and acting party leader in the lower house of parliament was appointed Prime Minister on 26 September following the death of Solomon Bandaranaike from gunshot wounds a few hours earlier. Dahanayake in recent months has emerged as one of the moderate leaders of Bandaranaike's Sri Lanka Freedom party, and played an important part in ousting far-leftist Food Minister Philip Goona-wardene earlier this year. As leader in the house, Dahanayake was the logical successor to Bandaranaike.

It seems likely that Governor General Goonetilleke appointed the new prime minister on the understanding that Dahanayake would merely run a caretaker government pending new national elections. Bandaranaike had lost his coalition's absolute majority in parliament, retaining only a working majority of about eight independent and appointed members, and there had been two recent parliamentary efforts to overthrow him. Nevertheless, both leftist and moderate political parties in Ceylon might cooperate temporarily with Dahanayake if promised new elections in the near future.

Should Dahanayake attempt to assume Bandaranaike's mantle and retain control of parliament until the regularly scheduled elections in 1961, however, he would almost certainly encounter a storm of opposition. His effort would be opposed by numerous groups who had been unwilling to challenge Bandaranaike at the polls but who would be eager to unseat his leaderless party. Among these groups would be powerful Buddhist and conservative elements. Ceylon's leftist parties would also wish to capitalize on the situation and increase their holdings in parliament. The efforts of both conservative and leftist groups would be aided by the strong possibility that Bandaranaike's dwindling parliamentary party will disintegrate further following his death. Should Dahanayake be seriously challenged, Governor General Goonetilleke might ask Dudley Senanayake, leader of the moderate United National party, to try to create a new coalition.

Goonetilleke, apparently aware that maneuvering by power-seeking opposition parties might create popular disturbances, has alerted Ceylon's regular and reserve military forces, and police have been located strategically throughout Colombo. The public thus far has remained calm.

26 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
