Developments in Jordan

It is not at all certain how long key army elements will continue to support King Husayn. Army Commander in Chief Habis Majalli, a cousin of the late Prime Minister Hazza Majalli, intends to retire about the end of May ostensibly because of ill health.

His real reason, however, is said to be that he feels King Husayn has placed him and the Jordanian Army in a false position by publishing letters in which the King thanked the army for its "wholehearted support" of his forthcoming marriage. Majalli reportedly does not believe the marriage will be good for Jordan nor does "a large part" of the army.

Husayn wrote and published the letters in order to put the army in a position from which it could only with difficulty openly criticize the marriage, and to reduce the effectiveness of any effort which might be made by one or another faction within the army to exploit the situation. The King apparently had been prepared to lose a small amount of support as a result of his decision to marry Toni Gardiner, but he had not expected the unfavorable reaction by most of his people.

In Palestinian West Jordan, long a source of strong opposition to the King and his regime, Husayn has irreparably shattered the image he has attempted to create of being a champion of the Arabs and a stanch defender of Islam. Moreover, there is a widespread feeling that the only heir to his kingdom will be the UAR's Nasir. However, underground political parties thus far have apparently undertaken little organized opposition activity.

Shortly after the wedding, Husayn probably will make the cabinet changes he has had under consideration. Samir Rifai, a former prime minister who is widely regarded in Jordan as being under American influence, reportedly claims to have been assured by the King, during a recent audience, that he "would be pleased" with the King's plans. The unpopular but capable Rifai apparently is slated for some cabinet position and may again become prime minister.

24 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
