[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

6 January 1958

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

This document contains classified information affecting
the national security of the United States within the
meaning of the espionage laws, US Code Title 18, Sections
793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits its transmission
or the revelation of its contents in any manner to an un-
authorized person, as well as its use in any manner
prejudicial to the safety or interest of the United States
or for the benefit of any foreign government to the detri-
ment of the United States.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. MACMILLAN'S CALL FOR A NON-AGGRESSION PACT

4. POSSIBLE IRAQI CABINET AND ARMY SHAKE-UP
[PAGE 04]
1. MACMILLAN'S CALL FOR A NON-AGGRESSION PACT

Prime Minister Macmillan's radio speech
of 4 January, advocating a non-aggression
pact with the Soviet Union and an eventual
summit meeting, reflects the sensitivity
of the Conservative government to public demands for efforts--
beyond the moves outlined in the 19 December NATO communiqué--
to achieve a reconciliation of major disputes with Moscow. Mac-
millan seems to anticipate that by such an initiative he can in-
crease public support for a defense program. Macmillan re-
stricted and hedged his proposals to reduce any alarm of fellow
NATO members over not being consulted. The British govern-
ment presumably intends to incorporate the ideas in Macmillan's
formal response to Bulganin's note of 10 December now being
prepared. The reply is to be discussed at the North Atlantic
Council meeting on 8 January.

The Soviet news agency TASS on 4 January
reported Macmillan's proposal, criticizing his "rude anti-Soviet
attacks" and his defense of British foreign policy. The Soviet
leaders probably will assert that only the United States now stands
in the way of an East-West accommodation. Moscow is also likely
to contend that an East-West heads of government conference would
be the best forum for discussing Macmillan's ideas and that favor-
able reaction in Europe and Asia has improved the prospects for
holding such a conference.

Free world reaction to the Macmillan proposal
was nearly unanimously favorable. French Foreign Ministry
sources were quoted as hailing Macmillan's "bold initiative"; in
Rome, authoritative sources welcomed the proposals for a non-
aggression pact but emphasized the need for adequate guarantees.
Bonn's favorable comment was more restrained, reflecting the
government's fear of any new steps toward an over-all settlement
not hinged on German reunification--a topic which Macmillan's
speech ignored. Enthusiastic approval came from the press in
Cairo, Tokyo, and New Delhi.
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
4. POSSIBLE IRAQI CABINET AND ARMY SHAKE-UP

Authoritative Iraqi sources expect the
month-old Mirjan cabinet to fall

The changes, if they occur, probably
would be the product of disagreements
within the cabinet between hold-overs from
the previous Ali Jawdat cabinet and new members brought in
by Mirjan. Iraqi strong-man Nuri Said is planning to absent
himself from the country during the shake-up, in order not to
give the impression that he is behind it.
