Talks Between Khrushchev and Ulbricht in East Berlin

During Khrushchev's visit to East Berlin on 19-20 May,
East German party chief Ulbricht is said to have urged him
repeatedly to take prompt action on a separate peace treaty
with East Germany.
the East German lead-
er argued that a summit conference in six to eight months
was unlikely and there was therefore no point in maintaining
the status quo in the interim. Ulbricht reasoned that West-
ern agreement to a new summit would probably be conditioned
on positive assurances which would preclude a repetition of
the events in Paris. After assuring Ulbricht that no conces-
sions were made during his private talks with De Gaulle and
Macmillan, Khrushchev reportedly agreed with the East
German party chief's negative evaluation of the possibilities
for another summit. He refused, however, to commit the
USSR to a specific timetable on a separate peace treaty, and
agreed only to Ulbricht's suggestion that the Berlin and Ger-
man treaty questions be raised through diplomatic channels.

At a meeting of the SED and National Front leadership,
Khrushchev announced this agreement but remained "passive"
in the face of urgings to press ahead with an early "signing of
a separate treaty. At a farewell party Khrushchev reaffirmed
to Ulbricht that he would "not retreat from their agreed posi-
tion."

East German officials are reported to feel on the basis of
these talks that neither the German nor Berlin problem is like-
ly to be resolved at the summit level, and that Moscow now
will use normal diplomatic exchanges to propose separate
treaties with both German states. If the West rejects the So-
viet offer, the way would be open for a separate treaty with
East Germany. It is probable, however, that Khrushchev was
only attempting to placate the East German leaders and off-
set their visible disappointment over his public commitment
to maintain the status quo until another summit meeting could
be held in six to eight months.
