Indian Authorities Weigh Sino-Indian Border Problems

Concern among top Indian leaders over the Sino-Indian
border situation has intensified recently in the wake of reports
from military posts of "intensive" Chinese Communist con-
struction activity in disputed border areas and the arrival
of new contingents of Communist troops. Indian officials feel
that Peiping's effort to extend roads and build military sup-
port facilities is aimed primarily at consolidating its posi-
tion in the disputed territory it now holds. Overflights of the
Ladakh border area during late May and early June by unidenti-
fied aircraft--presumed by the Indians to be Chinese--have
heightened official anxiety. A new influx of Tibetan refugees
has further complicated New Delhi's problem.

In recent cabinet discussions Defense Minister Krishna
Menon apparently has strongly advocated more aggressive
patrolling tactics along the frontier, arguing that inaction
would only lend permanency to Chinese occupation of Indian-
claimed territory and further weaken New Delhi's position.
"Forward patrolling," with the "clear anticipation" of clashes
with Chinese patrols, would demonstrate India's refusal to
accept the status quo. Chou En-lai has said the Chinese would
refrain from forward patrolling in order to avoid the intense
animosity which follows military incidents. Communist forces,
however, would probably attempt to turn back or capture any
Indian patrols found in Chinese-claimed territory, and this
could lead to a clash.

Menon probably made his proposal in an effort to bolster
his personal political position by assuming the role of defender
of the nation. He may calculate that an aggressive line will
curry favor among Indian military leaders, despite indications
that some officers feel their capabilities are overextended al-
ready. Menon's proposal reportedly has been shelved by Nehru
pending further developments. A team of Indian officials ar-
rived in Peiping on 13 June to begin detailed study of documents
relating to the border dispute. They brought 500 documents with
them.

Despite continuing domestic pressure for a more active pol-
icy, Nehru probably will continue to resist any tactics which
he feels would give Peiping a propaganda advantage or risk
serious hostilities.

14 June 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
