[PAGE 01]
28 December 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. EAST GERMAN REGIME BEGINS ARRESTING WRITERS
AND INTELLECTUALS

2. PEIPING REPORTEDLY WARNS MOSCOW AGAINST INTER-
VENTION IN POLAND

3. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

4. TITO WRITES LETTER TO SOVIET LEADERS ON HUNGARY

5. NURI SAID SAYS SITUATION CALMER IN IRAQ
(page 7).

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. EAST GERMAN REGIME BEGINS ARRESTING WRITERS
AND INTELLECTUALS

East German party propaganda chief
Kurt Hager, in an attempt to justify re-
cent arrests of intellectuals and writers,
has charged them with having made a hypo-
critical avowal of faith to the German Demo-
cratic Republic and socialism and at the
same time using the "method of destructive criticism." Hager
accused them of having contacts with the Hungarian intellec-
tuals and of using them and "certain Polish intellectuals" as
models.

Comment
The recent arrests of intellectuals, reflect-
ing the tough line now in effect, though in-
tended to serve as a warning to dissident elements among the
intelligentsia, may in fact have stimulated opposition to the
party's policies. Intellectuals and writers in East Berlin dur-
ing the past few days have been expressing their opposition to
these arrests,

The references in the party press to con-
tacts of East German intellectuals with Hungarian and Polish
intellectuals re-emphasize the regime's determination to elimi-
nate ideological heresies in East Germany. East German Com-
munist leaders have consistently blamed the anti-Soviet devel-
opments in Hungary and Poland on excesses and misguided ac-
tions by writers and intellectuals.

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. PEIPING REPORTEDLY WARNS MOSCOW AGAINST
INTERVENTION IN POLAND

Polish foreign minister Rapacki claims
to be receiving continual evidences of
Chinese Communist support for Poland.
Peiping had warned Moscow that inter-
vention in Poland might split the bloc, with the Chinese them-
selves leading such a split.

The foreign minister added that the Poles
have been in touch with the Chinese from the beginning of the
crisis. Most of Poland's information on the thinking of high
Soviet officials comes from the Chinese, according to Deputy
Foreign Minister Winiewicz.

Comment
During his tour of southern Asia Chou has
been embarrassed by the necessity of sup-
porting harsh Russian measures in Hungary and will probably
urge the Soviets during his visit to Moscow in January to avoid
similar developments in Poland which might threaten the suc-
cess of Peiping's "peaceful" efforts in Asia.

Chinese Communist press and radio com-
ments reflect strong sympathy for the Gomulka government
and for Polish aspirations to a greater measure of independ-
ence. The allegation that Peiping would carry its support of
Gomulka to the extent of leading a split, however, is contra-
dicted by China's repeated insistence that bloc unity is the
overriding consideration in relations between Communist coun-
tries.

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

Developments in Sumatra have taken a
new turn in the reported arrest of Col.
Simbolon by the new army territorial
commander, Lt. Col. Ginting, who was
appointed by President Sukarno after the
coup. In a radio announcement on 27
December, Ginting stated that he had
seized control of north Sumatra and that
normal relations with the central govern-
ment had been restored.

Ginting apparently commands little loyalty
among local troops and police. His as-
sumption of control raises the possibility of clashes between
his forces and the supporters of Simbolon. Ginting is be-
lieved to be supported by the local Communists,

Meanwhile, army and political sentiment
increasingly favors a presidential cabinet, led by former vice
president Hatta, to which members would be appointed irre-
spective of party affiliation and which would not be responsible
to parliament. Hatta himself has stated that the Ali govern-
ment must resign and that Sukarno should assume responsibility
for setting up a presidential cabinet. He stressed the need for
early action before groups in Sumatra "take too much power and
revenge" and in order to avert revolts in other areas.

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. TITO WRITES LETTER TO SOVIET LEADERS ON HUNGARY

President Tito told Ambassador Riddle-
berger on 23 December that he has writ-
ten a long letter to the Soviet leaders on
Hungary. He said he was hopeful of
Soviet concessions that would meet Hungarian popular de-
mands. He could not be sure of the results of the discussion
"now under way," but thought he would be able to influence
Soviet decisions. He again recommended that the West reduce
its pressure on the USSR regarding Hungary so that Moscow
could find some political compromise which he believes will
eventually have to come.

Comment
Tito first referred to these negotiations
on 5 December, when he implied to the
Western ambassadors that there was more going on in his
relations with the Kremlin than the West was aware of. Sub-
sequently, Belgrade has offered no hint regarding their con-
tent.

The basis for negotiation between Yugoslavia
and the USSR lies in their common objective of maintaining a
Communist state in Hungary. While Yugoslavia would be un-
likely to press for a complete withdrawal of Soviet troops now,
it would probably attempt to gain Soviet concurrence in the res-
toration of Nagy to a top position in the Hungarian regime and a
revival of politically active workers' councils. The USSR is
unlikely at this time to accept such proposals but it could make
a number of token gestures, such as a restoration of some Nagy
followers in an attempt to gain Yugoslav support for its Hun-
garian policies.

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. NURI SAID SAYS SITUATION CALMER IN IRAQ

Iraqi prime minister Nuri Said told an
American embassy official on 24 Decem-
ber that the local situation is becoming
calmer and more stabilized. Nuri
planned to order the opening of all schools and colleges in
Iraq on 29 December and to have parliament reassemble as
scheduled on 1 January.

Comment
The abatement of the rioting caused by
Syrian and Egyptian propaganda against
the Iraqi government may be temporary. The trial in Damas-
cus of allegedly pro-Iraqi conspirators is likely to bring new
demonstrations against Nuri as a pro-British betrayer of the
Arab cause.

28 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7
[PAGE 09]
