[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

27 March 1956
Copy No. 103

DOS
REVIEW
COMPLETED

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. USSR OFFERS AID AND FRIENDSHIP TO PAKISTAN
(page 3).

3. EFFECT OF NEW ANTI-STALIN LINE IN ITALY
(page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 7)

[PAGE 03]
1. USSR OFFERS AID AND FRIENDSHIP TO PAKISTAN

Comment on:

Soviet first deputy premier Anastas I. Mikoyan, visiting in Karachi, has suggested that Pakistan replace its membership in the Baghdad pact and SEATO with adherence to the "five principles," but indicated this was not a condition for Soviet aid or friendship.

Mikoyan has had at least one long meeting with the Pakistani minister of foreign affairs and the minister of commerce. Additional Soviet trade specialists are to arrive in Karachi next week. The Soviet press and radio have repeated Premier Bulganin's 6 February offer of Soviet assistance in developing atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and Foreign Minister Molotov has hinted that the USSR might be willing to construct a steel mill for Pakistan.

Mikoyan reportedly indicated that if invited, Bulganin and Khrushchev would be pleased to come to Pakistan.

Mikoyan has made a good impression on the Pakistanis. They are reported to have accepted his invitation to send a parliamentary delegation to the USSR. President Mirza has reiterated that Pakistan is not going to compromise its ties with the West. He commented, however, that "a change" has come over the Russians during the past two months--"They used to be very cold. Now they are very warm."

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
3. EFFECT OF NEW ANTI-STALIN LINE IN ITALY

Comment on:

Secretary General Palmiro Togliatti's presentation of the new anti-Stalin line to the Italian Communist Party (PCI) is reported to have caused widespread confusion in the party. Under sharp attack at a 22 March meeting of the PCI parliamentary group for having previously concealed information, he admitted having been aware of Stalin's "erroneous position" for many years, but said he did not tell his own party because premature revelation would have resulted in crises for all the Communist movements in the world.

Togliatti in the past has been successful in smoothing over intraparty differences, and it is unlikely that any serious split will develop at this time or that Togliatti's leadership will be seriously challenged.

Pietro Nenni, head of the pro-Communist Italian Socialist Party (PSI), has publicly taken the line that the attack on Stalin should not have been launched without proper historical discussion and that the really positive result of the Soviet Communist Party congress was the acceptance of the principle of "many roads to Socialism."

The American embassy in Rome believes that Nenni's adoption of a different line was probably concerted with Togliatti and that the PSI will succeed in absorbing most of the present discontent and confusion and prevent defections from the extreme left in Italy.

In the nationwide local elections to be held in late spring, the previously apparent trend toward the Nenni Socialists will probably be accelerated by these developments.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 26 March)

The Israelis are planning to lower the level of Lake Huleh, above Banat Yacov, by one half, according to

He says such drainage would involve dynamiting in the demilitarized zone. The British speculate that this action might be an attempt by the Israelis to undermine the UN secretary general's proposed trip. There has been great bitterness between Syria and Israel over the Israeli plan to drain the Huleh swamps, on which work began in the spring of 1951. Despite a UN Security Council resolution of 18 May 1951, the dispute has never been settled. Any work done in the demilitarized zone by Israel will provoke strong Syrian protests.

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
