Peiping Vindicates Its Interpretation of US Motives

Despite Peiping's major demonstrations of "firm support" for the Soviet Union following the summit conference, the Chinese are taking advantage of the conference breakdown to vindicate their views against accommodation with the West. A People's Daily editorial of 20 May states that the outcome of the conference was no surprise to those who view the international situation correctly and are not misled by "certain superficial phenomena."

The Chinese had maintained all along that there had been no real change in the American attitude toward the Communist world and that the principal task of the bloc was therefore to expose the false nature of American peace gestures. A few days before the summit meeting was to convene, Mao Tse-tung had implicitly criticized Khrushchev for having "illusions" about "US imperialism."

The 20 May editorial contains some indications that the Chinese may fear that Khrushchev will not maintain, in the long run, his present uncompromising attitude toward the West. In this connection, the editorial assesses the summit breakdown as "helpful" because it "laid bare" the "ferocious" features of "US imperialism" and calls, as did the Chinese in the pre-summit period, for further exposure of the United States.

By emphasizing that the Chinese were right and Khrushchev wrong, the editorial suggests the Chinese probably hope to use present developments to increase their influence throughout the Communist world as the most accurate interpreters of Marxist-Leninist theory.

That Moscow now is on the defensive can be seen in Soviet Ambassador Chervonenko's speech at a rally in Peiping on 20 May. "Like other people," he said, "the Soviet people have never deceived themselves with illusions and have always remembered the imperialist intrigues." On the contrary, People's Daily said on the same day, events of the past few days prove misguided those who had naively thought that imperialism could be dealt with.

21 May 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
