[PAGE 01]
9 August 1960
Copy No. C 74
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized persons, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
9 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Shah of Iran replies to recent Khrushchev
letter with lengthy defense of Iran's pro-
West policies.

India to purchase several Soviet heli-
copters, presumably for use in border
area.

III. THE WEST

Brazil--President Kubitschek's desire
for US support of his Latin American
development plan resulting in cautious
and neutral approach to US-Cuba problem.

LATE ITEMS

The Congo Situation.

Laotian paratroop battalion seizes
Vientiane in attempted coup.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran-USSR: The Shah, without materially changing his
basic position, has replied to Khrushchev's letter of 13 July
with a lengthy defense of Iran's pro-Western orientation
and its policy toward the Soviet Union. Asserting that no
other nation had gone so far to reassure the USSR, the Shah
reiterated his willingness to "pledge in writing that Iran will
not give permission for the establishment of missile bases
by any foreign government on Iranian soil." The Shah, how-
ever, reserved the right of the Iranian Army to equip itself
with rockets. The Shah described Khrushchev's suggestion
that the borders be demilitarized as militarily meaningless,
but he said he would accept the suggestion as an expression
of good intentions. He restated Tehran's willingness to co-
operate with the USSR on utilization of the rivers along the
border. (Page 1)

India-USSR: New Delhi has apparently decided to purchase
several MI-4 helicopters from the USSR. In tests in July this
model reportedly satisfied Indian altitude and payload require-
ments for the Himalayan border region.
(Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Brazil-Cuba-US: President Kubitschek's desire to pry
[PAGE 05]
American economic development plan, "Operation Pan Ameri-
ca," is resulting in a cautious and neutralist Brazilian approach
to the Cuban problem and a tolerance for Cuban and pro-Commu-
nist activities in Brazil. Kubitschek's policy is based on the
views of his key foreign policy adviser, Frederico Schmidt,
who believes the elimination of the Cuban problem would under-
cut Brazil's blackmailing power. (Page 3)

LATE ITEMS

*Republic Of The Congo: Increased stresses within the Congo-
lese Government suggest that Premier Lumumba may not be able
to retain power in the absence of outside aid. The endorsement
by Kasavubu's Abako party of a Congo confederation such as is
favored by Katanga Premier Tshombe, together with disaffection
in Equator Province and near anarchy in Kasai Province, may
prompt Lumumba to request that Ghana and Guinea unilaterally
dispatch troops to bolster his regime. (Page 4)

The UN Security Council has again called for the immediate
withdrawal of Belgian troops from the Congo and has, in effect,
given assurances to Tshombe and other dissident provincial lead-
ers that the UN will in no way interfere with their attempts to
organize a Congo confederation. Armed with this resolution,
Hammarskjold will probably return to the Congo and proceed with
his plans to bring the country under the control of the UN forces
preparatory to implementing UN plans for large scale technical
assistance.

*Laos: The second parachute battalion under Captain Kong Le
on 8 August seized control of Vientiane and a nearby army base
in a sudden and unexpected action. The takeover was seemingly
carried out unilaterally by Kong Le, although it may have had
the secret backing of certain high-ranking army officers disgruntled
over the meteoric rise to preeminence of Defense Minister Gen-
eral Phoumi. The objectives of the takeover are as yet unclear;
however, a leaflet signed by the "revolutionary committee" exhorts

9 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF Page ii
[PAGE 06]
"Lao patriots to... chase the government out that demands money
from the great powers," suggesting that the revolutionaries may
at the least seek a more neutralist alignment.

It is still too early to determine whether the revolutionaries can
make their takeover hold up. Phoumi, however, suffers a serious
disadvantage in that the troops at his disposal for counteraction
are widely dispersed throughout the country.

9 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF Page iii
[PAGE 07]
Iranian Reply to Soviet Note

Iran, in replying to Khrushchev's note of 13 July, has in
effect again rejected the Soviet demand that Tehran agree to
ban all foreign bases and troops on Iranian soil before "normal"
relations between the two countries can be restored. The Shah
repeated his offer, which was previously unacceptable to Mos-
cow, to "pledge in writing that Iran will not give permission
for the establishment of missile bases by any foreign govern-
ment on Iranian soil." He noted, however, that this offer would
not prohibit the Iranian Army from arming itself with any type
of weapon, including rockets.

The Shah stated that Iran's alignment with the West had been
forced by Moscow's policies. He pointed out that Iran could
not understand why Moscow is more unfriendly toward Iran,
which has not provided missile bases to foreign powers, than
it is toward other CENTO countries which have permitted such
bases or signed defense agreements with the United States.

He reiterated Tehran's willingness to cooperate with the
USSR on utilization of the rivers on their common borders. He
said that Khrushchev's suggestion that both countries withdraw
forces from their common borders was an expression of good
intentions, but pointed out that it would not guarantee Iran's se-
curity in view of the power and mobility of the Soviet armed
forces.
[PAGE 08]
India to Buy Several Helicopters From USSR

New Delhi has decided to purchase several MI-4 (Hound)
helicopters from the Soviet Union.
An MI-4 tested last month reported-
ly satisfied Indian altitude and payload requirements for the
Himalayan border region and demonstrated that maintenance
would not be a problem even in forward areas. An additional
attraction of the arrangement is Soviet willingness to accept
payment in rupees, thereby permitting India to conserve scarce
foreign exchange.

The planned purchase was apparently pushed hard by De-
fense Minister Khrishna Menon, whose recent efforts to bolster
his political position by speeding the build-up of border defenses
have included the purchase from the United States of two S-62
Sikorsky high-altitude helicopters and 29 C-119G (Packet) mili-
tary transports. Menon's efforts to obtain the MI-4 were reported-
ly opposed by Indian military leaders, who have long resisted
attempts to purchase non-Western equipment because of the at-
tendant spare-parts complications. The defense minister re-
portedly forced the issue, however, by threatening to sabotage
cabinet consideration of other materiel requests unless he re-
ceived cooperation on this purchase.
[PAGE 09]
Brazil Relates Cuban Problem to US Aid for Economic Development

The dominant group of Brazilian officials concerned with
foreign policy, including President Kubitschek and his chief
adviser, Augusto Frederico Schmidt, favors a cautious neutral
approach to the Cuban problem, in contrast to Brazil's past pol-
icy of marshaling support for the US at inter-American meetings.
This group, spearheaded by Schmidt, sees in this approach a way
to pry "massive support" from the US for Kubitschek's plan for
Latin American economic development, "Operation Pan America"
(OPA), which he regards as essential to hemisphere security.

A minority group in the Foreign Ministry, including Foreign
Minister Lafer and Political Chief Pio Correa, advocates a "hard
line" on Cuba, but this is rejected by Schmidt as tactically un-
sound in that "eliminating the Cuban problem" would reduce Brazil's
bargaining power for OPA. Kubitschek almost fired Pio Correa for
putting special restrictions on the issuance of visas to Cuban na-
tionals, and he rescinded the restrictions immediately.

Similarly, Schmidt argues that "a certain amount of Communism
in Brazil" is necessary for bargaining purposes.
the government will not
try to control activities of the outlawed Communist party or of
subversive aliens until after the October presidential elections.
Schmidt's foreign policy recommendations
would be implemented during the rest of the Kubitschek administra-
tion, which ends in January 1961.

The American Embassy in Rio de Janeiro believes that at the
forthcoming meeting of foreign ministers in Costa Rica, Brazil
will probably tend to withhold full cooperation on the Cuban issue
unless it receives quid pro quo on OPA or unless other Latin
American nations provide substantial unreserved support for US
viewpoints.
[PAGE 10]
The Congo Situation

Increased stresses within the Congolese Government
suggest that Premier Lumumba may not be able to retain
power in the absence of outside aid. The Abako party,
called for the reorganization of the country as
a confederation, as is favored by Moise Tshombe, premier
of secessionist Katanga Province. Lumumba might still
command a majority in the assembly despite opposition from
Abako deputies. However, the seeming about-face by
Kasavubu--who has worked closely with Lumumba in the
present crisis--may seriously damage the government's
prestige.

Similar sentiment against any strongly centralized
government is reportedly rising in Equator Province. In
Kasai Province, where fierce fighting between Baluba and
Lulua tribesmen has caused several hundred deaths, the
provincial capital at Luluaburg is reported in flames. The
provincial government--dominated by enemies of Lumumba--
reportedly plans to set up a semi-autonomous regime with its
capital at Bakwanga.

The accelerating political fragmentation of the Congo ap-
pears to reflect in part the lack of a police force controlled by
Lumumba. Despite his strenuous efforts, the Force Publique
has not yet been effectively reconstituted, and the UN dissociates
itself and its troops from "internal" matters such as the tribal
warfare in Kasai and the legal status of Katanga. Although in the
past Lumumba has threatened to request Soviet intervention, his
recent visits to Conakry and Accra suggest that he may prefer
to ask Guinea and Ghana for troops which would be outside the
scope of the UN command.

The Sino-Soviet bloc continues to indicate a readiness to
provide economic and technical aid to the Congo.
a Soviet offer to assist the Congo's industrial development,
[PAGE 11]
and Czechoslovakia reportedly has offered to provide school-
teachers. In addition, Moscow plans
on 9 August to deliver an IL-14 transport plane--presumably
for Lumumba's use--to Buta, north of the Lumumba stronghold
of Stanleyville. The "ferry flight" will be via Cairo and
Khartoum, and the plane will carry Congolese wing markings.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
