[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
12 January 1961
DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo: Tshombé is preparing to resist Gizenga elements who are entering Katanga, and is mobilizing Europeans for service in his forces. Twenty-five Belgian "paracommandos" reportedly arrived in Elisabethville by commercial airline on 9 January, and 42 more are expected on 16 January. Meanwhile, the Gizenga forces have been sighted heading southwest into Katanga from Manono, and their advance apparently has been welcomed by anti-Tshombé Baluba tribesmen.
In Leopoldville, Mobutu's position has been further shaken by a police mutiny over pay. The Congolese Army meanwhile continues restive concerning the recent dissident

[PAGE 03]
successes, and irritated over Mobutu's alleged favoritism toward certain Congolese Army units.

Cyprus: The Cyprus Government is showing some concern over increasing activities of the Pancyprian Fighters Association, an extremist, right-wing opposition group of former members of EOKA--the Greek Cypriot underground organization against the British. Leaders of the group are calling for repudiation of the Cyprus settlement, demanding union with Greece, and denouncing President Makarios as a "traitor." The government expects some trouble during a patriotic celebration on 15 January.

*Laos: Premier Khrushchev's letter to Prince Sihanouk endorsing his 1 January proposal to convene a 14-nation conference on the Laotian situation was probably intended to capitalize on growing Asian concern over the future course of events in Laos as well as to encourage what the USSR claims are increasing signs of disagreement among the Western allies concerning a policy toward Laos. Recent bloc propaganda has highlighted Pathet Lao claims to widespread victories in Laos. The Pathet Lao radio stresses the need for continuing the armed struggle. A North Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokesman on 11 January denounced as a "fresh provocation" the delivery to the Phoumi forces of US "fighter" planes and helicopters.

III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future.

[PAGE 04]
B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the bloc in the immediate future.

C. With continuing substantial bloc logistic support, particularly airlift, the Communist forces in Laos will consolidate their hold on the vital Xieng Khouang/Plaine des Jarres area and will maintain pressure on Phoumi's forces elsewhere in Laos. There are as yet no indications of bloc military reaction to the arrival of armed T-6 aircraft in Vientiane, but their successful employment would probably lead to increased bloc military commitments in Laos, possibly including similar aircraft.

D. While there are no reliable indications that the Castro regime intends any hostile military action against Guantanamo Naval Base, the possibility of such action, given Castro's rashness and instability, cannot be completely discounted. There is evidence of a substantial increase in Cuba's military capabilities, and the current campaign to convince the populace that the US intends armed action against Cuba has resulted in a high state of military alert throughout Cuba.

[PAGE 05]
The Situation in the Congo

Tshombé is preparing to resist Gizenga elements that have entered Katanga and is mobilizing some Europeans for service in his forces.
Twenty-five Belgian "paracommandos" reportedly arrived in Elisabethville by commercial aircraft on 9 January, and 42 more are expected on 16 January. Although the reasons for engaging the "paracommandos" are not known, there have been reports that Tshombé has had reservations concerning the loyalty of his Katanga militia and hoped to recruit an all-white bodyguard battalion in Europe.

In Leopoldville, Mobutu's position has been further shaken by a police mutiny over pay. The Congolese Army meanwhile continues restive concerning the recent dissident successes, and irritated over Mobutu's alleged favoritism toward certain units.

[PAGE 06]
Cyprus Government Concerned by Actions of
Extremist Group

Archbishop Makarios and other officials of the Cypriot Government are showing some concern over the extremist right-wing opposition Pancyprian Fighters Association, whose increasing activities since mid-December they regard as more dangerous than those of the Cypriot Communists. The first meeting of the Fighters Association, held in July 1960, reportedly was attended by 93 former members of EOKA--the Greek Cypriot underground organization which fought against the British. The group made a rather futile effort to oppose the candidates of the conservative Patriotic Front and the Communist AKEL in parliamentary elections in early August.

Little was heard of the organization from then until mid-December, when it intended to use the annual 15 January celebration of a 1950 plebiscite on "enosis"--union of Cyprus with Greece--to circulate petitions urging enosis and to stage a parade protesting the London-Zurich Agreements, which provided for Cypriot independence. The government expects trouble at that time. Two hundred persons reportedly attended a Fighters Association meeting in Nicosia on 7 January at which speakers urged renewal of the demand for enosis and repudiation of the Cyprus settlement, and denounced Makarios as a "traitor."

The organization does not now appear to be a serious threat to the moderate government, but its emphasis on enosis could add serious strains to the tenuous and largely artificial ties tending to bind together the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities.

[PAGE 07]
Situation in Laos

Khrushchev's letter endorsing Prince Sihanouk's 1 January call for a 14-nation conference to deal with the Laotian situation was published in Phnom Penh on 11 January. Hanoi had endorsed Sihanouk's proposal on 5 January. This latest maneuver may be intended to capitalize on growing Asian concern over the course of events in Laos. The bloc probably also feels that by endorsing Sihanouk's general proposals to reconvene a new conference along the lines of the 1954 Geneva Conference it will maintain its posture of seeking a political settlement to the Laos crisis and offset any proposal for renewing the ICC on Western terms.

The Communists probably also feel that endorsement of the proposal will encourage what the bloc claims is increasing evidence of disagreement among the Western allies concerning a policy toward Laos. Recent Soviet propaganda has attempted to exploit this theme, and TASS claimed on 10 January that US efforts to "demonstrate Western unity and the effectiveness of SEATO in Laos have completely failed." Although bloc propagandists continue to call for reactivation of the ICC, a 7 January Soviet broadcast reiterated Moscow's opposition to any plan which would entail recognition of the Boun Oum government.

Terming the arrival of the T-6 aircraft in Laos a "fresh provocation," a North Vietnamese Foreign Ministry spokesman on 11 January stated that "US imperialists and their satellites should bear full responsibility for the grave consequences."

The relative lull in the fighting in Laos continues.

[PAGE 08]
