III. THE WEST

Party Struggle Over Adenauer's Successor Impending

Chancellor Adenauer's preference for Finance Minister Etzel as his successor has caused Vice Chancellor and Economics Minister Erhard to threaten to resign if he fails to obtain the chancellorship. Since Erhard is very popular in the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and can probably carry the party rank and file with him in a showdown, Adenauer will probably be forced to accept him. Erhard's election to the chancellorship after a bitter party fight would be a blow to Adenauer's prestige and could have an adverse effect on his future influence on the new government.

Erhard's popularity with the voters was an important factor in the CDU's victory in the 1957 national elections. At that time Adenauer was reported to favor Etzel as his eventual successor, but his attempt to create an important new cabinet post for Etzel was blocked by Erhard, who objected to any diminution of his economic powers. As finance minister, Etzel has enjoyed the support of the powerful Ruhr industrialists, who have been hostile to Erhard's free-economy policies. These industrialists also played an important role in Adenauer's attempt to force Erhard into the presidency in February, which would have opened the way for Etzel to become chancellor.

If Erhard heads a new government, his close associate and critic of Adenauer's foreign policy, Bundestag President Gerstenmaier, may be in line for the Foreign Ministry--a combination which would drastically reduce Adenauer's ability to influence foreign policy. In an effort to block Gerstenmaier, Adenauer will probably either insist on retaining Foreign Minister Brentano or propose Interior Minister Schroeder; both men are opponents of Erhard.

Bundestag leader Krone, Adenauer's close adviser, apparently is certain of the party chairmanship. Krone and other CDU officials will visit Adenauer at his Italian vacation resort at the end of April to begin talks on the composition of a new government.
