[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

6 March 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRANCE REPORTED PLANNING "FULL MOBILIZATION"
TO MEET ALGERIAN CRISIS

2. PEIPING STATEMENT ON THE SINO-AMERICAN NEGO-
TIATIONS AT GENEVA

3. IRAQI OFFICIAL DISSATISFIED WITH BAGHDAD PACT
MILITARY PLANNING

4. YI KI-PUNG NOMINATED FOR VICE PRESIDENT OF
SOUTH KOREA

6. THE GENERAL STRIKE IN FINLAND

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. FRANCE REPORTED PLANNING "FULL MOBILIZATION"
TO MEET ALGERIAN CRISIS

General Jean Valluy,
French representative to the NATO Stand-
ing Group, told the attache on 1 March
that 500,000 men are required to restore
order in Algeria. He added that he feels
the situation there is so explosive that there might not be time
to train the men for guerrilla warfare.

General Augustin Guillaume, who re-
cently resigned as chairman of the French Joint Chiefs of
Staff Committee, asserted to Ambassador Dillon on 1 March
that France has two alternatives in North Africa: to raise
more troops for Algeria or evacuate the area.

Comment
While some newspapers are reportedly
demanding "full mobilization," such a
move is impractical in terms of equipment available.

The French army maintains a reserve,
subject to immediate recall without parliamentary consent,
composed of all conscripts who have completed their mili-
tary service within the past three years. This reserve is
believed to total 420,000, and, although it has already been
levied on, it should be adequate to cover a call-up of as
many as 300,000.

It is unlikely that Mollet would initiate
a massive recall, however, until the assembly votes on his
request for extraordinary powers to deal with Algeria. The
assembly is scheduled to discuss the granting of such powers
on 8 and 9 March, and Mollet is expected to make the issue
a vote of confidence.
[PAGE 05]
2. PEIPING'S STATEMENT ON THE SINO-AMERICAN
NEGOTIATIONS AT GENEVA

The statement Peiping's Ministry of
Foreign Affairs made on 4 March on
the Sino-American negotiations at
Geneva is more belligerent in tone
than its statement of 18 January in declaring that Peiping
cannot acquiesce in "dragging out" the talks and using
them "as a tool to prevent China from exercising its sov-
ereign rights."

The 4 March statement contains a
threat to use military action in its reference to the off-
shore islands. At five points in the statement, Peiping
asserts its sovereign rights over or intention to "liberate"
Taiwan and the offshore islands. On 18 January, Peiping
merely referred to its rights in Taiwan or the Taiwan area.
For the past year, Communist China has refrained from
efforts to seize any more offshore islands and has generally
de-emphasized the offshore islands in comments on the Sino-
American talks.

The belligerent tone of the statement
seems designed primarily to force US agreement to a Dulles-
Chou meeting. In timing the statement to coincide with
Secretary Dulles' visit to Asia, Peiping undoubtedly hopes
Asian leaders, especially Nehru, will bring personal pres-
sure on him for direct talks with Chou En-lai. At the
time of the Khrushchev and Bulganin visit to India, Nehru ex-
pressed the hope that the current Sino-American ambassa-
dorial talks at Geneva would lead to meetings "at higher
levels".
[PAGE 06]
3. IRAQI OFFICIAL DISSATISFIED WITH BAGHDAD PACT
MILITARY PLANNING

General Daghestani--the Iraqi chair-
man of the Military Deputies Committee
of the Baghdad pact and the deputy chief
of the Iraqi army--is strongly critical
of the progress being made by the pact's
military planners and by the "lack of faith" of some members,
according to the American army attache in Baghdad.

Daghestani says the Iranians insist on
planning for the defense of their Elburz Mountain line, which
is beyond the present capabilities of the pact, and the British
refuse to disclose their capabilities in the area on security
grounds. He said he would ask both Iran and Britain at the
15 March meeting of the military committee if their member-
ship in the pact is sincere and, if so, he would insist on more
realistic planning. If the replies are not satisfactory, Daghe-
stani stated he will "turn in a hell of a report to his govern-
ment."

Comment
Iraq apparently feels rapid progress is
necessary to justify its break with the other
Arab states in joining the pact. Discouragement over what
Iraq believes to be lack of progress and failure to persuade
other Arab states to join the pact might lead Baghdad to recon-
sider the usefulness of continued membership.
[PAGE 07]
4. YI KI-PUNG NOMINATED FOR VICE PRESIDENT
OF SOUTH KOREA

The Liberal Party's nomination of
party chairman Yi Ki-pung for vice
president of South Korea climaxes
a long period of intense political
maneuvering and places Yi in position to succeed the
80-year-old Rhee in the presidency. Yi has proved gen-
erally co-operative with American officials and is be-
lieved to favor a normalization of relations with Japan.

Although Rhee has not publicly en-
dorsed Yi's candidacy, the nomination indicates that he
at least did not interpose any objections. The president's
continued prestige and the strength of the Liberal Party
organization, combined with the disunity of the opposition,
virtually assure the election of Rhee and Yi by an over-
whelming majority this spring, possibly in May.

Rhee's statement on 5 March that he
is not a candidate for re-election is probably only a politi-
cal gesture. In 1952 he also at first refused renomination,
but agreed to bow to "the will of the people."
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. THE GENERAL STRIKE IN FINLAND

The success of Social Democratic
Party leader Fagerholm in forming
a coalition government on 3 March
considerably brightens prospects for an early settlement
of the five-day-old general strike, which continues to
spread. Since the government is a coalition of the Social
Democrats and Agrarians, who represent the opposing
interests in the strike, Fagerholm would probably not have
accepted the responsibility of the premiership unless he
felt reasonably sure of achieving a settlement.

The Communists do not appear to be
playing any significant role in the strike, although there
have been some reports of clashes between police and
Communist demonstrators. The militancy demonstrated
by the Socialist-controlled trade union federation in its
demand for higher wages is likely to strengthen the Social-
ists' position among workers and upset any Communist
attempts to play a major role in the strike.
[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 5 March)

Syrian antiaircraft batteries on 5 March
fired at and damaged a light Israeli plane. Israel claims the
plane was over Israeli territory; Syria claims it was flying
over Syrian territory. The pilot was injured and the plane made
an emergency landing in Israel. Exchanges of fire occurred be-
tween Egyptian and Israeli forces near the Gaza strip. Israel
charges that Jordanian infiltrators attempted to derail the Jeru-
salem-Tel Aviv train.

The American army attache in Tel Aviv
reports an accelerated mobilization of Israeli personnel and
vehicles over the week end. He said that military vehicle traf-
fic was very heavy, but no directional trend was noted. He
adds that the Israeli defense force is in a high state of readi-
ness.

The American army attache in Amman,
Jordan, in commenting on the dismissal of General Glubb and
other British officers, stated that most Jordanian units are with-
out effective leadership, and that morale and capabilities of the
Arab Legion are certain to suffer. He said the fact that three out
of four top officers are police officials will weaken the top com-
mand.
