Demonstrations by Both Rightists and Moslems in Algeria
Likely During Referendum Period

European rightists opposed to President de Gaulle's Algerian policy reportedly plan demonstrations in Algeria beginning on 4 January. Although the exact nature of the disturbances has not been decided, they are to begin with the movement of crowds into the streets. Similar outbreaks by Europeans during De Gaulle's 9-13 December tour of Algeria touched off counterdemonstrations in the Moslem quarter which forced the government to call in army units from the field and resulted in the death of over 120 Moslems. Violence by Moslems against Europeans has continued nightly over the past week in Oran, and three military vehicles were burned in the Algiers casbah on 30 December. Moslem groups are reported ready to counter any further European demonstrations.

In his New Year's eve message to the French people, De Gaulle called for "vast approval" of his Algerian policy in the referendum scheduled for 6, 7, and 8 January in Algeria and 8 January in metropolitan France. Possibly reflecting growing government fear of a large number of abstentions, De Gaulle stressed the impetus a large favorable vote would give his policy and implied that if he did not get that "frank and massive" vote, he would withdraw from the scene.

Reaction to the campaign in France has been characterized by apparent widespread disinterest, probably reinforced by the holiday season. Trade unions and political parties, except for some extreme rightists, have expended limited effort to influence their memberships. However, two leading French Army generals, Jean Valluy, former commander of NATO forces in Central Europe, and Jean Touset du Vigier, president of St. Cyr military school, joined retired Marshal Alphonse Juin in openly opposing De Gaulle. Valluy said the French Army has passed from astonishment to bitterness and "is on the brink of despair, perhaps of revolt." Juin was recently removed from his last official position by a government order abolishing the right of marshals to sit on the Higher Armed Forces Council.

In Tunis, meanwhile, the Algerian rebel government has again called on Moslems in Algeria to boycott the referendum.

3 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
