[PAGE 01]
5 December 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Iraqi Army blames Communists for violence in recent riots (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on the postponement of West German treaty ratification (page 6).

8. Crippling protocol to EDC gaining support in French parliament (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Iraqi Army blames Communists for violence in recent riots:

The Iraqi Army blames the Communists for the violent character of the recent Baghdad disturbances, stating that the arrested mob leaders were known Communists, who carried bottles of gasoline and maps of the city with designated targets. The Baghdad military governor believes they attempted to subvert the army.

Comment: Reports immediately preceding the recent disturbances in Iraq had noted an increase in Communist activity. Their strength is estimated at 12,000 and their potential for violence remains high.

- 5 -

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on the postponement of West German treaty ratification:

On the eve of final Bundestag action on the Bonn and Paris treaties, with a substantial majority in support of the treaties assured, Chancellor Adenauer suddenly decided to postpone further parliamentary action until mid-January. He apparently feared that the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) would petition the SPD-dominated first panel of the Constitutional Court for a ruling on the treaties following the final balloting.

By deferring the Bundestag vote, the Chancellor has effectively blocked such action. He will presumably so frame his own petition to the court that it will be heard by the second panel, most of whom are Christian Democrats.

In the last week, Bonn politicians have become pessimistic regarding the court's forthcoming advisory opinion on the treaties which had been requested by Federal President Heuss. This was partly due to the activities of the vice president of the court who, favoring the Social Democratic Party, was successfully influencing judges to render a decision unfavorable to the government.

8. Crippling protocol to EDC gaining support in French parliament:

The French delegates to the EDC Interim Commission in Paris state that an increasing number of deputies in the National Assembly now incline toward modifying the EDC treaty along the lines proposed recently by the pro-government Paris daily Le Figaro. The proposal suggests the addition of a protocol to the treaty providing that the EDC's executive authority would defer all policy questions to the unanimous decision of the Council of Ministers representing the six member states for an unspecified transitional period. By this means France would remain free to apportion its military resources between Europe and overseas areas.

- 6 -

[PAGE 06]
Comment: This is the first firm indication that the National Assembly and the Pinay government may agree on a treaty modification that would drastically weaken the character of EDC and not merely postpone its implementation.

The suggested protocol would initially deprive the EDC of its supranational character and lead to serious delays, if not inaction, on steps needed to support the NATO build-up.

- 7 -
