Britain Apparently Moving Toward Decision on Common Market Membership

Since Prime Minister Macmillan's visit to Washington, his government has apparently been moving closer to a decision to join the Common Market. London probably now believes it could accede to the EEC treaty subject to several important reservations. The most formidable difficulties concern views on agricultural policy in Britain and in the EEC, the disposition of existing Commonwealth preferences, and the treatment to be accorded European imports of tropical products. London also faces diplomatic difficulties in disentangling itself from the European Free Trade Association (Outer Seven).

Tactically, London is waiting for evidence that Anglo-French antagonisms over relative power and influence on the European continent will not again block progress. The British hope that the second round of informal exploratory talks between British and French experts being held in London on 2 and 3 May will provide some clarification of the French attitude.

De Gaulle will no doubt decide the issue himself, and many British leaders have long felt he would not have Britain in the Common Market on any terms. However, Macmillan has recently professed greater optimism. Following his Washington visit, the prime minister is reported to have told Canadian Prime Minister Diefenbaker that he considers De Gaulle a confederalist with whom he (Macmillan) wants to work out a "confederal deal," since "Adenauer's successor would be more dominant in Europe than De Gaulle." Inasmuch as the six EEC countries are scheduled to meet on 19 May to consider steps toward a confederation, it is possible London may feel under some pressure to act before then.

Although London is aware that the US would support full British membership in the EEC, various quarters in Britain and on the Continent have interpreted this as meaning American support for a multilateral association between the

2 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
