[PAGE 01]
27 March 1958
Copy No. 137

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

i
[PAGE 05]
Japan: Japan will begin experimental firing of guided missiles in the fall of 1959, according to Defense Director Tsushima. A missile range is being established on Niijima Island, about 100 miles south of Tokyo on the east coast, and initial experiments apparently will involve defensive missiles of Swiss and American manufacture.

Communist broadcasts to Greece: A clandestine Communist radio, with its transmitter possibly located in Czechoslovakia, is broadcasting to Greece after more than two years of silence. Leaders of the exiled Greek Communist party may have decided that a renewed radio campaign at this time could assist the Communist-front United Democratic Left in the forthcoming Greek national elections.

III. THE WEST

Spain-Morocco: The Spanish and Moroccan foreign ministers are to meet shortly to negotiate further regarding termination of Spain's protectorate over Southern Morocco.

27 Mar 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Japan to Begin Missile Tests in 1959

The director of Japan's Defense Agency, Juichi Tsushima, informed a Diet committee on 26 March that Japan will begin experimental testing of guided missiles in the fall of 1959. This plan, although presently limited to defensive weapons, represents a major step in military policy for Japan and considerable political risk for the government because the Japanese people still do not favor rearmament and strongly oppose nuclear weapons.

Tsushima said that a missile range would be established on Niijima Island, about 100 miles south of Tokyo. Press reports indicate that difficulties may arise in connection with acquisition of land for the site. Presumably, initial tests would be limited to the surface-to-air Oerlikon purchased from Switzerland and the air-to-air Sidewinder to be made available by the United States.

The decision to proceed with the missile program was the result of strong pressure from defense officials and members of the ruling Liberal-Democratic party's defense subcommittee who believe Japan's defense establishment is obsolescent.

The Socialists will attempt to arouse a public uproar on this issue, but the government almost certainly will point out that neither weapon has a nuclear capability. The government probably will be unwilling to consider introducing nuclear weapons as long as antinuclear sentiment remains high in Japan.

27 Mar 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Clandestine Communist Radio Begins Broadcasts
To Greece

A clandestine short-wave transmitter, identifying itself as the "Voice of Truth," began brief daily broadcasts in Greek on 19 March. Officials in Athens believe the transmitter is being operated on behalf of the illegal Communist Party of Greece (KKE), perhaps from Czechoslovakia. The broadcasts have been antigovernment and anti-American, emphasizing the "plight" of Greek farmers, the role of the "colonialists" in the Cyprus problem, and the need for a coalition of Greek political parties to participate in the forthcoming national elections.

These are the first such broadcasts since "Radio Free Greece" discontinued operations from Bucharest in December 1955 after eight years of supporting Greek Communist activities. It was assumed at that time that the cessation of broadcasts was designed to strengthen claims that the USSR was not interfering in Greek internal affairs so that Greek Communists could successfully promote an electoral coalition of center and leftist parties for the elections in February 1956.

The KKE may now have decided that the Communist-front United Democratic Left (EDA), whether running alone or as part of an electoral coalition, could profit from a radio-propaganda barrage on its behalf during the election campaign. The "Voice of Truth" will probably concentrate its attacks on proposals to establish missile bases in Greece, the handling of the Cyprus issue, and the economic problems which still beset Greece. However, the overt re-entry of the KKE into Greek politics would furnish anti-Communists in Athens with further ammunition in their current campaign against collaboration between centrist parties and EDA in the forthcoming elections.

27 Mar 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Spanish and Moroccan Foreign Ministers to Meet
Regarding Southern Protectorate

Spanish Foreign Minister Castiella told Ambassador Lodge on 25 March that he and Moroccan Foreign Minister Balafrej would meet shortly at an undetermined place. Presumably this meeting will represent a new effort to remove the latest snag in negotiations for termination of Spain's protectorate over Southern Morocco.

Spain had antagonized Morocco on 19 March when the Spanish ambassador in Rabat demanded guarantees against "new Moroccan aggression." This statement by the ambassador apparently reflected divided counsels in Madrid as a result of pressure from Spanish army leaders, who are known to oppose cession of this area unless Spain obtains maximum safeguards against further hostilities mounted from Morocco. Castiella's remark to Lodge that a "decision" is "imminent" suggests that the Spanish Government is now about to clarify its own position regarding the turnover of the southern protectorate.

27 Mar 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Japan: Japan will begin experimental firing of guided missiles in the fall of 1959, according to Defense Director Tsushima. A missile range is being established on Niijima Island, about 100 miles south of Tokyo on the east coast, and initial experiments apparently will involve defensive missiles of Swiss and American manufacture.

i
