workshops said to be carried by the convoy are presumably to be used in paving Kabul streets as provided for in the Soviet-Afghan loan agreement of 5 October.

It would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to move such heavy equipment along the more direct but tortuous mountain route from Mazar-i-sharif to Kabul. Southern Afghanistan has long been open to Soviet diplomats to at least the same limited extent that the northern part of the country has been open to American representatives.

6. India may get British-financed steel mill:

London has offered B. M. Birla, Indian industrialist, a financial arrangement providing for a credit of 45,000,000 pounds sterling ($126,000,000) to construct a steel plant in India with a 650,000-ton capacity, according to the British trade commissioner in New Delhi. The repayment period is ten years and the interest rate "slightly more than that for gilt-edged securities." There has as yet been no discussion as to whether the plant would be operated as a government or private enterprise.

Comment: There has been considerable discussion in Indian government circles of a Soviet offer to build a steel mill in India with a 300,000-ton annual capacity. Conservative members of the Indian cabinet have been making strenuous efforts to obtain a steel mill from sources other than Russian. They are apparently pinning their hopes on Britain, as private investors in the United States were not interested.

Even though its terms appear less attractive than those of the Soviet offer, the British proposal will strengthen Finance Minister Deshmukh and Commerce Minister Krishnamachari in their attempts to prevent Indian acceptance of the Soviet offer. In view of the death of former food minister Kidwai, who sponsored the Soviet steel mill project, Deshmukh and Krishnamachari may be able to convince Nehru that acceptance of the Soviet offer would be unwise. It is unlikely that the Indian government will accept both the British and Soviet offers at this time.
