present strategy is probably designed to avoid friction with the Majlis, and these tactics should keep him in office for at least three months or until the oil committee presents its recommendations to the Majlis. Factors which might cause an earlier upset are his poor health and popular impatience over the oil issue.

Comment: Mossadeq's National Front has wide popular appeal but few Majlis representatives, and Mossadeq's Cabinet Ministers - mostly old-line politicians - are unlikely to support measures that threaten their own interests. It is likely that friction with the Majlis will develop.
9. Syrian-Israeli border situation continues serious:
According to US Ambassador Davis in Tel Aviv, the border situation between Israel and Syria is still "far from encouraging." Davis reports that Foreign Minister Sharett, who is acting-Prime Minister while Ben-Gurion is in the US, is in a difficult position in regard to the border issue because: (a) the Israeli public is disappointed over the foreign reaction to the border incidents, and (b) the Israeli Army, headed by Chief of Staff Yadin, lacks confidence in the Mixed Armistice Commission. Meanwhile, US Minister Cannon in Damascus reports that the tense atmosphere within Syria and the popular bitterness resulting from the frontier incidents are increasing the difficulties of the Syrian Government in any approach to a settlement of the dispute. Cannon is concerned that Israel may annex the demilitarized area, since colonization of this small but fertile region would help to release the pressure on Israel's immigrant staging centers.

Comment: Reports from the Palestine area indicated that fighting on a major scale ended, for the time being at least, as a result of the UN Security Council cease-fire order of 8 May. Skirmishes reported subsequently in the demilitarized zone north of Lake Tiberias indicate, however, the continued seriousness of the Syrian-Israeli border troubles, which might again result in heavier fighting. There is still some danger that the Israeli Army - hostile toward the Mixed Armistice Commission, the Syrians and the local Palestinian Arabs - will force the hand of the Israeli Government by seizing part or all of the demilitarized zones and presenting the UN with a "fait accompli" that would be difficult to change.
