Laos

The Soviet Union has previously called for reactivation of the International Control Commission for Laos, but in doing so has insisted that, while the ICC might meet and discuss ways of settling the crisis, it could not resume its activity in Laos until a conference had furnished the Commission with new directives. Peiping has not reported Souvanna Phouma’s proposals for a cease-fire under the aegis of the ICC. A 23 March People’s Daily commentary, Peiping’s first press comment on Laos in more than ten days, called upon all “peace-loving forces to firmly support the patriotic struggle of the Lao people” and proposed only that common efforts be made to convene a 14-nation conference.

The French Foreign Ministry spokesman said that regardless of Souvanna’s “weaknesses and erratic attributes,” he does not believe Souvanna to be a “lost cause.” Paris still considers him the most important political force in Laos apart from the King and appears willing to help him strengthen his “independent” position.

Additional details of the consolidation of Communist control over most of Phong Saly Province and the eastern portion of Luang Prabang Province have been obtained.

In addition to Pathet Lao troops the monk reported the presence of small units of North Vietnamese troops in the vicinity of Nam Bac and other villages farther north. The trail leading into southern Phong Saly Province from the North Vietnamese border is being improved by local civilian and military labor to facilitate communications with Dien Bien Phu.

There is still a separate identity in Phong Saly Province between Pathet Lao, Vietnamese, and Colonel Khamouane’s troops, whose control is restricted to Phong Saly town. Khamouane, a former Laotian Army officer who took his command over to Souvanna’s side last year, apparently hopes to stick to his middle course in expectation that Souvanna will return to power. His exposed position, however, demands tacit cooperation with the Pathet Lao.

General Staff Chief General Ouane, reporting on the military situation north of Luang Prabang, says enemy elements are trying

24 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
