forces would arrive, but if attempts were made to stop the UN troops, Hammarskjold would immediately ask for Security Council authorization to use force. Should the Council fail to authorize such military action, as seems likely, Hammarskjold believes he would have no recourse other than to recommend that the UN withdraw its entire Congo operation. Hammarskjold’s plan is based partly on his belief that authorities in Leopoldville are pursuing a policy designed to “strangle” the UN effort in the Congo. A Congolese Government statement issued on 23 March, however, said that Kasavubu was taking a three-day trip to the lower Congo area and that the trip was “in connection with the eventual return of UN forces into the region.”
(Backup, Page 3) (Map)

*Angola: Anti-American sentiment in Luanda continues high, following protest demonstrations around the consulate on 22 March. These demonstrations, encouraged by anti-American press editorials, appear to be part of a Portuguese attempt to blame the US—along with the Communists—for the recent uprisings. On 23 March, Lisbon signaled a tough line of resistance by ordering its UN delegation to walk out of the current session and not to participate in any General Assembly discussion of recent disorders in Angola. Although the impact of moderate elements in the Salazar regime on Lisbon’s sharply anti-American stance has been limited, a group led by Minister of Defense Moniz is reliably reported to have acted to reduce the vigor of the anti-American demonstrations in Portugal and to tone down the press and radio campaign against the US government. The Moniz group, which claims considerable military backing, believes some liberalization of Portuguese policy in Africa must be made and expressed the hope that the announced US policy in Africa would induce Salazar to make reforms.

Northern Angola is under virtual martial law, and Portuguese military forces are reported to be conducting large-scale operations against terrorist groups.

24 Mar 61 - DAILY BRIEF ii
