Sharp Differences in Bonn Over Brentano Aid Offer

In the absence of Adenauer a meeting of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) members on 21 February greeted Foreign Minister von Brentano's account of his financial talks in Washington coolly and with only perfunctory applause in contrast to the "thunderous applause" following the attack on him by Erhard and Etzel. Brentano reportedly left the meeting visibly shaken.

Erhard bitterly attacked Brentano's talks in Washington committing West Germany to a continuing annual aid program featuring substantial budgetary appropriations. He argued that while German capital would be devoted to aid to developing countries, foreign capital, including American, would flow into German investments, and that American financial difficulties would accordingly worsen.

Finance Minister Etzel said that an aid program on the scale envisioned by Brentano would mean a 16-percent tax increase, which he implied the Bundestag would never accept. Etzel added that no one should tell him that political considerations were overriding because in his opinion the prime political issue for Bonn was West Germany's economic stability.

Erhard may believe that he has sufficient backing in the party to challenge Adenauer's authority on this issue and thus strengthen his chances of becoming the next chancellor. The breach between Erhard and Adenauer has never been healed since their quarrel in the spring of 1959 when Adenauer successfully opposed Erhard's choice by the party leaders. Last month an attempt was made to patch the quarrel and ensure party solidarity by naming both Adenauer and Erhard as a "team" to lead the campaign for the national election which will probably take place in September.

The chancellor can probably bring the opponents within his party into line, and may do so in a manner that will once more make a point of Erhard's political ineptness. He will be aided by the reported willingness of the opposition Socialj

25 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
