De Gaulle - Bourguiba Meeting

Before setting a date for the meeting between De Gaulle and Bourguiba both sides took extensive soundings to assure that some tangible gains would result. Tunisian Secretary of State for Information Mohamed Masmoudi, who arranged the meeting, reportedly came away from personal sessions with De Gaulle convinced of his sincerity in desiring to negotiate a settlement. Masmoudi also probed French opinion in private talks with figures outside of the government. French civilian and military working groups in Paris have reportedly subsequently completed plans for cease-fire arrangements and for self-determination. De Gaulle is reported willing to bring imprisoned rebel vice premier Ben Bella to Paris at the time of the Bourguiba visit, and may halt the execution of Moslem terrorists.

In Tunis, the rebel Provisional Algerian Government (PAG) at first appeared distrustful of Bourguiba's intentions, and was irritated that he had announced acceptance of De Gaulle's invitation without consulting them. On 17 February, however, Masmoudi told a US official the PAG had come to full agreement that Bourguiba should meet with De Gaulle in the interests of bringing about direct negotiations.

An officer of the PAG who confirmed this position to the US Embassy in Tunis on 23 February declared that Masmoudi had promised that Bourguiba would not meet with De Gaulle until Paris had demonstrated willingness to make substantive progress toward an Algerian solution. The same day an editorial in El Moudjahid, the official organ of the rebel movement, praised Bourguiba for "making incessant efforts to re-establish peace."

The rebel leaders probably would not risk adverse reactions in Morocco and the UAR to such an endorsement without reasonable certainty that Bourguiba's visit will produce results. Bourguiba himself in a 23 February radio address, said that the fact De Gaulle invited him for exploratory talks indicates that "the obstacles which blocked direct peace negotiations in the past have been surmounted."

In Algeria, military operations by both sides have recently been intensified. Rebel losses are increasing, since the French

25 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
