[PAGE 01]
28 October 1953

Copy No. 84

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]SOUTHEAST ASIA
1. Possibility of postelection revolt causing concern in Philippines: (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. Saudi Arabia reportedly faces breakdown in internal security (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE
3. Security police surveillance strengthened in eastern Czechoslovakia (page 4[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. New East German travel checks may curtail refugee flow (page 4).
5. France reluctant to become involved in question of Trieste troop withdrawals (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA
6. Threat seen to prestige of US air missions in Latin America (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
[[PRED_REDACTION_2]]SOUTHEAST ASIA

1. Possibility of postelection revolt causing concern in Philippines:

The possibility of armed revolt in the event of fraudulent elections is causing serious concern to responsible Philippine officials.

Magsaysay has told his followers to avoid violence, but has allegedly asked trusted supporters to determine the number of armed men available for an emergency.

the administration may arrest top Nacionalista leaders on trumped-up charges of conspiracy.
the unfavorable public reaction to recent press reports of possible wholesale arrests would serve as a deterrent to the administration.

Comment: Nearly all competent observers have stressed the possibility of a violent reaction to an administration victory. There has been only one previous report, however, alleging actual Nacionalista plans for a revolt.

The possibility that the administration might arrest opposition leaders has long been rumored and such a move would be just as likely to set off a revolt as would a blatantly fraudulent victory.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Saudi Arabia reportedly faces breakdown in internal security:

Saudi Arabian internal security is deteriorating and that he expects a breakdown of all central authority with attacks against foreigners and an outbreak of tribal warfare to follow the death of King Ibn Saud, who is seriously ill. He characterizes the crown prince, to whom the king has recently delegated considerable authority, as weak[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 04]
[[PRED_REDACTION_3]]Comment: While this report may be too pessimistic, the government recently handled the strike of oil workers badly and the government does appear to be experiencing internal security problems.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Security police surveillance strengthened in eastern Czechoslovakia:

Comment: Early in August a rural uprising against local party and government officials in eastern Slovakia necessitated the dispatch of secret police and security troops to restore order. Although there is no known resistance organization in Slovakia, peasant disaffection in that area is apparently serious enough to require long-range countermeasures[[/PRED_REDACTION_3]].

WESTERN EUROPE

4. New East German travel checks may curtail refugee flow:

The recent institution by the East German police of checks on travelers entering Berlin on the S-Bahn, or elevated, may close an important avenue of escape for refugees and might seriously handicap any future relief programs for Soviet zone residents, according to American officials in Bonn. They also fear that the ten-minute police checks of S-Bahn passengers traveling from the Soviet zone may be extended also to travel between the east and west sectors of Berlin.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: The East German police have been examining luggage and documents of S-Bahn passengers at the Soviet zone border since 18 October. The S-Bahn has been one of the principal routes used by refugees who continue to arrive in West Berlin at a rate of about 500 daily.

5. France reluctant to become involved in question of Trieste troop withdrawals:

French foreign minister Bidault believes that a French request to Yugoslavia and Italy to withdraw their troops from the Trieste area would be inadvisable. He told the American and British ambassadors in London on 26 October that such a request would certainly be rejected by Yugoslavia and could lead to a break in diplomatic relations. Bidault added, however, that he would express personally to the Yugoslav foreign secretary and to Italian premier Pella his concern over troop movements.

Bidault also said that since the basic question was political, details of military problems should be put aside pending further three-power discussion. He felt that an acceptable solution could be found only by a realistic "whittling down" of the conflicting demands of Rome and Belgrade.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Threat seen to prestige of US air missions in Latin America:

Royal air force officers rather than British civilians are now scheduled to train Venezuelans in the use of British jet bombers. The American embassy in Caracas believes such a development could set a precedent seriously damaging to the effectiveness and prestige of United States military missions in Venezuela and other Latin American countries.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: Employment of British officers for this purpose, if not approved by the United States, would constitute a formal breach of the air mission agreement with Venezuela and would pose a new threat to the whole program of arms standardization in the hemisphere. The Venezuelan air force chief would probably not risk such a breach and might in any case prefer qualified American personnel.

British jet aircraft now compose over 20 percent of the Venezuelan air force; Brazil and Argentina have also procured considerable numbers of British jets.
