[PAGE 01]
11 April 1960
Copy No. C 68
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping will continue to give open support to nationalist movements despite possible conflict with Soviet tactics in Western Europe.
Chou En-lai, in foreign policy speech to National People's Congress, opposes any stabilization of status quo in Far East.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
South Africa--Attempted assassination of prime minister will further aggravate situation; Africans may stage disorders on 15 April.
Somali nationalists of Italian-administered trust territory and British protectorate plan to hold discussions regarding union.
Afro-Asian Solidarity Conference opens on 11 April in Conakry.
Laos--political rather than military methods to divide anti-Communist ranks.

III. THE WEST
El Salvador--Two members of the National Legislative Assembly trying to persuade the military to lead a palace revolution this week.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - USSR:
Khrushchev's visits to capitalist countries may be good for Soviet policy but cannot be useful for the "socialist camp!"

Communist China: In his 10 April foreign policy speech to the concluding session of the National People's Congress, Premier Chou En-lai indicated Peiping's opposition to any stabilization of the status quo in the Far East. He stated that "up to the present there has been no change in the tense situation between China and the United States" and that, regarding Taiwan, Peiping will "struggle to the end" to defend "its territorial integrity." Referring to Japan, Chou repeated that there could be no possibility of improving relations with the Kishi government. With reference to China's disputes with India and Indonesia, Chou merely called for "reasonable solutions."

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Union of South Africa: The unsuccessful attempt of an English-speaking white farmer to assassinate Prime Minister Verwoerd will aggravate the domestic situation because of the

[PAGE 05]
interpretation likely to be given the act by various groups. Although the would-be assassin had no known political backing, die-hard elements within the Nationalist party will see the attack as proof of a widespread plot to kill government leaders and will demand further repression of non-Europeans and liberal whites. The Africans are likely to see the attack as an indication of support among the English-speaking community for their antigovernment effort. They will probably increase their agitation and may stage disorders on 15 April, Africa Freedom Day. (Page 2)

Somalia - British Somaliland: Somali nationalists of the Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia and of the British protectorate are planning to bypass official channels and hold discussions regarding a possible union of the two areas. Italian and French officials in the area apparently suspect that these moves are the result of British machinations. Officials in the British protectorate fear that disorders would erupt if authorities attempted to contain nationalist enthusiasm. (Page 3) (Map)

Afro-Asian Conference: The second "nongovernmental" Afro-Asian People's Solidarity Conference which begins in Conakry, Guinea on 11 April seems likely to be marked by a struggle for control of the solidarity movement between Communist participants and UAR-led neutralists. This conflict and the indifferent and sometimes hostile attitude of African nationalists toward the movement will probably continue to limit its prestige and effectiveness. (Page 5)

Laos:
campaign which would emphasize political and propaganda methods rather than military ones to prevent candidates sponsored by the reformist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI) from winning a majority in the 24 April elections. The message indicates that the Communists hope to exploit divisive tendencies in the anti-Communist

11 Apr 60  DAILY BRIEF  ii

[PAGE 06]
ranks both during the election campaign and after the new assembly convenes. Subsequent Communist propaganda has followed rather closely the line laid (Page 6)

III. THE WEST

El Salvador: Two deputies in the National Legislative Assembly--a captain and an inactive army general--are trying to persuade several lieutenant colonels to take advantage of the recent increase in dissatisfaction among the military with President Lemus and lead a palace revolution in the second week of April. The anti-Communist officer corps, however, may hesitate to follow the advice of the two deputies, who recently introduced draft legislation that would have favored Communists and a pro-Castro faction in elections for the National Legislative Assembly and local offices on 24 April. (Page 7)

11 Apr 60  DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping's View of Khrushchev's Policies

Khrushchev's visits to capitalist countries may be good for Soviet policy but cannot be useful for the "socialist camp!"

by visiting Paris Khrushchev could not help both France and the "anti-imperialist" movement in Africa, and that it is China's task to support the movement. These remarks and recent official Chinese statements indicate that Peiping, in pursuit of its policy of giving open support to nationalist movements in underdeveloped countries, is determined not to be inhibited by Soviet tactics in Western Europe. The Chinese apparently feel the bloc should play a more vigorous role in weakening the position of European powers in Africa.

Khrushchev is not a "revolutionary" leader like Stalin and that he is trying to do things which are contrary to the "revolutionary ideas" of Communism. This remark may in part refer to Peiping's preference for a truculent posture toward the United States. Articles in Peiping's theoretical journal Red Flag are attempting to demonstrate that Khrushchev's policy calling for "friendly" East-West contacts and "mutual concessions" has no historical precedent in Communist doctrine. The articles insist that the real attitude toward USSR-US coexistence lies in Lenin's remark, "Let no American capitalists touch us. We will not touch them."

The Chinese view Khrushchev's policy as leading to an undesirable stabilization of the status quo and as detracting from their effort to justify open hostility to the United States. In line with this effort, Red Flag recently insisted that the "predatory nature of imperialism" must be exposed." The editor of a Hong Kong Communist newspaper told his staff on 4 April that the United States is turning its attention to small-scale wars--a "fact proving that American peaceful posturing is feigned." He directed that prominence be given this line in the newspaper.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Assassination Attempt May Aggravate South African Situation

The unsuccessful attempt of an English-speaking white farmer to assassinate Prime Minister Verwoerd on 9 April will probably have important domestic consequences, although the would-be assassin probably was not acting for any political group and may have been demented. The country's tense political and racial situation will be aggravated because of the interpretation likely to be given to the attack by various elements of the population.

Powerful die-hard groups within the dominant white Nationalist party, who have shown no willingness to ameliorate local racial laws under international pressure, may see the attack as proof of a widespread conspiracy to kill government leaders. They will probably demand a further repression of protest activities by the non-Europeans and liberal whites, and will call for a strengthening of official restrictions on individual rights during the racial crisis. Traditional animosity between the English and Afrikaner communities may be heightened. Right-wing Nationalist politicians may redouble their efforts to weaken South Africa's traditional ties with Britain by advocating an early proclamation of a republic and reappraisal of the Commonwealth connection.

The Africans, interpreting the attack as evidence of English-speaking opposition to Verwoerd's policies, will probably be spurred on in their agitation against the government. African nationalists may cause disorders on 15 April--celebrated widely as Africa Freedom Day--by a stay-at-home campaign and street demonstrations.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
APPROXIMATE AREA OF PROPOSED GREATER SOMALIA
UNCLASSIFIED

[PAGE 10]
Somali Nationalists to Meet to Discuss Union

Somali nationalists in the Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia and in the adjoining British protectorate of Somaliland plan to bypass official channels and to hold discussions about a possible union of the two areas. A mission of eight government and legislative leaders from the protectorate sought and received an invitation to visit Mogadiscio, capital of Somalia, on 12 April. Somalia is slated for independence on 1 July, and pressure is mounting for early independence in the British protectorate.

The Italian administrator looks on the visit as a "plot to extend British influence" to Somalia and may attempt to forestall the meeting. Such action would place Italy in the position of being an obstacle to Somali aspirations, but would strengthen Somalia Prime Minister Issa and rid him of some of the stigma of being an Italian stooge by allowing him to appear as champion of a Greater Somalia--toward which he has been somewhat apathetic. The fact that Issa's government is dominated by the Hawiya tribe while the rival Darot tribe is predominant in the Somaliland protectorate may have influenced his outlook toward a close union of the two areas.

Anticipating the arrival of the protectorate mission, the Somalia Government is whipping up enthusiasm for association. A government newspaper has given extensive coverage to Issa's statements characterizing the unity of all Somali territories as his most pressing political problem. Publication of these statements suggests that the prime minister either intends to adopt a pro-union line or is enabling himself to shift the blame elsewhere in case talks fail.

An official in the French Foreign Ministry has expressed some skepticism regarding British motivations in Somaliland. He believes the British could put a brake on pan-Somali developments, at least until Somalia becomes independent in July. The official believes

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
British policy endangers Paris' hope that a satisfactory modus vivendi can be worked out between the Somalis and Ethiopia which is highly suspicious of all pan-Somali activities.

In London, a Foreign Office spokesman was skeptical of the judgment of the Somaliland Government that disturbances would erupt in the protectorate if the United Kingdom failed to go along with the legislative council's motion for independence and union with Somalia. Nevertheless, he did not exclude the possibility of independence for Somaliland and association with Somalia by 1 July.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]
Afro-Asian Conference Opens in Guinea

The second Afro-Asian People's Solidarity Conference--a "nongovernmental" organization--is scheduled to meet in Conakry from 11 to 16 April, with approximately 300 delegates. The first conference, held in Cairo at the end of 1957, provided Nasir and the Communists a joint vehicle for exploiting Asian and African nationalism and furthered Soviet efforts by adopting a strong anti-Western line. In the past two years, however, a split between UAR-led neutralists and Communist elements has developed within the organization, and the Conakry meeting seems likely to reflect a struggle for control between these two groups.

The agenda of the present session will probably include discussions on the liquidation of imperialism and colonialism, on independence and unity in Africa and Asia, on coexistence, disarmament, and economic development, and on strengthening the solidarity movement. Despite the anticipated neutralist attempts to prevent Communist domination, which have a reasonably good chance of success, the conference will almost certainly have a pronounced anti-Western cast.

Enthusiasm for the Conakry conference is markedly less than that prevailing at the time of the Cairo session. Most delegations, with the exception of the Soviet, Chinese Communist, and UAR groups, have little support from their home governments. The neutralist-Communist conflict and the indifferent and sometimes hostile attitude of African nationalists are likely to continue to limit the prestige and effectiveness of the solidarity movement.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 13]
Pathet Lao Instructions Regarding Laotian Elections

in connection with the 24 April National Assembly elections, that the fundamental requirement during the campaign is to "(expand) the United People's Front and (construct) a working alliance between us, the various factions, and progressive distinguished persons opposed to America and the CDNI,"
it would be preferable for former Premier Phoui's Rally of the Lao People (RLP) to win control of the assembly and suggested that the "least reactionary" of the RLP candidates should be supported in districts where no Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS), Santiphab, or other "progressive" candidate was running.

To implement this program,
the launching of a widespread political campaign until the first session--10 May--of the new National Assembly. Personnel presumably being trained at various bases were to be returned to their villages "so that they can participate in the general elections and ... avoid a situation of being illegal, . . ." "All armed units" were to be reorganized and "spread between various areas of the enemy rear and our main bases," a measure possibly envisaged as a counter to Laotian Army security sweeps in progress in various sections of the country since 1 January. Subsequent Communist propaganda has followed rather closely the lines laid

the Communists' anticipation of the possible dissolution of the RLP, with one fragment aligning itself with the CDNI and the balance of the party membership becoming more vulnerable to NLHS approaches for a new parliamentary working alliance. Hope is held out that "we can destroy the other alliance and win over the regular party members of the (RLP)." This apparent expectation of a split in the anti-Communist ranks is probably an important calculation behind the Communists' seeming willingness thus far to allow the elections to be carried out in relative peace even though the NLHS and allied elements can only hope to win a small number of seats.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 14]
III. THE WEST

Army Officers Considering Coup Against Salvadoran President

A group of Salvadoran lieutenant colonels has recently been meeting with two members of the National Legislative Assembly, General Quintanilla and Captain Buitrago--both of whom are trying to persuade the officers to lead a coup against President Lemus in the second week of April. The proposed coup is intended to capitalize on the growing discontent among the military with the policies of President Lemus. The President, however, is probably aware of some plotting, since he ordered the transfer of 19 high-ranking officers on 29 March, perhaps to disrupt a plot.

The most recent irritant to the military is a new law limiting the number of generals and colonels in the Salvadoran Army to eight generals and forty colonels. Past dissatisfaction has stemmed partly from disgruntlement at not receiving the favorable treatment accorded the military by previous presidents and their belief that Lemus is grooming Major Rubio Melhado as presidential candidate for the 1962 elections.

a palace revolution was a "certainty" if the President persists in championing Melhado as his successor.

The anti-Communist officer corps, however, may be hesitant about taking advice from Quintanilla and Buitrago, whose actions in the National Legislative Assembly would favor Communists and sympathizers with Fidel Castro's revolutionary movement in the elections to be held on 24 April. Neither Quintanilla nor Buitrago was renominated as a candidate. The Communists, who are reported to have recently received a shipment of arms, may attempt to stir up violence before and after the election.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 16]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 April 1960
Copy No. C 68
