[PAGE 01]
9 March 1955
Copy No. 88

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Comment on role of former Cambodian king (page 3).

4. Arrests of Indonesian opposition members may indicate future government election tactics (page 5).

SOUTH ASIA

6. Congress victory in Indian state of Andhra does not ensure stability (page 6).

* * * *


[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Comment on role of former Cambodian king:

Developments in Cambodia since King Sihanouk's abdication leave no doubt that the former monarch intends to retain his


[PAGE 04]
dominant position in Cambodian political life. Postponing his "return to the people," Sihanouk took complete charge of a military graduation ceremony on 5 March at which the new king was present, and was evidently vastly pleased with himself in his new role, according to Ambassador McClintock.

He informed the American ambassador that "he had arranged" with the palace and the government for negotiations on American aid to be brought to a speedy conclusion. To this end, he had appointed his mother his "plenipotentiary." McClintock believes Sihanouk will continue to be king in everything except name, acting through a sort of "shogunate," and his spokesmen will be his three privy councilors.

In the event Sihanouk tires of his present role, he may arrange to have his throne restored to him. There are precedents for such action in Cambodian history, and the machinery exists for organizing a "spontaneous demand" for Sihanouk's return. Such a restoration would, moreover, have the strong support of the present king and queen, who have been conspicuously ill at ease in their new roles.


[PAGE 05]
4. Arrests of Indonesian opposition members may indicate future government election tactics:

A number of opposition Masjumi party leaders were arrested in late February, the day before a town election in West Java, according to the Indonesian press.

the arrests were responsible for the National Party's winning the election by a slim plurality, since the detainees were unable to vote and their families were afraid to. Ostensibly the arrests were in connection with the activities of armed bands in the area, and the Masjumi fears they may be an indication of future National Party tactics to upset the Masjumi organization.

The election returns in the town showed the Communists a strong third party.

Comment: Both the National Party, which heads the cabinet, and the Communist Party, which supports it, fear a Masjumi victory in Indonesia's forthcoming first general elections because of the Masjumi's identification with Mohammedanism, the nation's predominant religion. As one of their campaign tactics, these two parties have tried to identify the Masjumi with the illegal Darul Islam, a fanatical Moslem organization and Indonesia's principal dissident group. The February arrests apparently were made largely on these grounds.

The Communists have campaigned more actively than any other party, and are reported gaining strength at the expense of both the National Party and the Masjumi.


[PAGE 06]
SOUTH ASIA

6. Congress victory in Indian state of Andhra does not ensure stability:

The Congress Party still faces major problems in Andhra state despite the fact it alone has won an absolute majority in the recent elections and, with its allies, controls a large majority of the 196 seats in the state legislative assembly. The Communists received over 30 percent of the votes cast as against Congress' 50 percent. The Communists' capability for troublemaking will presumably again come to the fore as the intensity of Congress Party activity in Andhra declines.


[PAGE 07]
Factionalism still exists within the Congress Party organization and competent leadership, as in the past, apparently is still lacking. A thorough overhauling of the Congress Party organization in Andhra, as well as of the administration of the state government, will be necessary to achieve true stability.
