II. ASIA-AFRICA

Soviet-Iranian Relations Entering New Phase

Soviet Ambassador Pegov, who left Iran six months ago following the abrupt breakdown in nonaggression talks, and the pro-Soviet Iranian ambassador to Moscow, Masud-Ansari, are returning to Tehran amid increasing official and unofficial speculation of renewed efforts to end the tension that has severely strained Soviet-Iranian relations during the past seven months. Pegov is scheduled to arrive in Tehran on 16 September. While some significant new development appears in prospect, its character remains unclear.

Ambassador Pegov's return apparently resulted from Ansari's recent interview with Khrushchev, who indicated that Pegov should return "as soon as possible" to present Soviet views to the Shah. Ansari is returning at his own request to report to the Shah on his talks. He recommended that no proposals be offered the USSR until Pegov's return to Tehran and Soviet propaganda attacks are halted. While Radio Moscow has greatly tempered its recent broadcasts to Iran, and has even offered "the hand of friendship," the Soviet-sponsored clandestine broadcasts to Iran are as vituperative as ever regarding the Shah and Prime Minister Eqbal.

According to Ansari, Khrushchev pointed to American military activities in Iran as threatening the southern borders of the USSR and warned that the USSR may be obliged to avail itself of the provisions of the treaty of 1921 and occupy Iran. Khrushchev asserted that the USSR only asked "that Iran should not join the American aggressors who want to encircle us. . . ." He admitted there had been errors in Soviet policy toward Iran, but assured that everything possible was being done to redress the past. Khrushchev reportedly argued the advantages of neutrality for Iran, noting that Iran could bargain for many times as much American aid and at the same time get Russian assistance. He emphasized that Iran is more important to the USSR than any of the neutral countries in the area.
