I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Demotes Top Party Aide

Aleksey Kirichenko, who until a few months ago was functioning as Khrushchev's second-in-command in the party secretariat, has been demoted to the job of party chief in Rostov Oblast, according to a Soviet press announcement of 13 January. The assignment represents a serious reversal in his political fortunes. Kirichenko's status as a full member of the party presidium, a post he has held since July 1955, was not mentioned. While Kirichenko has not been reported involved in policy disputes, in recent months he no longer seemed to enjoy Khrushchev's full confidence.

Kirichenko, now 52, was a Khrushchev protege and associate for many years. Khrushchev was apparently responsible for Kirichenko's rapid rise in top party circles since 1953. In June 1959, however, Khrushchev told Governor Harriman that Kozlov had been picked as his successor and derided the suggestion that Kirichenko might be in the running. Since then Kirichenko has not engaged in the kind of substantive party activity which had previously marked him as one of the four top Soviet leaders.

Factional infighting in the highest circles of the party is most often observed in the areas of personnel appointment and policy decisions. There has been a rash of personnel changes recently: upheavals in the leadership of several republics, extensive changes in the secret police (KGB), shifts in the central party apparatus, and more recently, the return of Presidium member Nikolay Ignatov to full-time work in the party secretariat after several months in disfavor. Some of these changes probably reflected maneuvering involving Kirichenko.

The decision to reassign Kirichenko was probably made last month at a special secret session of the party central committee which was held immediately following an open meeting devoted to agricultural problems. A Soviet newspaperman stated that the secret session considered important domestic matters which would be formally approved by the Supreme Soviet meeting beginning 14 January.

14 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
