III. THE WEST

Implications of Pinay's Removal from Debre Cabinet

The removal on 13 January of Finance Minister Pinay, the most influential leader of the previous regime remaining in the cabinet, indicates that De Gaulle may have decided to subordinate Pinay's "hard money" policy to other considerations. Appointment of Bank of France Governor Wilfrid Baumgartner, an able and respected technician, to replace Pinay may lessen the risk of a loss of investor confidence in the French economy and will also reduce the political importance of the Finance Ministry portfolio.

Premier Debre has been subject to growing pressures to loosen Pinay's restrictions on consumption and economic expansion and to push programs stressing social benefits. He and other ministers drawn from the "Gaullist" Union for the New Republic (UNR) favor selective rises in wages and farm prices, and have been working on plans to create a new national bank to aid in the reconversion of depressed areas and industries, to organize a government-controlled company for marketing Saharan oil, and to implement decrees embodying De Gaulle's earlier proposals to give labor a voice in corporate management.

The political implications of the crisis may be more far reaching. Pinay represents a threat to the UNR's attempt to build a new political base for the present regime. He still has considerable influence in the Independent party, which has been showing signs of serious disagreement with De Gaulle's "liberal" offer of self-determination to Algeria, his highhanded treatment of parliament, and his apparent downgrading of NATO and the Western alliance.

Pinay's withdrawal may widen the rift between the Independents and the UNR. The situation will be further strained if other Independents in the cabinet, notably Minister of Agriculture Henri Rochereau and Secretary of State for Foreign Economic Affairs Max Flechet, also leave, especially if they are replaced by "technicians," as opposed to political figures.

14 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
