Indonesia May Renew Emphasis on West Irian Claim

Renewed emphasis on Indonesia's claim to West Irian (Netherlands New Guinea) probably is indicated by statements to parliament on 27 February by Army Chief of Staff and Security Minister General Nasution. Nasution reportedly stated that the struggle to "reclaim" West Irian would be intensified, that it must be waged on all fronts--economic, political, and military--and that it must be carried out both within West Irian and outside its borders. He said that the West Irian issue affected all of Indonesia's domestic and foreign policies and would continue to do so as long as the territory was not returned to Indonesia. The army's press spokesman, however, has denied press reports that Nasution said the nation should be prepared to undertake a war in behalf of its claim.

During the same parliamentary debate, Foreign Minister Subandrio refused to say whether or not Indonesia would raise the Irian question at the next session of the UN General Assembly, claiming it would be a "tactical error" to reveal future actions at this time. Subandrio told the Thai foreign minister a few weeks ago that Indonesia was very anxious to settle the West Irian question with the Netherlands, and that if this could be done adjustments would be made regarding Dutch economic claims in Indonesia.

Both Subandrio and President Sukarno have stated publicly during the past year that Indonesia will not resort to force to achieve its claim. Indonesian officials, particularly President Sukarno and air force leaders, undoubtedly feel that the nation's military build-up is strengthening its international stature and will assist in bringing pressure to bear on the Netherlands. Indonesian paramilitary groups reportedly continue to infiltrate West Irian in an effort to stimulate the local population against the Dutch administration.

The West Irian claim was de-emphasized in 1958 and 1959, and anti-Dutch measures in Indonesia itself were substituted. National pride and political necessity now may dictate renewed emphasis. Nasution undoubtedly hopes to keep the army in the forefront of leadership for the politically significant West Irian campaign, which has been consistently exploited by President Sukarno and the Communist party and which was supported by Soviet Premier Khrushchev during his recent visit.
