[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

17 April 1951

Copy No. CI-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

NAVY review completed.

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

3. Little air activity on China's east coast revealed by US air reconnaissance (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Purge of Communists in Austrian police force to be dropped temporarily (page 5).

-2-
[PAGE 03]
Page Denied
[PAGE 04]
3. Little air activity on China's east coast revealed by US air reconnaissance:

Reconnaissance of the China coast opposite Taiwan conducted by aircraft of the US Seventh Fleet on 11 and 13 April revealed the airfield at Amoy to be operational, while airfields at Foochow and Swatow were non-operational. The field at Chien-ou (inland about 100 miles northwest of Foochow) had been extended since August and was in operational condition except for a rockpile in one turning circle. No unusual shipping concentration was observed in any of the major harbors. Anti-aircraft fire was encountered over Foochow, Amoy, and Swatow, but none was encountered over Chien-ou.

Comment: Reports received earlier in the year generally agreed that the Chinese Communists were engaged in extensive airfield improvement and air activity, and in the construction of coastal defenses along the southeast China coast. These reconnaissance flights tend to support the claims that the Chinese have taken steps to improve coastal defenses.

Chinese Communist broadcasts, heard in Tokyo over the week-end, charged the US with violation of the China coast by a flight of 200 aircraft. These charges probably refer to the above mentioned reconnaissance flights.

-4-
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Purge of Communists in Austrian police force to be dropped temporarily:

Austrian Interior Minister Helmer has informed US High Commissioner Donnelly in Vienna that, because of the current "tough" Soviet attitude in Austria, Donnelly should not expect further overt action at present against the Communists in the Austrian police. According to Donnelly, Helmer appears particularly worried about the Soviet refusal to accept the dismissals of Communist police already ordered by the Austrian Government and claims that this refusal may indicate a trend toward the establishment of a separate Soviet zone police. As further evidence of Soviet "toughness," Helmer cited (a) the Soviet reopening of the denazification issue, (b) the renewed cases of abduction and (c) Soviet demands for the removal of two non-Communist police officers in the Soviet zone, for the return to Vienna of a Communist police chief who has been transferred to the provinces, and for the evacuation of an Austrian gendarmerie school.

Comment: At US instigation, the Austrian Government began a drive in late March to purge the Austrian police of Communists, beginning with the Vienna administrative police. The Soviet authorities reacted vigorously by seizing the opportunity to bring counter-charges against loyal Austrian police and to demand their removal.

-5-
[PAGE 06]
Austrian capitulation on this issue will demoralize the police force and result in a serious weakening of the Austrian will to resist further Soviet demands.

-6-
