(he has in his recent conversations with Western diplomats
and the Soviet memorandum to Bonn. This suggests that the
USSR will continue to hold the Berlin question in reserve un-
til the Soviet leaders assess more fully the US position on
major East-West questions. Khrushchev's remarks on Ade-
nauer's role and references to the memorandum to Bonn also
suggest that he may be awaiting a reply as a pretext for pre-
senting a more exact demand on negotiations. A French For-
eign Ministry official was recently told by his Soviet counter-
part that Moscow was considering a foreign ministers'
conference on Berlin and Germany.)

(On the disarmament question Khrushchev implied that the
Western powers were attempting to defer negotiations. His
insistence that Soviet acceptance of general disarmament was
linked to UN revision was the same position he took last fall
at the UN General Assembly. At that time, however, he ex-
plained that the reorganization scheme was not a prerequisite
for negotiations.)

(In his statements to Ambassador Thompson on the Congo,
Khrushchev labeled UN policy as "colonialist" and stressed that
the USSR would oppose it "with all its means." He emphasized
that a reorganization of the UN was necessary to prevent another
situation such as that in the Congo, and argued that the US should
have an interest in reorganization, since it might be in a minor-
ity position some time in the future. Khrushchev's revival of the
link between UN revision and disarmament, which has been
played down in recent Soviet statements, probably foreshadows
a more intensive effort to use the appeal of disarmament to gain
support for at least Hammarskjold's resignation or progress to-
ward a greater Soviet role in the UN executive organs.)

(Khrushchev showed considerable satisfaction when informed
by Thompson that the US hoped shortly to lift its ban on Soviet
crabmeat imports, although he expressed some disappointment
at the recent canceling of a license for precision grinding ma-
chines. Khrushchev reiterated the Soviet position that trade
relations must be normalized and again emphasized that the USSR)

13 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
