New Japanese Government

Hayato Ikeda, re-elected prime minister on 7 December, has at least temporarily united his conservative Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) and improved chances for his government's stability by including in his new cabinet representatives of all major party factions. However, wrangling over selection of the speaker of the lower house, which delayed Ikeda's election two days, has marred his image as a political leader and generated interparty friction. Although the distribution of power in the LDP cannot be finally determined until powerful party posts have been filled, the core of Ikeda's support appears to come from the same factions that dominated the government of former Prime Minister Kishi.

The press, which refrained from strong criticism of Ikeda's first cabinet last July on grounds that it was only a "caretaker" government, immediately attacked the new cabinet as "second rate" and accused Ikeda of surrendering to factional pressures. He has retained strong incumbents in the important foreign, labor, finance, and education ministries but has not included any faction leaders. As a result, some observers are predicting another cabinet reshuffle after the next regular session of the Diet ends in the spring. Foreign Ministry officials believe the current special session of the Diet will be devoted to a wholesale attack on Ikeda's economic program--an attack in which his intraparty rivals may join.

Ikeda told a press conference on 8 December that his goal of doubling Japan's income in ten years would not be affected by decreased US dollar expenditures abroad, but high government and Bank of Japan officials believe that Japan will be affected severely and that an economic retrenchment will be required. They estimate that US moves announced thus far will cost Japan between $200,000,000 and $300,000,000 annually, sufficient to eliminate the nation's favorable balance of international payments unless offset by an increase in exports. Foreign Minister Kosaka, reflecting widespread press, business, and even some government sentiment for restoration of trade with Communist China, said after his reappointment that some "economic intercourse" with Communist China is desirable.
