3. Popular dissatisfaction in China increasing:

Popular dissatisfaction with the Peiping regime has grown in recent months as a result of heavy casualties in Korea, excessive taxation, police-state oppression in general and the current purges in particular. However, there is no indication of an imminent split in the regime, nor has there arisen any active resistance to it by the Chinese masses; anti-Communist guerrilla activities appear to be uncoordinated and incapable of posing a serious threat to the regime's stability.

In regard to foreign relations, Peiping's anti-US campaign has been ineffective, that the regime is becoming increasingly hostile to the UK, and that, while Sino-Soviet relations on the working level lack cordiality, the Sino-Soviet alliance appears secure.

Comment: This account is in general supported by conclusions which the US Consul General in Hong Kong has drawn

NEAR EAST

4. British may misjudge conservative Iranian attitude on oil:

US Ambassador Grady, in reviewing Anglo-Iranian Oil Company "past differences" with the US Embassy in Tehran, stated on 18 April that "those differences were only with regard to the policies of the company which have led them close to disaster." Grady reports that the most conservative Iranian leaders hold a far more extreme attitude toward nationalization than the AIOC and the British Foreign Office realize.

Comment: The AIOC has long exercised considerable influence in Iran while it carried out its own policies, which have at times been somewhat high-handed. In the present crisis the company appears to think that time is on its side and that financial pressure will eventually force the Iranian Government to accept the company's terms. The company has, however, on the whole been liberal in its policies toward Iranian workers and has treated them fairly when judged by labor conditions as they exist in Iran. It is obvious that any concession at this time short of acceptance of the principle of nationalization will not solve the present crisis.
