ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The Boun Oum government decided on 20 January to ask the United Nations and SEATO to send ad hoc committees to Laos to investigate its charges of Soviet and North Vietnamese involvement in the current fighting, according to the secretary of state for foreign affairs. The Laotian Government apparently hopes that the presence of such foreign observers would stop or at least minimize external support of local antigovernment elements as occurred during the hostilities in 1959 after a four-nation United Nations committee arrived in Laos.

Laotian Army headquarters claims that Tha Thom, in southern Xieng Khouang Province, has been retaken by government forces, but confirmation is lacking. Meanwhile, new and important engagements between government and Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces appear imminent in the area of Vang Vieng.

Soviet IL-14s and North Vietnamese transports continued airlift operations into Laos through 22 Jan, and additional flights are scheduled for 23 January. The Soviet LI-2s which recently arrived in Hanoi have not yet participated in the airlift into Laos. (SECRET SABRE) (Page 5) (Map)

Congo-Belgium: Officials of the Belgian Defense Ministry appear to be aiding Tshombé's Katanga government without the knowledge of the Belgian Foreign Ministry. A Foreign Ministry official told the American ambassador on 19 January that his office had just learned that Defense Ministry personnel had assisted in the screening of a group of white recruits who had left Brussels that day for service with Tshombé's forces. According to an earlier report from the Congo, a senior Belgian military officer had stated that Belgium was willing to sell the equipment then at Kamina base to Tshombé for a token payment; in addition, the officer reportedly had recommended that equipment and training for a paracommando battalion be provided by Belgium. Another report indicated that more than 200 "deserters" from Belgian units in Ruanda-Urundi are now serving with the Katangan forces. The military activities apparently conflic

23 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF
