The Situation in Laos

The Boun Oum cabinet voted on 20 January to send separate requests to the United Nations and SEATO to send ad hoc committees to Laos to investigate its charges of Soviet and North Vietnamese involvement in the current hostilities, according to the secretary of state for foreign affairs, Sop-saisana. Laos' representative at the United Nations reportedly received instructions on 21 January to put the request to Hammarskjold, but the approach to SEATO apparently is still in draft form. The government's announcement on 21 January that three regiments of North Vietnam's regular army had crossed into Laos' southern provinces may be intended to reinforce these requests. Available evidence does not support the claimed intrusion.

Faced with a deteriorating military situation, the Boun Oum government apparently hopes that the presence of such foreign observers would stop or at least minimize external support of local antigovernment elements. A similar unilateral appeal to the United Nations in 1959 during a period of less serious fighting resulted in the dispatch to Laos of a four-nation committee. Although the committee came up with no firm evidence of direct involvement of North Vietnamese units, its presence had an immediate quieting effect.

Vientiane may also hope by these moves to forestall other international action--such as reactivation of the International Control Commission or another meeting of those nations attending the 1954 Geneva Conference--which it fears would only play into Communist hands.

Laotian Army headquarters claims that government troops have retaken Tha Thom, in southern Xieng-Khouang Province, which had been reported lost to Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces on 20 January. Reports from this front are sketchy and confused, but a strong enemy effort apparently continues in this area, which is a potential jumping-off place for a government attack on the Plaine des Jarres.

Meanwhile, important engagements between government and Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces appear imminent in the area of the

23 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
