NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Syria embarks on anti-Western campaign:

The Syrian Government has ordered the liquidation by 2 April of the Near East Foundation, which is financed by the Point Four program. It has ordered the replacement of foreign company managers by Syrians. It has forbidden civil servants to "establish contact" with foreign legations and has asked foreign missions to restrict the activities of their personnel to their official duties.

The US Legation in Damascus thinks that the passage of these measures is the result either of faulty coordination between Colonel Selo, the legal head of the government, and Colonel Shishakli, the military power behind the government, or of insincerity on the part of Shishakli who has steadily indicated his pro-Western orientation.

Comment: There has long been evidence of a strong anti-Western sentiment in Syria. While the effects of the new regulations cannot now be assessed, their promulgation means that the US and Britain will have added difficulties in persuading the present Syrian military regime to cooperate with the West.

7. American Military Mission in Iran strongly opposed by Mossadeq:

Iranian Cabinet member Busheri has told Ambassador Henderson that the Iranian Finance Ministry will have no authority to grant funds to the US Military Mission after 20 March unless a new contract is signed. Although Mossadeq has assured the American Ambassador that the Mission's expenses would continue to be met even without a contract, Busheri believes that the Prime Minister could not legally justify such an expenditure before the Majlis.

Meanwhile, the Prime Minister has again told Ambassador Henderson that he has always opposed and can never support or agree to any US-Iranian military contract.

Comment: In an apparent attempt to appease local conservative opinion and avoid antagonizing the United States, Mossadeq has suggested on several occasions that the Military Mission stay in Iran after the expiration of the contract until the situation is clarified. At the same time, however, he has warned that neither he nor the Majlis would be inclined to consent to a continuation of the Mission.

8. New disturbances in Egypt predicted:

The British War Office, which expects riots in Egypt when Prime Minister Hilali Pasha reveals the Wafd's role in the recent disturbances in Cairo, has alerted the British forces in the Canal zone and in Libya which would be involved in any occupation of the delta region.

The difficulties facing Egypt's Premier in initiating domestic reforms have also been stressed by the able Ahmed Hussein Pasha, who at one time participated in the former Wafd government but who has so far refused to join the new cabinet. He states that Hilali lacks any real public support and maintains that the government's emphasis on internal reforms has already evoked charges that the Prime Minister is diverting popular interest from Egypt's national aspirations.

The American Ambassador in Cairo states that if Britain would soon offer substantial concessions on the treaty dispute, the Hilali Cabinet could break the power of the Wafd. He also notes that "if the Hilali government falls, no one knows what will come next in Egypt."
