The Congo Situation

The UN command in the Congo appears to have embarked on an all-out effort to establish the authority of Congolese President Kasavubu and set the stage for an early attempt by Premier Lumumba's Congolese opponents to remove him from power definitively. This effort apparently has the support of Col. Mobutu, the chief of staff and most important figure in the Congolese Army--control of which will probably prove decisive in determining the outcome of the Kasavubu-Lumumba power struggle. Mobutu, who recently claimed that three quarters of the army was loyal to him, reportedly arranged the surrender of arms by the bulk of the 3,000 Congolese troops stationed in the Leopoldville area. This action took place at a UN-controlled army camp on 10 September. In addition to its virtually certain inspiration of this development, which would seem seriously to undermine Lumumba's position, the UN has provided the troops with the first pay many of them have received in two months.

These moves by the UN command coincided with its announcement of an order--attributed to the Congolese Army--calling for a general cease-fire throughout the Congo and of plans to supervise the execution of the order along the borders of separatist Katanga Province. The cease-fire order has been welcomed "in principle" by Katanga President Tshombé, whose regime Lumumba has vowed to crush, and by Tshombé's ally, Albert Kalonji, the leader of the hard-pressed anti-Lumumba movement in neighboring Kasai Province. Lumumba, on the other hand, denied the validity of the cease-fire order and announced that his troops were continuing to operate "with great success" in Katanga and Kasai. Press reports from Elisabethville, however, indicate that last week's incursions into Katanga from Kivu Province by Congolese Army elements have not yet been followed by any invasion in force.

Meanwhile, Kasavubu and his supporters have pushed ahead with the formation of a new cabinet composed of moderate, federalist-minded elements to replace Lumumba's leftist regime, despite the latter's continued claims to be the only legal government of the Congo. Headed by Senate President Ileo, the cabinet list transmitted by Kasavubu to Secretary General Hammarskjold over the week end names Kalonji as interior minister and Justin Bomboko as
