[PAGE 01]
14 January 1954

Copy No. 84

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. British doubt Chinese Communists are colonizing North Korea
(page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iran forbids Orbit diplomatic missions to distribute propaganda
(page 4).

5. Replacement of Resident General Guillaume in Morocco expected
(page 5).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. British doubt Chinese Communists are colonizing North Korea:

The British Foreign Office believes there is insufficient evidence to conclude that the Chinese Communists are colonizing North Korea. It notes that Chinese civilians traveling to Korea for even short visits normally take bedding and packs with them, and suggests that the 4,000-man Chinese "delegation" which toured Korea last October or Chinese civilian technicians may have been mistaken by Western observers for permanent settlers.

Comment: The presence in North Korea of Chinese construction workers and technicians to assist in reconstruction has been well established, but there is no firm evidence that any of them are actually settling in the area.

In spite of China's increasing importance in the conduct of Korean affairs, the Soviet Union still retains a dominant position through Soviet-trained Koreans who occupy most of the top party and government posts, and through Soviet advisers in all the ministries and important industrial installations.
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iran forbids Orbit diplomatic missions to distribute propaganda:

The Iranian Foreign Ministry has formally requested the Polish minister to stop importing Communist literature into Iran, the ministry also asked the Rumanian and Czech legations to stop publishing their daily Persian-language news bulletins. Iran based its request on the grounds that the Iranian legations in Rumania and Czechoslovakia are not permitted to publish news bulletins.

The Soviet embassy may also be requested by the Foreign Ministry to cease distributing news bulletins if the Iranian embassy in Moscow is not allowed similar privileges. Postal authorities in Iran have intercepted shipments of Polish-language Communist propaganda leaflets destined for the Polish legation in Tehran.

Comment: This is the first direct step the Zahedi government has taken to limit the distribution of Orbit propaganda. This action, together with the recent rudeness of the Soviet ambassador to the Iranian foreign minister and Moscow's protest against recent anti-Soviet articles in the Tehran press, suggests that relations between Iran and the Soviet bloc are becoming increasingly strained.
[PAGE 05]
5. Replacement of Resident General Guillaume in Morocco expected:

French officials in Morocco told the British consul on 11 January that Resident General Guillaume will be replaced in the near future by General Pierre Koenig. They also stated that important and far-reaching changes in the residency government could be expected within three months.

Comment: The appointment of Koenig, a rightist deputy who is close to General de Gaulle, probably would be the result of a political deal in France. It would not represent a change in French policy in Morocco. His intimate connection with Marshal Juin, foremost backer of El Glaoui, powerful chieftain of the Moroccan Berbers, also presages a continued influence for Juin on Moroccan affairs.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
