III. THE WEST

De Gaulle Moves to Quash Opposition on Algerian Policy

The relief of General Massu from his key army command in Algeria, together with the firm tone of the 22 January Paris communique reaffirming De Gaulle's offer of self-determination for Algeria, suggests that the French President is laying the groundwork for a bid for a negotiated solution regardless of rightist and army opposition.

De Gaulle stressed to Socialist leader Guy Mollet on 19 January that self-determination for Algeria is the only course possible. Mollet received the impression that De Gaulle wants to set a date for a referendum in Algeria, superseding his 16 September stipulation of "within four years after pacification" which has been widely misinterpreted. Mollet thought De Gaulle "out of touch with the problem and with the thinking of the country," but De Gaulle is probably counting on his scheduled TV broadcast of 29 January to rally public support.

The communiqué's statement that before the end of 1960 commissions of Algerian deputies and general and municipal councils would be summoned to Paris to study all major Algerian problems suggests that De Gaulle hopes to persuade the Algerian rebels that they could best gain their long-term objectives by participating in such deliberations.

De Gaulle is also reported on 19 January to have told Algerian rightist deputy Marc Lauriol that the "false tension" in Algeria is "entirely the creation of the military." De Gaulle reportedly added: "I know how the military operates. They mounted the Dreyfus affair and they are mounting an Algerian crisis in order to serve their own purposes." His intention to visit Algeria on 5 February and his swift replacement of General Massu by a nonpolitical officer, Lieutenant General Jean Crepin, suggests that De Gaulle is confident his authority as chief of state will be respected by the army. He will nevertheless probably tour military installations in Algeria to reassure key groups of officers concerning his policy, as he did prior to his 16 September proposal for self-determination.

23 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
