[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Venezuelan measures against Soviet Charge may react against Western diplomats in Moscow (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Burmese Premier may resign (page 4).
4. Overthrow of Thai Premier reportedly planned (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Italian Government not expected to dissolve neo-Fascist party (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

6. Revolt reportedly planned in Surinam (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Venezuelan measures against Soviet Charge may react against Western diplomats in Moscow:

Ambassador Kennan warns that if the Soviet representatives in Venezuela are not treated with full courtesy until they leave, there may be serious repercussions in Moscow not only against the Venezuelan representative but possibly against other missions. The Ambassador points out that it is important not to set a precedent for mistreatment of diplomats in the case of a break in relations.

Meanwhile, Czechoslovakia has asked Venezuela for permission to represent Soviet interests there, and the Czech Vice Foreign Minister informed the Venezuelan Minister in Prague that unless the Soviet staff in Caracas were permitted to leave Venezuela freely, the Soviet Union is prepared to take "whatever steps the situation requires."

Comment: In response to Venezuelan provocations during the preceding week, the USSR on 13 June broke relations, charging "hooliganism" and violations of international law. On the night of the break, the Soviet Embassy was surrounded by police, and a Soviet official was badly beaten when he tried to leave.

The Soviet Embassy in Caracas has asked that the International Red Cross investigate the "mistreatment" by the Venezuelans.

Ambassador Kennan on 14 June emphasized that the Soviet note to Venezuela stated that Venezuela was "obviously acting under the direction of its North American masters."
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Burmese Premier may resign:

Burmese Premier Nu "agreed" to remain in office for one month to give his colleagues an opportunity to choose a successor, although Nu may only have been testing his strength, he might retire if anyone but Defense Minister Ba Swe were selected.

Comment: This is the second recent report that Nu may be actually considering retirement, but he has threatened to resign several times since assuming office in 1948.
[PAGE 05]
4. Overthrow of Thai Premier reportedly planned:

Police Director General Phao is reportedly planning to depose Premier Phibun by a coup d'etat. The influence of General Sarit, Phao's chief rival, has been weakened by loss of control over certain army units formerly supporting him. If Sarit fails to rebuild his position soon, his army supporters may attempt a coup which might result in "general fighting throughout the Kingdom."

Comment: Press reports of 20 June state that a general alert has been ordered in Thailand. However, Phao is currently in Europe and probably would not leave the direction of a coup to his subordinates.

The American Embassy in Bangkok states that Sarit has strengthened his position in recent months and that there is little imminent possibility of an open conflict between the Phao and Sarit factions.

The possibility of a coup by either Phao or Sarit cannot be discounted as their rivalry is a constant threat to stability in Thailand.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Italian Government not expected to dissolve neo-Fascist party:

Despite the overwhelming parliamentary approval of a bill empowering the government to dissolve the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement in the "extraordinary case of necessity and emergency," Christian Democratic spokesmen intimate that no such move is likely in the immediate future.

Government officials fear that even if the party were proscribed, a similar movement would spring up before the 1953 national elections. The new movement might benefit from the "martyrdom" and be free of the present party's less popular ties with the old Mussolini regime.

The US Embassy in Rome comments that the new law may still inhibit the neo-Fascist press and provide a legal basis for jailing some of the party's leaders.

Comment: Ever since the Italian Social Movement showed an alarming increase in strength by polling third place in the local elections in southern Italy last month, the centrist parties and the Communists have been increasingly vocal in their demands for the party's suppression.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Revolt reportedly planned in Surinam:

The political situation in Surinam has "deteriorated rapidly" in the last few weeks and a revolt against the Netherlands government is planned, according to a local Dutch government official. The four reported leaders were members of a seven-man delegation which returned this month from The Hague after suspension of negotiations for a new political relationship with the Netherlands.
[PAGE 07]
The Commander of the Dutch forces in Surinam, who doubts the "reliability" of sixty percent of the native police, has reinforced the army garrison at the capital and taken steps to protect the major airport. He has also ordered the army to hold maneuvers in the capital city of Paramaribo and feels that this show of force will deter disturbances.

Comment: Surinam, which supplied almost half of the total US bauxite requirements in 1951, has been increasingly desirous of greater political freedom. This is the first hint of a revolt, however.

One of the alleged plotters is a labor leader with considerable influence among the bauxite miners.

Dutch army and marine units, superior in numbers and training to the native police, should be able to control the present threat.
