[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

State Dept. review completed

5 September 1957

Copy No. 136

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. AMBASSADOR THOMPSON COMMENTS ON SOVIET DIS-ARMAMENT OBJECTIVES

2. NEW SOVIET NOTE REAFFIRMS USSR'S POSITION ON MIDDLE EAST

4. IRAQI CROWN PRINCE RECALLS NURI SAID
(page 6).

5 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. AMBASSADOR THOMPSON COMMENTS ON SOVIET
DISARMAMENT OBJECTIVES

The USSR probably considers that the
Western disarmament proposals fail
to meet even minimum Soviet objectives,
according to Ambassador Thompson in
Moscow. He believes the Soviet Union will not feel compelled
now or in the foreseeable future to accept terms which it con-
siders unfavorable.

Thompson thinks the USSR is less con-
cerned than the United States about the spread of atomic
capability to other states, except for West Germany. Non-
orbit states are more likely than the satellites to produce or
insist on receiving atomic weapons, and their possible use of
such weapons against each other could be exploited by the USSR.
Thompson believes, furthermore, that Moscow sees no value in
the Western proposal for a cutoff of world-wide production of
fissionable material as long as the United States reserves the
right to station units with atomic weapons abroad and supply
atomic weapons to other countries. He believes the USSR's em-
phasis on ending tests springs less from a desire to prevent
other nations from acquiring atomic weapons than from the prop-
aganda advantages to be gained from Western rejection of such
a ban or the lessening of international tension if the West accepts.

The ambassador feels that the Western aerial
inspection proposals, even if confined to the Arctic, would not only be
considered costly by the USSR but would force the USSR to give up
a large measure of its advantage of greater secrecy than the West
can maintain. He quotes a Soviet Foreign Ministry official as say-
ing recently that the USSR could never agree to aerial inspection
as long as Western bases exist on the periphery of the Soviet bloc.

Thompson points out that the proposed armed
forces levels would mean a greater reduction for the USSR than
the West. The Western proposals do not satisfy important Soviet
objectives of maintaining the status quo in Eastern Europe, reduc-
ing the danger of an explosion there, and diminishing the risks of
local conflicts developing into major wars with atomic weapons.
The USSR does not attach much importance to the prime Western
objective of reducing the danger of surprise attack.

5 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. NEW SOVIET NOTE REAFFIRMS USSR'S POSITION
ON MIDDLE EAST

The USSR's notes to the United States,
Britain, and France on 3 September were
probably intended to pave the way, in
anticipation of the forthcoming UN Gen-
eral Assembly debate on the Hungarian
report, for a Soviet resolution accusing the United States and
its allies of aggressive acts against Middle East countries
and the Soviet bloc.

The note to the United States, implicitly
continuing Soviet support of the Arab states, charged that the
"Eisenhower doctrine" proves American readiness to use force
in the Middle East. It also attacked the Baghdad pact, British
military action in Oman and Yemen, and Western interference
in the internal affairs of the Arab states, as evidenced by what
it termed the antigovernment plot in Syria. The USSR warned
the West of "dangerous consequences" resulting from attempts
to draw countries into military groupings, but suggested no
specific Soviet counteraction to Western "interference" in Oman,
Yemen, and Syria.

Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, who
asked Ambassador Thompson's reaction to the American version
of the notes, insisted that a "constructive approach" was contained
in the last sentence, which like the Soviet notes of 19 April called
for a four-power declaration condemning the use of force and "re-
nouncing interference in internal affairs of the Near and Middle
East." Gromyko agreed with Thompson that the Middle East situ-
ation was "very delicate and difficult," but gave no suggestion of
greater Soviet tractability.

5 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. IRAQI CROWN PRINCE RECALLS NURI SAID

Iraqi Crown Prince Abd al-Ilah told
American officials in Istanbul he feels
that there must be some changes in the
Iraqi cabinet if a resolute attitude is to
be adopted toward Syria. The crown prince said he was re-
questing former prime minister Nuri Said to return to Iraq,
probably to become deputy prime minister, and that he has
other cabinet changes in mind.

Comment

The Iraqi cabinet headed by Ali Jawdat
has followed a "soft line" toward Egypt
and Syria with the ostensible objective of bringing about a
rapprochement among the Arab states. King Husayn of Jor-
dan has complained about the weakness of Iraqi support, and
Abd al-Ilah also apparently now feels that this "soft line" has
not been productive.

5 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]
