Nehru Retains Krishna Menon as Defense Minister

Prime Minister Nehru has temporarily eased the crisis caused on 31 August by the resignation of army commander General Thimayya as the result of friction with Defense Minister Krishna Menon. Nehru in Parliament on 2 September praised Krishna Menon's work and said he had found only one instance of Menon interfering with army recommendations. He stated that on that occasion he had agreed with Menon. Nehru called Thimayya an able general but criticized him for resigning at the present time for "trivial" reasons. The prime minister indicated that both men would remain in their posts.

The anti-Menon movement obviously is not solely a personal Menon-Thimayya feud over administrative matters, as is suggested by the wording of Thimayya's resignation. It appears rather to be a widespread effort to force Menon out of office. This is indicated by a number of virtually simultaneous developments in New Delhi, Bombay, and Calcutta between 30 August and 1 September. Anti-Chinese demonstrations in Calcutta on 30 August, before Thimayya's resignation was submitted, included a call by Atulya Ghosh, a West Bengal Congress party leader, for Menon to resign. Anti-Chinese demonstrations in Bombay on 1 September also included a demand for Menon's departure. Leaders of the Socialist party and the rightist Jan Sangh party have demanded Menon's resignation, and the president of the Jan Sangh has denounced Menon as "pro-Communist." Articles in various Indian newspapers, including the pro-Congress Amrita Bazar Patrika of Calcutta, have accused Menon of partisanship in handling national defense matters. Earlier, some papers had charged him with trying to build a personal "empire" within the armed services. There also were requests from the floor of Parliament on 1 September that Menon clarify his position.

The tenor of all demonstrations and articles linked Menon with leftism and accused him of a pro-Chinese attitude. Typical was the question asked on 2 September by a member of Parliament who queried why Menon had been quick to accuse Pakistan

3 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
