[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

30 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

DIA review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. MIKOYAN'S TALKS IN PAKISTAN AND INDIA

2. JAPAN AND SOUTH KOREA AGREE TO RESUME TALKS

3. HUNGARY'S "REHABILITATION" OF LASZLO RAJK
(page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. MIKOYAN'S TALKS IN PAKISTAN AND INDIA

In a meeting with Pakistan's Prime Minister Chaudry Mohammad Ali on 24 March, Mikoyan strongly attacked the Baghdad pact and SEATO, and said the USSR was determined to maintain the "neutrality" of Afghanistan.

Mikoyan spoke confidently of Soviet strength, and emphasized that the USSR feared no power or combination of powers, and that the Soviet Union was determined "to break" the pacts directed against it. While Mikoyan apparently made it clear that Pakistan's membership in the Baghdad pact and SEATO stood in the way of good Soviet-Pakistani relations, he did not make Pakistan's withdrawal from its Western commitments a condition for Soviet friendship and assistance.

In India, Mikoyan made a major bid for another Soviet-sponsored "show-project." He stated on 28 March that the USSR was willing "to share with India our experience in the creation of our oil industry . . . and to co-operate . . . in the delivery of oil industrial equipment, the training of cadres, and so forth." He described the steel mill at Bhilai, now being constructed with Soviet assistance, as "an example of peaceful economic competition with the Western powers in this sphere," and added, "Let our Indian friends be the judge in this competition."

He said the USSR, in order not to burden the trade and payments balance of India, would use the profits from sales of Soviet goods to India to buy Indian goods.

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. JAPAN AND SOUTH KOREA AGREE TO RESUME TALKS

South Korea's consul general in Tokyo has informed the American embassy that Japanese foreign minister Shigemitsu has agreed to hold exploratory talks as a preliminary to reopen negotiations between Japan and South Korea. Shigemitsu had previously told the American embassy that if preliminary talks concerning the repatriation of detained nationals proved fruitful, it might be possible to go on to other subjects.

The South Korean consul general states that Shigemitsu agreed to withdraw a statement made by Kubota, the chief Japanese negotiator in the 1953 talks. The statement, which was interpreted by the Koreans as disparaging of their sovereignty, led to a breakdown of the talks. Both countries have agreed that provision should be made at the earliest practicable date for the release of detainees held by each country.

President Rhee has insisted that Japan also accept the Rhee Line fishing boundary and renounce its property claims in Korea in advance of any talks. Although his recent attacks against Japan have been fairly subdued in tone, there is no direct evidence that he is willing to modify his terms. It is quite possible, however, that Rhee is prepared to negotiate the repatriation of foreign nationals, in view of recent North Korean efforts to champion the cause of Koreans detained by the Japanese.

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. HUNGARY'S "REHABILITATION" OF LASZLO RAJK

Hungary's exoneration of former minister of interior Laszlo Rajk and seven codefendants who were convicted on charges of "nationalist deviation" in 1949 is the first reversal of a major postwar purge trial by the Satellites.

Hungarian party leader Matyas Rakosi, who had led the attack on Rajk, made the announcement and placed the blame for the charges against Rajk on former police chief Gabor Peter, who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1954. Despite Rakosi's reversal, the exoneration of Rajk will undoubtedly stimulate the active anti-Rakosi and nationalist sentiment within the Hungarian party.

Since the major part of Rajk's trial was aimed at proving him an agent of Tito, the Yugoslavs will interpret this development as a further vindication of their position in the dispute with Stalin. They will also view it as an important step toward permitting "independent roads" for the Satellites.

It appears likely that a number of the victims of the major Satellite postwar party trials and purges in other Eastern European countries will also be restored to grace. East German party first secretary Ulbricht announced on 24 March that a commission was to be formed to "examine cases of party members who have been punished. . ." and there have been reports that a commission has been established in Czechoslovakia to review the Slansky case.

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 29 March)

Israeli sources state that one Egyptian civilian was killed and four others wounded on 28 March in two clashes between Israeli and Egyptian forces east of the Gaza strip. Firing was also reported between the Egyptians and Israelis at El Auja.

Road signs are being removed throughout Israel according to the American army attaché in Tel Aviv. The attaché reports that males born between 26 September 1938 and 20 March 1939 have been ordered to report for registration and examination between 3 April and 14 May.

An official of Prime Minister Ben Gurion's office recently told General Burns that Israel is willing to wait until 15 May for an Arab decision on the Johnston Jordan River Valley Plan.

The Greek government probably will grant Israel landing rights for 12 French Mystere IV planes for a transit flight to Israel and the same privileges for 20 jet planes (presumably MIG's) to be flown by Egyptian pilots from Czechoslovakia to Cairo.

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8

[PAGE 09]
on 27 March that Syria has one regiment of Soviet T-34 tanks which recently arrived. a regiment at full strength consists of 48-54 tanks. The arrival in Syria of this number of T-34's has not been confirmed. However, earlier reports indicated that 20-30 tanks of undetermined origin had arrived from Egypt.

30 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9
