[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Indonesian President seeks US support on New Guinea question (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. New British restrictions increase Egyptian animosity (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Dutch see Western European support for German admission to NATO
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Indonesian President seeks US support on New Guinea question:

During a conversation between President Sukarno and the US Ambassador to Indonesia, the former expressed a hope for American support on the New Guinea issue. Sukarno explained that if the pending Dutch-Indonesian conference fails to solve the New Guinea question he anticipates a unilateral denunciation of the Union by Indonesia; he said he could not predict "to what level the sentiments of the populace might rise."

The US Ambassador observes that should Indonesia resort to unilateral action and incur the ill will of the western world, a "strong reciprocal reaction might be expected" from Indonesia. Such a reaction could involve the loss of Indonesia as a link in the eventual Pacific security chain, and the loss to the United States of Indonesia's genuine and growing friendship.

Comment: Netherlands-Indonesian discussions on the disposition of New Guinea are expected to end in an impasse. In such an event, leftist and nationalist elements in Indonesia will press for abrogation of the Union and other Dutch-Indonesian agreements, which would create serious economic problems for both Indonesia and the Netherlands.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. New British restrictions increase Egyptian animosity:

The new series of restrictions imposed by British military authorities in the Suez Canal area have again resulted in a reduction in Egypt's oil supplies.
[PAGE 04]
The US Ambassador in Cairo warns that, while he appreciates the current difficulties of the British which have led to imposition of these restrictions, Egyptian animosity toward the British "has risen to such a white heat that a real explosion seems inevitable."
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Dutch see Western European support for German admission to NATO:

The Dutch Foreign Minister believes that all NATO members except France would approve the admission of Germany to NATO in a status of full equality. He has stated that this is the only means by which the West can gain Germany's cooperation in European defense.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: Though West Germany will probably be willing to enter the European Defense Community without being a member of NATO, it will probably expect membership after a relatively short time.
[PAGE 07]
