[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

16 June 1956
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. NEW SYRIAN CABINET PROBABLY DOMINATED BY LEFTISTS (page 3).

2. BRITAIN FAVORS EVENTUAL NEUTRALIZATION OF LAOS (page 4).

3. COMMUNIST SYMPATHIZERS SEEN INCREASING IN SOUTH KOREA (page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 6)

16 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. NEW SYRIAN CABINET PROBABLY DOMINATED
BY LEFTISTS

The composition of the new 11-member
"national" cabinet in Syria headed by
Prime Minister Sabri al Asali indicates
continued government weakness, susceptibility to army influence, and a
sharper turn to the left. Three ministers are probably
conservatives; the other eight are leftists, opportunistic
"independents," and amenable party wheelhorses.

Among these eight are the ministers of
foreign affairs and national economy who are members of the
strongly anti-Western Arab Socialist Resurrection Party.
Salah al-Din al-Bitar, the new foreign minister, is a member of the party's executive committee. This party will
probably dominate the cabinet, since its popular anti-Western
reform program, its control of "the street," and its influence
in the army have enabled it to exert influence far beyond its
small parliamentary strength.

The Arab Resurrection Party's inclusion
in the government is clear evidence of the waning influence
of the conservative parties--the "old Arab nationalists" who
fought for Syria's independence from France. The composition of the cabinet also reflects the rise of the new nationalists--the younger educated elements, who are pressing for
social and economic reform, are hostile to foreign "interference," extremely bitter over the establishment of Israel,
and view Egyptian prime minister Nasr as the symbol of the
future. The Arab Resurrection Party is a vigorous supporter
of Syrian alignment with Egypt, co-operates with the Communist Party, supports Syrian purchase of arms from the Soviet
bloc, and most recently has urged recognition of Communist
China.

16 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. BRITAIN FAVORS EVENTUAL NEUTRALIZATION OF LAOS

The British Foreign Office has expressed
the view to the American embassy in
London that Laos should in the long run
be neutralized, since it would probably
be "more of a liability than an asset as an ally!" The Foreign
Office did not seem particularly concerned over the projected
visit of Laotian premier Souvanna to Peiping, but was concerned that Souvanna should not throw away his bargaining
position there.

Comment

Britain has never excluded the expedient
of neutralizing Laos, if necessary, to remove a
possible source of conflict with the Chinese Communists.

Souvanna and other Laotian leaders, feeling uncertain of Western military support in case of an emergency, are already tempted to accept Communist inducements
to become neutral. The British attitude, if conveyed to the
Laotians at this time, would weaken their determination to
remain firm in dealing with the Chinese Communists and might
well be decisive in swinging Laos to neutralism.

16 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. COMMUNIST SYMPATHIZERS SEEN INCREASING IN
SOUTH KOREA

As a result of popular dissatisfaction,
the number of Communist sympathizers
in South Korea is increasing;
if the trend
continues, peaceful unification will be attained through a
compromise with North Korea.

Comment

The degree of dissatisfaction with the
Rhee administration is
although
the army remains loyal to South Korea, 80 percent of the
troops would not have supported Rhee in the May elections
had they not been forced to do so by their officers. A leftist
candidate, capitalizing on the large protest vote, polled over
2,000,000 votes against Rhee in the May elections.

Although a significant increase in pro-Communist sentiment is unlikely, dissatisfaction with the Rhee
regime may result in a growing susceptibility to North Korean
proposals for a negotiated unification. Negotiations, however,
are not likely to take place while Rhee remains in power.

16 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5
[PAGE 07]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 15 June)

The Lebanese deputy chief of staff has
stated that Lebanese forces along the Israeli border will be reduced to normal strength in a fairly short time. About a third
of the infantry and all the antiaircraft artillery units moved to
the border as an emergency measure have already returned
regular stations.

One hundred Czech trucks arrived in
Syria in mid-May,
These
trucks are probably the Tatra model, a 10-ton tank truck in
which the Syrian army had expressed interest. This delivery
presumably is the first shipment on a contract for 600 Czech
trucks.

The commander in chief of the Egyptian
navy has told the American naval attaché in Cairo that Egypt will
receive submarines and that he has sent 220 naval personnel to
the USSR for flight and mechanical training in naval aviation. The
Egyptian officer also indicated a Soviet admiral had visited him
three times in Alexandria to discuss naval assistance.

16 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6
[PAGE 08]
