Internal Developments in Yugoslavia

Yugoslavia's parliament convened on 18 April to approve
the annual report of the Federal Executive Council (the cab-
inet) on economic development and the primary tasks to be
faced in the coming year. While the report itself contains
little of dramatic import, it comes at a time of significant
change in Yugoslavia. On 1 January Belgrade announced that
its Second Five-Year Plan (1957-61) had been completed one
year early and that the third would be begun immediately.

The economic reform accompanying the new plan will
bring Yugoslavia's foreign trade practices into closer accord
with those of the West by lessening central government con-
trol over trade, unifying the exchange rate of its currency at
750 dinars to the dollar, and using simplified, direct tariffs.
Belgrade hopes that these changes will increase foreign trade
by 74 percent in the next five years. The reform also calls for
further decentralization of Yugoslavia's political administra-
tion and economy. By vesting more power at the local level,
the regime hopes to solve a problem which plagues all Com-
munist regimes—how to stimulate individual initiative and in-
dustrial efficiency without endangering the regime's control.

The reform has had unsettling domestic effects, and as a
result, some party officials fear that popular unrest may de-
velop. Retail prices for certain consumer goods have risen
sharply, necessitating the extension of price controls. Under
the new system, some industries have engaged in monopolistic
practices, forcing up prices despite the regime's expectations
to the contrary. Belgrade has not been able, moreover, to re-
duce controls on as many commodities as originally planned,
because some of the Western aid—totaling $275,000,000—sup-
porting the reform is relatively short term, high interest, and
restricted as to its use.

Yugoslavia is making ideological claims about the reform
in an attempt to justify a program which some party cadres
apparently consider non-Marxist. Moreover, these cadres may
feel threatened by the regime's policy of emphasizing efficiency

19 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
