[PAGE 01]
25 October 1951
Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

3. Comment on Mao Tse-tung's 23 October speech (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Soviet attitude on seized Berlin district still unclear (page 6).
7. German defense contribution may be delayed by French stand (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
3. Comment on Mao Tse-tung's 23 October speech:

Mao Tse-tung's 23 October speech before the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference -- an allegedly representative body which invariably endorses the Communist program -- was his first major policy statement since June 1950. In contrast to the 1950 speech, which outlined Communist China's long-range prospects, Mao's most recent address emphasized the "great success" of the regime's three-point program for 1951: aiding Korea, advancing land reform and suppressing "counter-revolutionaries."

Although reaffirming other recent Communist declarations that the Chinese commitment in Korea "must continue" until the UN agrees to a "peaceful settlement," Mao did not suggest any alteration in Peiping's previous terms for such a settlement and did not indicate Peiping's future course of action in Korea.

Characterizing the USSR as the "most trustworthy and loyal ally" of China, Mao asserted that the Sino-Soviet alliance ensures the "doom" of "imperialist domination" of the world, and that Soviet strength has "greatly increased." The first contention has been common in Communist propaganda of the past year, while the second has been emphasized throughout the Soviet world since Stalin's recent claim of Soviet atomic achievements.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Soviet attitude on seized Berlin district still unclear:

Soviet authorities in Berlin on 22 October ordered the East German Peoples' Police to withdraw from Steinstuecken, the small district in the US sector of Berlin seized by Peoples' Police units four days earlier. Although the acting chief of the Soviet Control Commission in Berlin explained to the US Commandant that the community would revert to its former status, he requested further documentation of the US claim to the sector.

During the conversations, the Soviet representatives gave the impression that they wished to extricate themselves from the whole affair by shifting the blame to the East Germans. In a later press statement, however, they stressed that the future status of the area would be studied by Soviet and US specialists.

Comment: At the time the East Germans withdrew from Steinstuecken, the Allies were considering retaliatory action in the form of denying the Russians access to the important radio building which they now occupy in the British sector. Despite indications that the USSR was backing down completely, an unconfirmed press dispatch now reports that a group of Soviet soldiers and Peoples' Police returned to the area on 24 October.

7. German defense contribution may be delayed by French stand:

The US delegation to Allied discussions in London on a German financial contribution to Western defense warns that the French position on this subject threatens to "move back the entire timetable" for the conclusion of contractual relations with the Germans, the establishment of the European Defense Forces, and the raising of German units.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
France is insisting that a common defense budget be applied by the European Defense organization from its inception and hence seems to contemplate a "much fuller working out and implementation" of financial arrangements than was envisaged by the US.

Comment: France had previously approved postponement by the Defense Conference of consideration of a budget, pending at least the initial results of the current NATO study of its members' potential defense contributions.

- 7 -
