[PAGE 01]
5 July 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Cambodia: Recent statements by Chief of State Sihanouk indicate he does not contemplate requesting arms and aircraft from Communist China in the immediate future unless he is provoked by sudden inimical acts by South Vietnam or Thailand. Reports persist, however, of a pending arms deal with Czechoslovakia, where a Cambodian mission headed by Deputy Premier Tioulong now is visiting. Sihanouk may have in mind a stand-by arrangement with Czechoslovakia or may be planning to use such arms to outfit Cambodian irregular forces, pending American reaction to Cambodia's request for stepped-up aid to the Cambodian regular forces.
(Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Caribbean: Venezuelan Foreign Minister Arcaya wants the meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States, which Venezuela has requested for 6 July, to convene a meeting of foreign ministers not later than 15 July to take action against the Dominican Republic. Venezuela holds the Trujillo regime responsible for the 24 June attempt to assassinate President Betancourt, and Arcaya has told the American ambassador that if the OAS does not act firmly his government will be unable to restrain its people from direct action against the Trujillo regime. Colombian President Lleras Camargo is also intent on OAS action against Trujillo and has told the American ambassador in Bogota that, if action is taken first against Trujillo, he will then help persuade other Latin American governments to take quick action against Fidel Castro.

5 July 60
DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

Indonesia: A group of high-ranking Indonesian army officers is reported urging Army Chief of Staff General Nasution to seize power at once in order to thwart President Sukarno's pro-Communist activities. According to a headquarters staff officer, these officers have informed Nasution that unless he supports them they will take steps without him against the president. The informant stressed that this action might occur at any moment. Sukarno is maneuvering to replace several officers who have been particularly active against the Communists, and is said to have ordered Nasution to discontinue all anti-Communist activity. Army leadership has been gravely concerned for months over Sukarno's continued concessions to the Communists.

5 July 60
DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Reports Persist of Cambodian-Czech Arms Deal

Recent criticism by Cambodian Chief of State Sihanouk of the alleged imbalance between American military aid to Cambodia and that given South Vietnam, Thailand, and Laos indicates that, unless provoked by inimical acts by the neighboring states, he is not contemplating requesting a major arms program from the Communist bloc in the immediate future. Sihanouk is quoted by a correspondent of the London Observer as saying he might be forced to accept proffered bloc arms--including jet aircraft--unless the United States "radically revises" its anti-Communist military aid policy in Southeast Asia by the year's end. Previously, he had indicated he would prefer an increase in American military aid to Cambodia combined with a decrease of such aid to the neighboring states.

Reports persist, however, of a pending arms deal with Czechoslovakia, where a Cambodian mission headed by Deputy Premier and Minister of Plans Nhiek Tioulong is visiting. The ordnance chief of the Cambodian Defense Ministry is with Tioulong.

Sihanouk may be contemplating a stand-by arrangement with Czechoslovakia, pending American reaction to Cambodia's request for more and newer arms for the Cambodian armed forces. He may calculate that Czech arms, procured either on a purchase or grant basis, could be used to outfit Cambodian irregular forces without jeopardizing America's military aid program for the regular troops. Sihanouk is pushing the expansion of irregular forces, particularly the Cambodian Socialist Youth commandos, on the grounds that threatened external attacks can best be met by village-level troops trained in guerrilla tactics.

5 July 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Venezuela and Colombia Want Early OAS Action Against
The Dominican Republic

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Arcaya wants the meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States, which Venezuela has requested for 6 July, to convene a meeting of foreign ministers as early as possible but not later than 15 July to take action against the Dominican Republic. Venezuela holds the Trujillo regime responsible for the 24 June attempt to assassinate President Betancourt and seeks anti-Dominican action by OAS members under Article 8 of the Rio Pact for the mutual defense of the 21 American republics. Article 8 permits measures ranging from recall of chiefs of mission to the use of armed force.

When informing the US ambassador on 30 June of Venezuela's intent to call for OAS action, Arcaya said that, if the OAS does not act quickly and firmly in this situation, the Venezuelan Government will be unable to restrain its people from direct action, since both public opinion and the military favor an attack, even without a declaration of war.

Colombian President Lleras Camargo is also intent on OAS action against Trujillo and told the American ambassador in Bogota on 29 June that, if action is taken first against Trujillo, he will then help persuade other Latin American governments to take quick action

5 July 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 12]
(against Fidel Castro. Lleras commented that most South American governments agree with him that Castro is a greater threat than Trujillo. Lleras is nevertheless a firm backer of Betancourt's position that the OAS must resolve the Trujillo problem first and believes that this priority is essential to the stability of the Betancourt regime. Lleras urged that the OAS act at least within a month on Trujillo and follow within 15 days with consideration of the Cuban situation.)

5 July 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
