4. Delay in Allied counter-action in Berlin favored:

Commenting on the increasing evidence that the East Germans are not complying with the conditions agreed to at the time of the signing of the interzonal trade pact, High Commissioner McCloy states that the British, French and West Germans are reluctant to take any counter-action at this time. In the event any steps are taken against continued East German restrictions on Berlin trade, the French and British seem to favor a progressive application of pressure before considering outright stoppage of interzonal trade.

Comment: Although the East Germans agreed orally on 20 September, when the trade pact was signed, to lift various harassing measures in Berlin, their only compliance has been a reduction of the highway tax. Obstruction of trade permits and interference with parcel post shipments are continuing, although apparently on a somewhat reduced scale. The important Rothensee canal lock remains closed.

Reluctance of the British, French, and Germans to take counter-action may arise partly from the belief that the net effect on the West Berlin economy of these harassing measures has been less serious than was originally feared and that the Communists can impose more damaging restrictions at any time.

5. French financial dilemma may force retrenchment in Europe or Indochina:

If the burden of the war in Indochina forces France to curtail its NATO commitments, the French may demand that the proposed German contribution to Western defense be correspondingly reduced to prevent its exceeding their own. The French are anxious, nevertheless, to have the Germans carry an equitable share of defense costs in order to avoid a deterioration in the French balance-of-payments position with Germany, and they are seeking ways to secure additional German financial commitments outside of a direct defense contribution.

The French may be tempted to cut their non-European obligations in order to insure a larger German contribution. This would lead to a progressive deterioration in the French position in Indochina, and would give rise to renewed pressure for a negotiated settlement with Ho Chi Minh.

Comment: The West Germans presumably will refuse to assume additional financial burdens, particularly if they interpret the French plan as a scheme to release French resources in the interests of colonialism.

The French Government hopes to patch together a 1952 military budget bolstered by substantial US aid for both France and Indochina. In view of the worsening French economic situation, however, it is increasingly doubtful that the National Assembly will accept the government program.

Since even the most optimistic estimates on the Indochina struggle call for expanded expenditures for at least two years, the possibility of a negotiated peace cannot be entirely discounted.
