Situation in Laos

Ex-Premier Souvanna Phouma appears to be on the verge of going over openly to the side of the Pathet Lao - Kong Le forces in Laos. He has agreed to a proposal brought to him by Pathet leader Phoumi Vongvichit to return to Laos to assume leadership of a government in opposition to the Boun Oum government. Souvanna reportedly stated that he would soon fly to Xieng Khouang, where the pro-Communists have set up a provincial administration and which they may claim as a temporary "national Laotian capital."

The Sino-Soviet bloc has consistently maintained that the Souvanna government remains the legal government of Laos. This assertion, made both to provide a rationale for the Soviet airlift and to limit international support for the Boun Oum government, would become considerably more plausible were Souvanna to throw in his lot with the Pathet Lao - Kong Le combine.

Phoumi Vongvichit left Phnom Penh on 27 January aboard a Soviet IL-14 accompanied by some of the more leftist inclined of Souvanna's entourage. The most noteworthy of these was former National Assembly President Pheng Pongsavan, who last fall was the primary force behind the creation in Vientiane of the Communist-influenced Peace and Neutrality Committee. There are already indications that this front group may be revived as a propaganda vehicle. A broadcast on 28 January by the clandestine "Radio of the Laotian Kingdom" stated that an "expanded" session of the committee had been held that day in Xieng Khouang; among the participants were Souvanna's half-brother, Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphannouvong, Kong Le, Pheng Pongsavan, and Quinim Pholsena, Souvanna's information minister. Another broadcast stated that Kong Le has been named chairman of the recently created "Laotian National Military Committee," described as "the supreme joint command of the legal government forces and the Pathet Lao fighting units."

The USSR apparently intends to delay its reply to the British proposal of 21 January that the International Control

30 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
