Commission (ICC) take preliminary soundings, through its Indian chairman, to determine whether it could perform any useful role in Laos. Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov has indicated that the USSR's reply would be delayed for a while. He pointed out that London had taken from 22 December to 21 January to reply to the Soviet proposal for reactivating the ICC and reconvening the Geneva Conference.

The bloc leaders evidently believe time is working to their advantage in Laos. Their delaying tactics are designed to provide the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces an opportunity to exploit their recent military successes and to secure control of as much territory as possible before international negotiations get under way.

The Communists are also seeking to prevent any international scrutiny of their airlift activities. The Polish delegation on the ICC for Vietnam engineered a postponement of a meeting of the commission scheduled for 27 January in Saigon in order to avoid a discussion of the airlift to Laos. The chief Polish member pleaded "illness," and the alternate Polish delegate suddenly departed for Hanoi. The Canadian delegation told the Indian chairman of the ICC for Vietnam that these Polish tactics represent a blatant attempt to frustrate ICC activities, and he requested that this situation be "brought to the attention" of the cochairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference---the USSR and Britain.

In a further international complication, sources on Taiwan state that Chinese Nationalist irregular forces have entered Laos at three points as the result of Burmese military pressure on the other side of the Mekong River frontier. The irregulars reportedly plan to establish new headquarters in Laos, following the loss on 27 January of their main base area in Burma, Keng Lap. Laotian authorities have called upon the irregulars not to move more than a few miles into Laos. Taiwan's security chief Chiang Ching-kuo professed to agree with the Laotians that Communist China might use the irregulars' presence as a pretext for action in Laos;

30 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
