GENERAL
1. US Ambassador in Moscow comments on Gromyko interview:
US Ambassador Kirk in Moscow believes that Gromyko's specific on-the-spot answers to important questions indicate that the Soviet Government considers the Malik proposal a serious effort to achieve a Korean settlement, regardless of its propaganda implications. Kirk feels that the Chinese People's Republic is also behind the move.
Gromyko's insistence that cease-fire negotiations remain separate from political and territorial questions implies that such questions will be raised later in connection with the Communist terms for settlement. There is no evidence that these terms will not initially include Chinese Communist membership in the UN, control of Taiwan, Chinese and Korean participation in the Japanese peace treaty, as well as the evacuation of all foreign troops from Korea.
The US Ambassador is inclined to suspect that the Chinese Communists are unwilling to continue the costly campaign and that urgent requirements of the Chinese over-all program necessitate abandoning the venture, at least for the present. He speculates that the importance of China to the USSR constrains the Soviet Government to react with greater flexibility than is customary with the Eastern European Satellites. Considerations of face make the Chinese Communist Government prefer that the USSR initiate the advances.
In answer to British proposals for further soundings of Communist China, North Korea and possibly the Soviet Government, Kirk emphasizes that Gromyko carefully sought to avoid governmental discussions in favor of direct negotiations between military commanders. The Ambassador considers that the opening move should be made by General Ridgway and the South Korean commander.
Comment: There is no evidence that the Peiping regime is anxious to sue for peace at this time. It is possible that the USSR's desire to avoid direct involvement in the war and increased material support for the Communist forces is the primary motivation underlying the proposals.
