WESTERN EUROPE
9. British delivery of Polish tankers reviewed and delayed:
Foreign Secretary Morrison expressed interest to US Ambassador Gifford in the idea that the Iranian oil crisis might justify delaying the delivery of the Polish Government-owned tankers being built in British ports. Meanwhile, the Foreign Office reports that the trials of the first two tankers, delivery of which had been expected by mid-July, have been postponed by two weeks, and are now scheduled to begin on 9 July.
Comment: Review of the issue in the light of the Iranian crisis and delay in the trials follow vigorous US representation along those lines. The stated UK position remains that the vessels will be delivered due to the legal principle involved and to fear of retaliation.
10. Interim interzonal trade agreement probably would release Berlin exports:
US representatives in Berlin believe that the Soviet authorities in that city may resume clearing West Berlin export permits if a new interzonal trade agreement, or an interim arrangement, is concluded by the East and West Germans without delay and confirmed by Allied authorities. The Berlin trade representative of the Bonn Government reports that the East Germans appear favorably disposed toward a two months' extension of the present interim agreement, which will expire 2 July. Meanwhile, the Soviets failed to pass any export permits on 28 June, and the backlog is now over 7,000.
US officials believe the USSR is determined to exert strong pressure for the early conclusion of a trade agreement. The chairman of the East German state planning commission said on 28 June that if all interzonal trade agreements, including interim arrangements, are allowed to lapse on 2 July, then complementary agreements will also become invalid, resulting in the stoppage of the delivery of electric current and coal to West Berlin.
Comment: The determination of the Soviet authorities and the East Germans to get an early trade agreement might prompt them to apply further pressure in the form of cutting off coal and electric power supplies to West Berlin. In that events, West Berlin could resort to its three months' stockpile of coal and its own adequate, though more expensive, sources of electric power.
