Dominican Republic - Venezuela - Colombia: President Lleras Camargo of Colombia, the Latin American President most closely allied with Venezuelan President Betancourt's efforts to promote multilateral action against the heirs of Dominican dictator Trujillo, now apparently feels that Betancourt is pushing too fast on the issue. Ambassador Briggs, on a special mission to Colombia, after conferring at length on 4 and 5 June with Lleras and his foreign minister, reported that the Colombian leaders had shared US and Venezuelan hopes that the extermination of Trujillo might be followed by a popular, democratically led uprising. However, the failure of such a movement to develop and the apparent success of "Ramfis" Trujillo in asserting his control have given Bogota "serious second thoughts." Colombian leaders doubt that "Ramfis" will change the old order and they feel that President Balaguer offers little hope of exerting liberal leadership. The Colombians, however, would now prefer to assess the internal Dominican situation further before giving consideration to tripartite military action with the US and Venezuela.

Betancourt, in 6 June conversations with Ambassador Stevenson, again urged decisive action through the OAS. Such action would depend on the report from the special OAS subcommittee that left for the Dominican Republic on 7 June. Though Betancourt is confident that the subcommittee will find evidence of drastic violations of human rights, the current thoroughly intimidated state of the Dominican dissidents and the regime's efforts to put on a good show make this by no means certain.

Betancourt believes that after the report is received, at least 14 Latin American governments will support a vote in the Council of the OAS for intensified economic sanctions and that the US, Venezuela, and Colombia should then ask for more severe measures, including military action. If Colombia decides against participating in a military effort, Venezuela will "go it alone" with the US, he said. He is confident that a show of military force would be sufficient to bring about the ouster of "Ramfis" and associates, "because the armed forces do not want him." Betancourt added that if Balaguer should set up a

8 June 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
