Situation in Zanzibar

The death toll in the rioting following the legislative elections of 1 June has approached 65. The great majority of the casualties were Arabs living in a heavily African section of Zanzibar town. Some 300 persons have been wounded and over 700 jailed. The British civil secretary has admitted in a press conference that the situation not only in Zanzibar town but throughout the islands is "unsatisfactory." Despite the prospect of election disturbances, the police were unprepared for large-scale violence. By 6 June, British authorities had flown in some 800 troops and 700 police from Kenya and Tanganyika.

A coalition government has been formed under the nominal leadership of Sheik Muhamed Shamte--president of the small Zanzibar and Pemba People's party--but Ali Muhsin, the leader of the Communist-infiltrated Zanzibar Nationalist party, is the real power.

Ali Muhsin, who has had close ties with Cairo, appears primarily interested in protecting the traditional dominance of the Arab minority of 50,000 among Zanzibar's 300,000 people--many of them recent African immigrants from the mainland. The Arabs are the most advanced of the protectorate's racial groups and are trying to entrench themselves in the civil service, police force, and other positions of influence.

Ali Muhsin has already declared that Zanzibar must become an independent republic before he will even discuss a possible federation with the East African mainland territories. He has strongly denounced alleged efforts by both Kenyan and Tanganyikan African leaders to interfere in Zanzibar's election, and since the election he has stated that his new government will take strong measures to control African immigration from the mainland and might expel voteless Africans already on the island. At that time he was scathing in his denunciation of Nyerere's government in Tanganyika, claiming it was "subject to neo-colonialist domination of West Germany, Israel, and the Catholic Church." Ali Muhsin has also indicated

8 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
