[PAGE 01]
5 December 1953

Copy No. 87

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA
1. New army crisis imminent in Indonesia (page 3).
2. Indonesian army chief of staff tenders resignation (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Comment on Egyptian threat of neutrality in East-West conflict (page 4).
4. British parliamentary opposition to Suez agreement seen growing (page 5).
5. Spanish Moroccan protest meeting reportedly scheduled for 5 December (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA
6. Guatemala renews relations with Czechoslovakia (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

1. New army crisis imminent in Indonesia:

According to Lieutenant Colonel Sutoko, a former Indonesian army deputy chief of staff, the commander of the West Java Military District, who is unsympathetic to the government, is redeploying his forces to effect a junction with those of the Central Java Command and is moving his heavy equipment to places of safety. Ambassador Cumming and his service attaches have observed the movement of heavy artillery and equipment out of Djakarta.

Sutoko said he had reason to believe that there were plans for the imminent arrest of himself and other members of the pro-Western group which demonstrated against Parliament on 17 October 1952.

The Djakarta press reports that all territorial commanders have been summoned to Djakarta for a meeting with the army chief of staff on 5 December.

Comment: Sutoko was relieved as deputy chief of staff after charges that he was implicated in the 17 October affair.

[PAGE 04]
2. Indonesian army chief of staff tenders resignation:

Indonesian army chief of staff Colonel Bambang Sugeng has submitted his resignation in protest over the appointment on 30 November of Lieutenant Colonel Lubis, an officer with limited military knowledge, as deputy army chief of staff.

The resignation reportedly has been accepted by the defense minister but will not become final until approved by President Sukarno, who has refused to accept Sugeng's resignation several times previously. Lubis' appointment reportedly has aroused strong feelings in army circles.

Comment: Since the reorganization of the Defense Ministry, which has reduced the influence of pro-Western officers in the army, Colonel Sugeng has been the ranking moderate in the army and a stabilizing influence. Colonel Lubis reportedly is anti-American, and his appointment may be another example of the rising influence of leftists in the Indonesian military establishment.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Comment on Egyptian threat of neutrality in East-West conflict:

Egypt's publicized threat of strict neutrality in any East-West conflict unless there is an early settlement of the Suez base issue is a maneuver aimed at inducing the United States to press Britain for additional concessions. It also reflects frustration over the situation as it is developing.

The regime's interest in impressing official Washington on the eve of the Bermuda conference with the need to do something for Egypt is reflected in press releases, in diplomatic approaches in Washington and Cairo,

Should Egyptian leaders despair of a Suez settlement as well as of American economic aid, they may expand Egypt's commercial contacts with the Orbit and generally reduce cooperation with the West.

[PAGE 05]
4. British parliamentary opposition to Suez agreement seen growing:

Foreign Secretary Eden has told Ambassador Aldrich that the Sudan election results will increase opposition within the Conservative Party to any Suez agreement. Foreign Office officials hope the Bermuda conference will produce assurances of American support for Britain.

According to press reports, 37 "rebel" Conservatives have met to discuss the effects of the Sudan elections on the Suez negotiations, and following the Bermuda conference, may present a motion in Parliament opposing any agreement with Egypt. In addition, the embassy understands that some Labor Party leaders are seriously considering opposing any agreement on the grounds that "it is the opposition's duty to oppose."

Comment: The British government's desire to conclude what it considers a satisfactory agreement has not been affected by the parliamentary situation. There are no indications that Britain will make any concession on the two unresolved issues, the right of British technicians to wear uniforms on the base and the availability of the base in time of war.

5. Spanish Moroccan protest meeting reportedly scheduled for 5 December:

A "mass meeting" of nationalist leaders is scheduled for 5 December in Tetuan, the capital of Spanish Morocco. A communique expressing opposition to the French dethronement of the Moroccan sultan and appreciation for Spain's attitude will allegedly be issued after the meeting.

Comment: Such a meeting could result in riots if French agents attempted to interfere. Spain has been trying to capitalize on the current unrest in Morocco to enlarge its Moroccan territory as well as to enhance its prestige with the Arabs.

[PAGE 06]
LATIN AMERICA

6. Guatemala renews relations with Czechoslovakia:

Comment: Communists and pro-Communists holding official positions in the Guatemalan government have consistently been pressing for the re-establishment of relations with Czechoslovakia, which were broken in 1948. The renewal of relations may result in an increase of trade between the two countries.

The Guatemalan government may also hope to obtain military equipment from Czechoslovakia in view of the United States ban on export of arms to Guatemala.

The new minister also will represent his country in Mexico and will maintain residence there.
