[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

11 August 1960

Copy No. C 71

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

1. Plans being made for another meeting of all Communist parties in effort to resolve Moscow-Peiping differences.

2. Comment on Khrushchev's hint he may participate in UN disarmament debate.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

3. Pakistan agrees to discuss Moscow's offer of oil exploration assistance.

4. UAR stepping up drive to expand its contacts and influence throughout Africa.

LATE ITEMS

5. Comment on Congo situation.

6. Comment on situation in Laos.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

11 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

International Communism: Plans reportedly are being made to hold another meeting of representatives of all Communist parties in a continuing attempt to resolve Moscow's and Peiping's conflicting views. The failure of the recent Bucharest meeting to provide a real resolution of the conflict apparently resulted in the formation of an international Communist commission to plan for such a meeting. It will probably be held in Moscow in conjunction with the USSR's October Revolution celebration. In addition to its serious concern with the unfavorable effects of the dispute on the image of bloc strength and unity, Moscow is probably increasingly worried by the strain it imposes on national Communist parties whose traditional left-right disagreements are being exacerbated by the Moscow-Peiping rift.

USSR-UN: Khrushchev's hint that he may participate in the UN General Assembly's disarmament debate suggests that he sees a repeat performance at the UN as a means of refurbishing the peaceful image he attempted to create last September, when he unveiled his complete and general disarmament scheme before the General Assembly. An appearance at the UN, in conjunction with possible visits to Cuba or Mexico, would also provide an opportunity for some "dramatic" new gesture such as calling for a world disarmament conference. Khrushchev's hint probably was timed to strengthen the efforts of the Soviet UN delegation to prevent a meeting of the UN Disarmament Commission as requested by the US. (Page 3)

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Pakistan-USSR: Pakistan's announcement that it welcomes a Soviet proposal to discuss details of oil exploration assistance is symptomatic of Pakistan's desire to enhance its aid from abroad by introducing competition between the US and the bloc. The Soviet proposal, originally made in 1958, was renewed in response to a Pakistani initiative last May. President Ayub probably does not intend to jeopardize Pakistan's alliance with the US, but he presumably hopes to arouse apprehension that Pakistan is moving toward a more "independent" policy. (Page 4)

UAR-Africa: The UAR is stepping up its drive to expand its contacts with and support for African nationalist leaders, and to increase its relations with the newly independent states. Material and moral support is being given to nationalist and Islamic elements in Angola, Senegal, French Somaliland, the Rhodesias, Kenya, Congo, Uganda, South and Southwest Africa, and Nigeria. Headquarters for African nationalists has been set up in Cairo; Radio Cairo continues its inflammatory Swahili broadcasts to East Africa, aimed especially at the British protectorate of Zanzibar.

Apparently hoping to play an influential role in the Congo, the UAR is maintaining direct contacts with Lumumba and is to hold military discussions with Ghanaian officials concerning "steps which should be taken in the Congo crisis." (Page 5) (Map)

LATE ITEMS

*Republic of the Congo: Secretary General Hammarskjold is expected to arrive in the Congo on 11 August and to proceed on Friday to Elisabethville where Katanga Premier Tshombé has stated he is prepared to begin negotiations for entry of UN troops into Katanga.

11 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
Congo Premier Lumumba on 10 August threatened an "invasion" of Katanga, and hinted he may attempt to arrest Tshombé as a traitor. Despite his efforts to reconstitute the Force Publique, Lumumba probably has no more than a few hundred troops loyal to himself, however, and no Congolese aircraft with which to airlift them to Katanga.

In Leopoldville, there have been anti-Lumumba disturbances for the second consecutive day. Possibly in reaction to rumors of a coup attempt, Congolese police on 10 August raided the office of the Abako party, which on 8 August passed a motion of no confidence against Lumumba. Several Abako adherents were reportedly wounded when firing broke out, but reports that Lumumba himself was injured in street demonstrations have been denied by an aide. The premier has warned that large numbers of Europeans would shortly be arrested for "plotting against the Congo," a threat which may lead to a new exodus by Belgians, including those in Katanga.

Brussels continues critical of the US for supporting the UN resolution calling for the "immediate" withdrawal of Belgian troops from Katanga and for activity allegedly prejudicial to Belgian interests. Although Foreign Minister Wigny has indicated that all Belgian troops could be evacuated from the Congo by 21 August, Brussels still may hope to avoid a commitment concerning a date for the evacuation of its Congo bases. Public criticism of Prime Minister Eyskens' government has sparked new rumors he may soon resign.

*Laos: The area controlled by the rebellious second parachute battalion and other small units allied with it still is apparently restricted to the Vientiane area.

The provisional executive committee announced in Vientiane by the revolutionary high command contains diverse elements unified mainly by their dislike of the

[PAGE 07]
Somsanith regime. Armed forces Commander General Ouane flew from Luang Prabang to Vientiane on 10 August, apparently to ascertain the rebels' terms. The possibility exists, however, that he might join them. Any compromise between the two contending regimes would in all likelihood lead to some loosening of Laos' ties with the United States and to an effort to reach a settlement with the Communist Pathet Lao. (Page 6)

III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the US in the immediate future:

While the origin and objectives of the 9 August coup in Laos are still unclear, there are indications that anti-US neutralist factions may be directing it. The internal developments create a situation favoring Communist exploitation, particularly Pathet Lao. There are no indications of any Chinese Communist or North Vietnamese intention to intervene overtly. The danger of such overt intervention would be greater if Thailand or South Vietnam were to intervene militarily.

*The Director of Naval Intelligence and the Acting Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, feel that the situation

11 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 08]
is best described simply as one which presents opportunities for Communist exploitation without regard to the many possibilities for which there are as yet no indications.

11 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 09]
Probable Future High-Level Communist Meeting

Plans are being made to hold another meeting of representatives of all Communist parties in an attempt to resolve the conflict of views which continues to divide the Soviet Union and Communist China.

Most parties, either through conviction or as a result of Soviet pressure, supported the Soviet Union at Bucharest. However, even after a 24 June meeting of representatives of the bloc countries had agreed on an innocuous resolution stressing unity, the Chinese delegate carried his country's opposing views to larger meetings of representatives of all Communist parties on 25 and 26 June.

Apparently on the suggestion of the Rumanian delegate, who was chairing the meetings, an international commission--comprising both bloc and nonbloc delegates--was established to prepare for another conference. This will probably be held in Moscow in conjunction with the USSR's October-Revolution celebration. In November 1957 a similar meeting attended by Mao Tse-tung worked out a declaration which was instrumental in maintaining a facade of unity for some time thereafter.

In addition to its serious concern with the unfavorable effects of the dispute on the image of bloc strength and unity, Moscow is probably increasingly worried over the strain it imposes within national Communist parties whose traditional left-right disagreements are being exacerbated by the existence of two opposing views at the apex of the Communist movement. Although the more disciplined and closely controlled bloc parties have swung behind the Soviet Union in the dispute, especially since the Bucharest meeting, there were indications earlier that support existed within certain of these parties for some of the Chinese views.

Prior to the Bucharest meeting the Chinese also lobbied for their point of view in such international front organizations

[PAGE 10]
as the World Peace Council and the World Federation of Trade Unions. This led to furious discussion in these bodies, thereby confusing the Communists who make up their membership and reducing the effectiveness of their appeal.

Within Communist parties of the free world the debate between the Soviet Union and China has been mirrored in debates between leftist, internationalist factions, who borrow from Chinese declarations for support, and rightist, nationalist groups, who rely on Soviet arguments. In India, for example, the Communist monthly journal has been reprinting Chinese speeches and the inflammatory Red Flag articles, while the weekly publication reprints Soviet speeches and statements. A similar situation apparently exists within the Iraqi Communist party, and, among others, within some Latin American parties.

[PAGE 11]
Khrushchev Hints He May Again Address UN General Assembly On Disarmament

Khrushchev's hint in a 9 August Pravda interview that he would participate in the UN General Assembly disarmament debate this fall suggests that he sees a repeat performance at the UN as a means of refurbishing the image of himself as peacemaker which he attempted to create last September, when he unveiled his scheme for general and complete disarmament before the General Assembly. Khrushchev repeated his defense of the Soviet walkout from the ten-nation disarmament talks in Geneva last June and renewed his attacks on the Western disarmament policy, which he again called "control without disarmament." The interview was probably timed to bolster the Soviet delegation's efforts to prevent the meeting of the UN Disarmament Commission, scheduled on 16 August, which the USSR probably feels would lessen the impact of an appearance by Khrushchev before the General Assembly in September.

Khrushchev may seek to use the UN once again as a forum for announcing a dramatic new disarmament proposal, such as urging a world disarmament conference. On 11 July the Communist-front World Peace Council called for a disarmament conference to be attended by all states, whether or not they are members of the UN, and announced it would undertake a major agitation campaign on the model of the 1950 Stockholm Appeal. Both the council's president and the Soviet delegate to it claimed that the omission of Communist China had given disarmament conferences of the past ten years an "air of unreality." In anticipation of Western proposals to bring about an early resumption of disarmament talks, Khrushchev may call for a world disarmament conference or the inclusion of Communist China and neutral countries as a means of avoiding serious negotiations on this subject until a new US administration takes office. In his letters to the Western powers in late July, Khrushchev asserted that the question of inviting other states to join the talks would arise during the UN session.

Khrushchev may be contemplating an appearance before the General Assembly in conjunction with possible visits to Cuba and Mexico. Raul Castro recently stated that Khrushchev had set a definite date for a trip to Havana, but Mexican officials continue to deny that he has been invited to attend Mexico's independence celebrations.

[PAGE 12]
Proposed Soviet Oil Exploration Assistance to

Pakistan's announcement that it welcomes a Soviet proposal to send a delegation to discuss details of assisting in the exploration of mineral--especially oil--resources shows Rawalpindi's desire to increase its aid from abroad by introducing competition between the US and the bloc. President Ayub presumably hopes to arouse apprehension that Pakistan is moving toward a more independent policy, but he probably does not intend to jeopardize Pakistan's alliance with the United States.

Many Pakistanis have argued for some time that India has secured larger amounts of foreign aid because it accepts help from both free-world and Communist countries. Recent Soviet successes in discovering oil deposits in India and Afghanistan probably have also been factors in Rawalpindi's decision to seek Soviet help in this field.

The Soviet proposal was originally made in 1958 and was renewed in response to a Pakistani inquiry last May. In their public announcements each country, however, now is trying to make it appear that it is responding to the initiative of the other.

The Pakistani military regime may hope that its show of "independence" will strengthen its support among the people, many of whom entertain strong, though usually latent, neutralist sentiments.

[PAGE 13]
AFRICA

UNCLASSIFIED

[PAGE 14]
UAR Stepping Up Support for African Nationalists

The UAR is intensifying its drive to expand its contacts with and support of individual African nationalist leaders as well as tighten its ties with the newly independent states. Convinced that Cairo's mission is to be the center of "anti-imperialist" activities and the leader of the Moslem world, Nasir is attempting to extend his leadership further into the African continent.

Funds have been given to or allotted for nationalist leaders in Kenya, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, the Congo, Nyasaland, and Basutoland, and Islamic leaders in Nigeria and Senegal. Money for an Arabic printing press in the Somali Republic was made available in early July, and $11,200 was sent to London on 21 July for the support of UAR activities among African nationals there. As early as last February Patrice Lumumba received a $21,000 gift from Nasir.

In late July contact was made with Angolan "revolutionary" leaders and arrangements were made to bring them to Cairo. Efforts were being made last May to transfer South African nationalist headquarters to Cairo. Similar efforts have been made with respect to Southwest Africa. Ugandan and Eritrean nationalists have been smuggled to Cairo.

Cairo radio meanwhile continues its anti-Western Swahili-language broadcasts to East Africa. These have taken on an increasingly strident tone and many have been aimed at Zanzibar, where there has been opposition to the establishment of US satellite tracking installations.

In addition to the UAR's direct contacts with Congo Premier Lumumba, Nasir informed President Nkrumah of Ghana on 7 August that he supported Ghanaian plans for "military aid to the Congo outside the scope of the United Nations." Cairo radio announced on 10 August that a military mission will leave for Accra to discuss "what steps should be taken in the Congo crisis."

[PAGE 15]
Laotian Coup Developments:

The area controlled by the rebellious second parachute battalion and other small units allied with it apparently still does not extend beyond Vientiane and its immediate environs.

The provisional executive committee announced by the revolutionary high command in Vientiane on 10 August is a diverse group united mainly by hostility toward the Somsanith government. Its most prominent member is Souvanna Phouma, a former premier who has long advocated stricter neutrality for Laos and believes the Communist Pathet Lao can be more easily handled if brought back into the national community than if forced to continue in armed insurrection. Also on the committee are two generals whose quarrel with the government was based on personal considerations of advancement and opportunities for graft rather than on ideological considerations. A number of disgruntled politicians of varying degrees of leftist persuasion are also included, among them Bong Souvannavong, a neutralist politician who long served as an apologist for the Pathet Lao. Two of Bong's extreme leftist sons appear to have played an important role in the coup.

The Somsanith government apparently will try to mount a counteroffensive against the Vientiane group from Luang Prabang. There is some indication that Defense Minister General Phoumi is shuttling between Thailand and southern Laos in an effort to organize loyalist support in that area. The task of dislodging the rebels from Vientiane by military means during the current rainy season may be sufficiently difficult to dispose Somsanith toward some form of compromise with the revolutionary group. Armed Forces Commander General Ouane's arrival in Vientiane on 10 August apparently represented an effort to find out the rebels' terms. There is some danger that Ouane may be won over to the rebel cause, however, and it seems hardly likely that he will be permitted to leave the capital.

Any compromise between the two contending regimes would in all likelihood lead to some loosening of Laos' ties with the United States,

[PAGE 16]
and a friendlier policy toward the Sino-Soviet bloc, and an effort to reach a negotiated settlement with the Pathet Lao. According to one report, the rebels have told Ouane that their terms include the designation of Souvanna Phouma as premier, "true neutrality," and a rapprochement with the Pathet Lao.

Communist China so far has not reported the coup; North Vietnam broadcasts indicate sympathy for the rebels. Although Hanoi has not specifically endorsed the Kong Le clique, it has rebroadcast rebel communiqués and criticized the Somsanith government.

[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 18]
