The Nigerian Election

Nigeria's general election on 12 December is expected to determine the make-up of the federal government in power when this most populous of all African countries--it has an estimated 35,000,000 inhabitants--gains its independence from Britain next October. The election, which is to fill 312 seats in the House of Representatives, is regarded as crucial by Nigeria's three major parties--the Northern People's Congress (NPC), the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC), and the Action Group (AG). Respectively, they represent, for the most part, Fulani, Ibo, and Yoruba tribal interests and control the federation's self-governing Northern, Eastern, and Western Regions.

Especially concerned about the outcome are the traditional Moslem rulers of the north--the controlling elements in the NPC--whose greatest fear is domination by the more dynamic Christian and pagan tribesmen of the south. These rulers and their adherents may react violently if they fail to secure a controlling voice in the new government, and might even attempt to secede.

Neutral observers have predicted an almost even three-way division of seats among the major parties and their minor-party allies--a result that would probably enable the NPC, which has an "understanding" with the NCNC leadership, to achieve its minimum goal. However, the election is unprecedented in many respects and forecasting is more than normally hazardous--especially after the NPC's unexpected major defeat in last month's UN-supervised plebiscite in the Northern Cameroons trust territory, an area long administered as an integral part of Nigeria's Northern Region.

Although tribal and regional loyalties will be the most influential factors, intimidation and harassment of opposition forces may also play a significant role in determining the final result, particularly in the north. There the traditional rulers enjoy a freer hand with respect to control over local police than do the southern governments. Moreover, the British, anxious to avoid the complications likely to follow a defeat of the NPC, appear to have taken a more lenient attitude toward that party's use of repressive measures against its opponents.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
