[PAGE 01]
7 July 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

7 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: President Sukarno's proclamation of the 1945 constitution provides a legal basis for the virtually unre- stricted powers he has acquired in his ten-year rule. It does not necessarily mean that he will make any determined new effort to solve Indonesia's pressing political, economic, and military problems. Sukarno's return to the old con- stitution is strongly supported by the army, which hopes to get several posts in the next cabinet. Should it achieve a greater political role, the army may make further efforts to curtail the growth and activities of the Communist par- ty.

7 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Cameroon: Violence, perhaps initiated by the extremist wing of the outlawed Communist-influenced nationalist move- ment, the Union of the Cameroons Population (UPC), appears possible in this French trust territory, which is scheduled for independence in January 1960. Terrorist bands have re- cently attacked widely scattered targets--generally involving European interests--and caused at least 13 deaths. The outbreaks of terrorism may be re- lated to threatened labor unrest and reported plots to assas- sinate pro-French government leaders in a UPC effort to focus international attention on Cameroun and influence the United Nations to order new elections before its independence.

III. THE WEST

France: De Gaulle, in his efforts to enhance France's standing in the Western alliance, now apparently envisages regular high-level consultation among France and the other five Common Market members to coordinate the "European" position in NATO and in East-West discussions. The Italians, who in the 25 June talks with De Gaulle in Rome steered him away from his initial proposal for a French-Italian-German combine, appear receptive, and Bonn is giving high-level attention to the proposal. (Page 6)

LATE ITEM

7 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Reinstitution of 1945 Constitution Legalizes Existing Indonesian Situation

President Sukarno's reinstitution of the 1945 constitution on 5 July provides a legal basis for the increased executive powers he has pre-empted over the past ten years and paves the way for continued direct presidential government. Two years ago Sukarno assumed virtual dictatorial powers when he abandoned parliamentary government by appointing his own cabinet. This presidential cabinet, led by Prime Min- ister Djuanda, resigned on 6 July.

President Sukarno himself will head the next cabinet, although a prime minister apparently will carry the bulk of administrative work. A legislature, including regional and functional representatives, and an advisory council are to be created "within the shortest possible time"; the means of their formation--whether by elections or appointment-- has not been specified.

The change in constitution does not provide any ready- made solutions to Indonesia's chronic difficulties, nor does it indicate that Sukarno will make a determined new effort to cope with the problems of a growing Communist party, continuing insurgent activities, and a deteriorating econ- omy. The vaguely written 1945 constitution will lend itself to a flexible, improvised, and highly centralized administra- tion.

Sukarno's return to the old constitution is strongly sup- ported by the army, which hopes to hold several portfolios in the next cabinet. Should it achieve a greater political role, the army may make further efforts to curtail the growth and activities of the Communist party.

7 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 08]
Increased Violence Appears Possible in Cameroun

The growing number of terrorist attacks within the past week in the French trust territory of Cameroun sug- gests that nationalist extremists may be initiating the dis- orders in order to focus international attention on the ter- ritory. The violence, directed at a wide variety of targets, has already resulted in at least 13 deaths, including six Europeans. The government has announced a state of alert in several areas, and armed police patrolled the streets of the capital on 6 July.

The violence appears similar to the former activities of the Union of the Cameroons Population (UPC), the out- lawed nationalist movement which created serious disorders in the seaport of Douala in 1955 and subsequently conducted guerrilla warfare against the government for three years. The UPC apparently split up following its military defeat last autumn, and several former supporters are engaged in ostensibly legal political activities. An extremist wing, however--probably led by Felix Moumie--carries on anti- government activities from other African countries, par- ticularly Guinea, and reportedly may plan to organize a re- volt in Cameroun including an attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Ahidjo.

The UPC's expatriate representatives are trying to ob- tain backing in next fall's UN General Assembly session for new elections--under international supervision--before Cameroun gains its scheduled independence in January 1960.

7 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

De Gaulle Proposes "European" Policy Coordination

French President de Gaulle proposed to Italian Presi- dent Gronchi on 25 June regular high-level consultations among France, Italy, and Germany to organize a common "European" policy. At Italian insistence, he agreed to extend the group to take in all six Common Market coun- tries.

De Gaulle apparently envisages the creation of a new bloc, whose position would be coordinated but whose deci- sions would not be binding on its members, to speak for "Europe" in NATO and in East-West discussions. He reportedly told the Italians that such a formation would permit its members to indicate to the Soviet Union the ex- istence of a strong, united European force. He probably also has in mind the effect of such a combination as a counterweight to US and British influence within NATO.

The Italians, who seemed pleased to have persuaded De Gaulle to broaden his "club" and to work within the NATO framework, appear receptive to his plan, and Bonn, contacted separately, is giving high-level consideration to it. German Finance Minister Etzel stated that the time has come to take a step forward toward European integra- tion on the political level, if the six-nation cohesiveness needed for the Common Market is to be maintained.

De Gaulle's proposal is another in the series of moves he has made to try to enhance France's standing in the Western alliance and to make Paris the spokesman for Continental Europe.

7 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 10]
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
