Daily editorial of 11 February, probably reflecting Peiping's reduced import capabilities, emphasized the need to produce domestically complete sets of industrial machinery. Economic planner Po I-po, perhaps referring to the Soviet-aided projects, has called for particular attention to finishing partly completed plants, maintaining those already in operation, and correcting supply "discrepancies" which now keep these facilities from functioning as complete units. He implied that new construction would be limited until these tasks are fulfilled.

USSR: Computations based on data acquired in connection with the Soviet space launching of 12 February (GMT) and on estimates of Soviet propulsion capabilities tend to support Moscow's announcements regarding the launching of the Venus probe. The similarity of this recent operation to the launchings of 10 and 14 October and 4 February indicates that all four were intended to be solar system probe operations and that all employed similar if not identical vehicles. The launchings in October probably involved attempted probes to Mars and the 4 February operation was probably an unsuccessful Venus shot.
The four Sibir ships in the Pacific which participated in the operation were returning toward their home port of Petropavlovsk on 14 February.

*Burma: Two anti-American demonstrations have taken place in Rangoon in the past two days and feelings will be intensified by the air engagement on 15 February in which three Burmese fighter aircraft shot down a Chinese Nationalist P4Y over northeastern Burma. Taipei claims that the plane was on a reconnaissance mission in connection with future supply drops but intends to take the public position that it was on a "mercy mission" for the relief of Chinese refugees in the area. This incident, in which one of the Burmese fighters was also destroyed, follows a government-sponsored press exposé of new American equipment captured at the former bases of the irregulars. (Backup, Page 3) (Map)
