Anti-American Sentiment in Burma

The issue of the Chinese Nationalist irregulars in northeastern Burma threatens to return US-Burmese relations to the low point they reached in 1953. At that time the Burmese took the Chinese irregular problem to the United Nations, demanding that the Chinese Nationalist government be branded an aggressor. Simultaneously Rangoon canceled American economic aid projects and by implication charged the United States with tacitly approving Taiwan's resupply of the irregulars. Only after extended negotiations in Bangkok and the evacuation of some 7,000 irregulars to Taiwan in 1954 did relations begin to improve.

The current development comes at a time when many senior pro-Western officers have been removed from influential army posts for antigovernment plotting, and the US military aid program in Burma is in jeopardy. The Burmese and English-language press in Rangoon have claimed that some of the equipment captured at former bases of the irregulars was more modern than any made available to the Burmese Army, and newspapers of 15 February carried pictures of the ICA handclasp symbol, allegedly taken from an air-dropped box of ammunition. On 15 February some forty leftists from the Communist-dominated Burma Trade Union Congress pelted the US Embassy with tomatoes; the next day some 500 persons gathered there in a pro-Lumumba demonstration. The Burmese police intervened tardily in both cases.

Burmese Vice Chief of Staff Brigadier Aung Gyi is making a personal investigation of the shootdown. He is reliably quoted as saying: "I am afraid of becoming anti-American in a blind emotional way, and I am afraid the Americans, assuming that the Burmese have gone into the red Chinese bloc, will encourage the Thais and Chinese Nationalists to do anything regardless of American relations with Burma." Aung Gyi also has mentioned the possibility that Burma may again take the problem of the irregulars to the United Nations, in order to prevent the Burma border area from becoming "another Laos."
