Adenauer Opposes Berlin Bundestag Session

West German Defense Minister Strauss has indicated to American officials in Bonn that he is "dubious" regarding the wisdom of Chancellor Adenauer's position that the federal government must avoid taking any action in Berlin "which would create difficulties for our allies." Strauss feels that if the Bundestag session is not held in Berlin this fall, it probably will never be held there again. He added that this would concede Khrushchev a considerable victory by allowing him to dictate what the West should permit to occur in West Berlin.

The press officer of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) Bundestag faction explained Adenauer's position on the ground that any action--whether it had precedent or was something new--which would serve as a pretext for a separate treaty between the USSR and East Germany must be avoided. The CDU spokesman said it was assumed that the United States would not wish to be put in the kind of difficult situation which would result from a separate treaty touched off by holding a Bundestag meeting in Berlin.

The position of the Bonn government was indicated in an article in the 15 July issue of an unofficial CDU publication written by All-German Affairs Minister Ernst Lemmer. Lemmer, the only West Berliner in the Bonn cabinet, maintained that despite the clear right of the Bundestag to meet in Berlin, the government "should avoid placing the powers guaranteeing Berlin's security in a position which public opinion in those countries might not support to the last consequences."

Bonn's position is certain to aggravate the political controversy between the chancellor and West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt, who is the chancellor candidate of the opposition Social Democratic party. Brandt sent a letter to Adenauer on 13 July maintaining that Allied and Federal Republic rights in Berlin should not be abandoned or limited in the face of intensified Soviet threats. He asserted that cancellation of the Bundestag session would seriously undermine Berlin morale.

20 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
