9. Comment on Soviet call for talks on Germany:

The Soviet statement of 15 January calling for new four-power talks on Germany and offering to normalize relations with West Germany if the Paris accords are not ratified was addressed primarily to the West German public. Having failed thus far in its prolonged campaign to exert diplomatic pressure on London and Paris, Moscow is shifting its attention to Bonn, where the Bundestag's final debates on ratification are scheduled for mid-February.

The offer to establish diplomatic relations with West Germany and the stated willingness to accept some undefined form of internationally supervised German elections if West Germany remains free of any defense commitments to the West are the major new points designed to appeal to West Germany.

Moscow has previously urged economic and cultural ties with Bonn, but this is its first offer to establish diplomatic relations. The assertion that this move could contribute to "better mutual understanding and the search for more successful paths" toward German unity is a hint that Bonn could improve the prospects for German reunification by abandoning Adenauer's pro-Western policies and seeking direct contacts with Moscow.

The statement of 15 January is intended to create the impression that Moscow will accept free German elections. The reference to international supervision of German elections, subject to East and West German approval, marks an apparent reversal of the Soviet position. The possibility of such a shift was foreshadowed last August by propaganda which hinted at the possible establishment of a weak supervisory commission, composed of neutrals and excluding the occupation powers, similar to the International Control Commission in Indochina.

In addition to its reference to international supervision, the statement says that all democratic parties should have "freedom of election propaganda" throughout Germany and that the electoral law must take account of existing laws in both East and West Germany. Past Soviet statements on Germany, however, have very narrowly defined "democratic parties" and East and West German election practices are incompatible.
