[PAGE 01]
3 March 1951

Copy No. C1-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Division of North Korean VI Corps receives active role in forward area (page 3).

2. French estimate Viet Minh capabilities (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Large numbers of empty boxcars move east from East Germany (page 3).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Division of North Korean VI Corps receives active role in forward area:

Comment: The VI Corps is one of the three North Korean corps which began moving southward from Manchuria late in January. The 19th Division is the first unit of these three corps known to have arrived in the forward area. Communist plans for a "Fourth Phase" offensive, possibly to occur in March, may rely heavily on such relatively fresh units.

2. French estimate Viet Minh capabilities:

A French official in Tonkin has informed US Consulate Hanoi that the Viet Minh can regroup and resupply themselves sufficiently within three weeks to launch another offensive in the Red River Delta and, in such an event, probably would achieve better coordination than in the January attack. The official added that there was, however, no indication that an imminent Viet Minh action was planned.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Large numbers of empty boxcars move east from East Germany:

February four trains of approximately sixty empty boxcars each and one or two trains of sixty flatcars
[PAGE 04]
equipped with side racks were dispatched daily from Frankfurt-am-Oder to Brest Litovsk. since 15 February most locomotives in the Frankfurt-am-Oder area have been employed on missions to the east.

Comment: This is the first report that large numbers of boxcars have moved east. If it is true, approximately 3,000 boxcars would be involved. Beginning February 20, unusually large numbers of empty flatcars capable of transporting military equipment and vehicles (although only a few can carry tanks) were assembled at various points in the Soviet zone and moved east to Brest Litovsk. In view of these reports, an influx of Soviet military units into East Germany, possibly destined for the still largely-unoccupied Zossen-Wuensdorf area, is a distinct possibility. About 1,800 freight cars are required to transport one full-strength Soviet mechanized division; the number of cars believed to have moved eastward would suffice for about three divisions.
