SOUTH ASIA

7. Indian Government is gravely concerned over possible loss of Iranian oil:
The Secretary of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs says his government is gravely concerned over events in Iran, which not only add to the threat of world war but also might entail the loss to India's economy of vital Iranian oil. On 23 June, according to the Secretary, Prime Minister Nehru sent a message to the Prime Minister of Iran, expressing his hope that the Iranian Government would observe moderation in the oil dispute and attempt to reach an amicable settlement.

Comment: Prime Minister Nehru and the Indian press, motivated largely by feelings of Asiatic nationalism and apparently unaware of possible economic consequences to India, have previously been outspoken in supporting Iranian action to nationalize the oil industry. Now that Iranian oil supplies seem likely to be cut off, they have belatedly remembered that 95 percent of the petroleum products annually consumed in India are imported and that Iran has provided about two-thirds of these imports.

NEAR EAST

8. US considers proposing a sixty-day moratorium in the oil dispute:
The US Department of State is prepared to suggest a "moratorium" to Iran, and the adoption of interim arrangements for 60 days between Iran and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company that would, without prejudice to the issues involved, permit operations and oil shipments to continue until a more permanent settlement could be worked out. When this proposal was submitted to British Foreign Minister Morrison for comment, he indicated that the US proposal appeared both helpful and constructive, and expressed the UK's willingness that such an approach be made. Mr. Morrison urged, however, that it be made clear to the Iranians that operations of the oil industry must be under full AIOC management, and that interim financial arrangements must be along the lines already proposed by the AIOC.

Comment: While the new proposals offer a ray of hope, it is unlikely that they will be acceptable to the Iranians, especially in the form suggested by Morrison, unless Iran is willing to make a major change in its oil nationalization policy. In view of British experience with Iranian intransigence, the UK probably does not attach much hope to this current effort to break the impasse.
