[PAGE 01]
25 March 1953

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet submarine believed sighted off South Africa (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. South Korea seeks substantial American aid to offset budget deficit (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on the new Chief Minister of the Pakistani Punjab (page 4).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet submarine believed sighted off South Africa:

The submarine sighted by a South African pilot off Natal on 12 March is believed to have been a Soviet "L" Class type, according to a Union intelligence officer.

He also states that on 24 February a Soviet tanker sailed from Cape Town, allegedly to refuel Russian whaling vessels in the Antarctic.

Comment: The circumstances of this sighting suggest that it is reliable. Soviet submarines of the "L" Class are capable of long-range operations; they do not normally operate without some kind of support.

FAR EAST

2. South Korea seeks substantial American aid to offset budget deficit:

Acting Prime Minister Paik Tu-chin, in a note delivered to the American Embassy on 21 March, declares that substantial outside aid will be required to cover Korea's 1953-54 budget deficit of 43 billion hwan. The South Korean official states that his country's financial situation is so desperate that "it is difficult, if not impossible, for us to support our armies in the field." The note indicates that the South Korean Government can meet its ordinary nonmilitary expenditures plus only about 25 percent of planned military commitments.

Comment: The South Korean budget is predicated on an increase in the armed forces from 443,000 to 600,000 men. At the official exchange rate, the budget deficit would amount to $715,000,000; in terms of actual purchasing power it amounts to $238,500,000.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on the new Chief Minister of the Pakistani Punjab:

The resignation of Punjab Chief Minister Daultana on 23 March, reportedly at the request of the Pakistani Prime Minister, apparently was brought about chiefly by his inability to control religious rioting aimed at ousting Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan.

His successor, Malik Feroz Khan Noon of the Punjab Moslem League Assembly party, has been Governor of East Pakistan. A personable official, who generally delegates his authority, he may nevertheless be expected to follow the orders of the Moslem League high command and to bring a measure of stability to the Punjab.

[PAGE 05]
