[PAGE 01]
26 November 1957    Copy No. 138

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH TO PRESS DEVELOPMENT OF IRBM (page 3).

2. BRITISH REVIEW OF DEFENSE POLICIES MAY DAMAGE NATO (page 4).

3. SOVIET-EGYPTIAN ECONOMIC AGREEMENT (page 5).

4. HANOI MOVES TO RETAIN INFLUENCE IN PATHET LAO MOVEMENT (page 6).

5. SOUTH KOREAN MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND UNIFORMS DESTINED FOR NORTH KOREA SEIZED (page 7).

6. OUSTER OF PRO-COMMUNIST MAYOR ON OKINAWA (page 8).

7. LABOR STRIKES CONTINUE ON CEYLON (page 9).

8. SPAIN FEARS US ARMS DELIVERY TO MOROCCO (page 10).

[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH TO PRESS DEVELOPMENT OF IRBM

Comment on:

Top French military research and
development officials informed
American representatives on 19
November that Minister of Defense
Chaban-Delmas has reached a firm decision to proceed
with development of an IRBM, presumably to be equipped
with an atomic warhead. The French officials said they
would like US help, since they are only in the initial stages
of development. They have given the project top priority
despite the heavy sacrifices such a program will impose
on France. They feel they must have a weapon with retaliatory capability because in the future there will no longer
be a choice between attack and defense, and purely defensive weapons must therefore receive second priority.

On 21 November a French Atomic
Energy Commission official made the first explicit admission that work is in progress on a French atomic
weapon. This is one of several indications that the French
government has made the formal political decision, long
hinted as imminent, to proceed with the manufacture of atomic
weapons. French scientists and technical experts could probably produce a bomb in 1958.

The French public can be expected to support the government in its determination not to accept any
proposed NATO allocation of the Western defense effort which
would prevent France from becoming a nuclear power. The
Paris government and press reacted sharply last week to press
reports of an alleged Anglo-American agreement to monopolize
manufacture of nuclear weapons within the North Atlantic alliance.

[PAGE 05]
2. BRITISH REVIEW OF DEFENSE POLICIES MAY DAMAGE NATO

Comment on:

The United States NATO mission says
that Britain has indicated that it might
disown the recommendations that will
come from the US-British-French Military Standing Group's current study of
the forces needed to defend Europe. The
mission believes that the very existence
of Britain's proposal for a new NATO
strategy review will tend to undermine the resolution of
those members who are determined to support present doctrine and procedure.

Britain's proposal that a small group, civilian
as well as military, be set up to study revision of strategy appears to stem partly from its desire to rationalize to British
public opinion its planned shifts in British defense policy.

[PAGE 06]
3. SOVIET- EGYPTIAN ECONOMIC AGREEMENT

Comment on:

Amir's request that a Soviet loan be made in hard
currency was rejected by Khrushchev, who said, "It is an
insult, asking us to give you money so you can buy from the
Americans."

The agreement has not yet been signed,
according to a reported statement by presidential adviser
Ali Sabri. Nasir is sending Minister of Industry Aziz Sidqi
to Moscow to investigate prices of equipment to be ordered
under the agreement.

Nasir said that
Amir rejected Soviet proposals for a "reorganization" of the
Egyptian army, using Soviet military specialists. At one
time in the discussions on this point, Amir is reported to
have threatened to leave the meeting unless the subject was
dropped.

[PAGE 07]
4. HANOI MOVES TO RETAIN INFLUENCE IN PATHET LAO MOVEMENT

Comment on:

While Hanoi is withdrawing military
equipment and Vietnamese cadres
from the two northern provinces of
Laos, it is acting to retain considerable influence over the Pathet Lao.

Viet Minh will station one or two
senior cadres in each Laotian province and maintain Viet Minh-trained
Laotian cadres in top posts of the Laotian Communist party.

Hanoi
is making a last-minute effort to send supplies, including
rice, into the Pathet-controlled provinces by the end of
November. Some of these supplies may be used to maintain the morale and good will of the local populace during
the transfer of authority of the two northern provinces to
the royal government, and some may be destined for clandestine supply depots.

Many Laotian government officials
feel that as many as half of the Pathet Lao troops will not
surrender but will "stay in the bush" or cross into North
Vietnam. These troops may be held in reserve in North
Vietnam to ensure against violation of Communist interests during the implementation of the settlement accords.

[PAGE 08]
5. SOUTH KOREAN MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND UNIFORMS DESTINED FOR NORTH KOREA SEIZED

An American official in Seoul has confirmed a local press report that the
South Korean navy recently seized a
shipment of South Korean military equipment destined for North Korea. The contraband reportedly
consisted of enough military supplies for a company, including uniforms and insignia presumably to be used by "Communist spies or guerrillas" infiltrating into South Korea.

The American embassy notes that the
South Korean navy is investigating the affair and that the outcome may prove extremely embarrassing to the South Korean army.

Comment

While the running of South Korean contraband into North Korea has often been reported, this is the first confirmed incident of major significance. The involvement of army supplies probably will further detract from the army's waning prestige, already undermined by factionalism, graft, and the assassination of "Snake"
Kim, the former army counterintelligence chief.

Should the opposition Democratic party
exploit the affair to embarrass the administration, the position of recently appointed Army Chief of Staff Paek Son-yop could be jeopardized. Paek already is opposed by some members of the governing Liberal party and is harassed by subordinates who hope to benefit from his ouster.

[PAGE 09]
6. OUSTER OF PRO-COMMUNIST MAYOR ON OKINAWA

Comment on:

The reaction on Okinawa to the ouster
of pro-Communist Kamejiro Senaga as
mayor of Naha on 25 November is likely
to be one of relief that the months-long
political impasse is over. The leftist Okinawan People's
party, however, probably will call for protest demonstrations to be staged by certain labor groups, teachers, and
students.

Senaga was voted out of office by the Naha
city assembly after the US high commissioner amended existing ordinances to permit the passage of a no-confidence motion
by a simple majority without the presence of the two-thirds
quorum formerly required.

A mayoralty election, from which Senaga
will be excluded, will be held early in January. The favored
candidate is expected to be Tatsuo Taira, a former governor
of Okinawa and a political independent, who appears to have
the best chance of multiparty support. Senaga's candidacy has
been blocked by extending from the central to the local level an
ordinance barring felons and certain other criminals from elective office. Senaga was convicted of perjury and conspiracy to
violate immigration laws in 1954 and was imprisoned for 18
months.

A spokesman for the Japanese government
refused to comment on the ouster, but the Japanese Socialists
are planning to promote a protest movement.

[PAGE 10]
7. LABOR STRIKES CONTINUE ON CEYLON

Week-end talks between Prime Minister Bandaranaike and Ceylonese
labor leaders whose unions began a
crippling series of strikes on 20
November have apparently failed to end existing unrest.
Although some unions are said to have reported back to
work, having received promises their demands for higher
wages would be investigated, latest reports state that
12,000 hospital workers are to strike on 28 November,
1,200 members of the railway stationmasters' union have
served 21 days' strike notice, and 750 shipyard employees
are still on strike.

The pattern of the strikes suggests that
many unions, noting the government's willingness to make
concessions, are serving strike notices in the hope of participating in any wage raises or other compensations ultimately sanctioned. If this is so, Bandaranaike may find
himself faced with an increasing amount of labor unrest and,
consequently, with growing financial and political problems.

[PAGE 11]
8. SPAIN FEARS US ARMS DELIVERY TO MOROCCO

Spanish Foreign Minister Castiella informed Ambassador Lodge on 23 November that he feared Moroccan King
Mohamed V would seek an arms deal
with the US during his visit to Washington. Castiella
warned that the consequences in Spain of such an agreement would be serious.

Castiella expressed the fear that weapons furnished under any such agreement would eventually reach the irregular Moroccan Army of Liberation, which clashed with Spanish forces in the enclave of Ifni on 22 November.

Comment

Morocco does not need arms as urgently
as does Tunisia, and it seems unlikely that
the King plans to request arms assistance from the United States.

Spain rushed reinforcements to Ifni and
Spanish Sahara early this month. Madrid may be expected
to become increasingly sensitive to any moves which might
strengthen the position of irregular Moroccan forces in the
area.
