Military and Police Units in Salvador Capital Reinforced

Army and police units concentrated in the capital city dur-
ing the day and evening of 25 January, following the overthrow
of the three-month-old government early that morning. Mobs
in front of the presidential palace who were shouting against the
military and calling for a general strike to protest the coup were
dispersed by early evening. However, sporadic shooting continued
in the city and vandalism, including the firing and overturning of
automobiles and buses, has taken place. There is still no reason
to doubt the capability of the armed forces to restore order.
However, their sensitivity to public opinion might lead them to seek
accommodation with the mob leaders if the disorders, which are
probably Communist led, continue for several days and cause much
bloodshed.

The new five-man junta is conservative in orientation and
is led by former army chief of staff Col. Anibal Portillo and
Lt. Col. Julio Rivera, commandant of the military school.
These officers named three civilians to the junta: Dr. Jose
Antonio Rodriguez Porth, a lawyer and former dean of the law
school of the National University; Dr. Jose Enrique Valiente,
a prominent physician and former vice dean of the medical
school; and Dr. Feliciano Avelar, a conservative lawyer. All five
junta members are believed friendly to the United States.
A cabinet was also named early on 26 January.

Colonel Portillo, apparent instigator of the coup, addressed
the nation on the evening of 25 January. He said the coup was
against Osorio as well as against the Communists and spoke of
both as equal dangers which had threatened Salvadoran democ-
racy. He reiterated the promise stated earlier in the day on
the official radio that it was the desire of the military that
El Salvador "return as soon as possible to constitutionality."
Dr. Rodriguez Porth also spoke along similar lines. He prom-
ised the "fullest guarantees" of free elections and said that the

27 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
