[PAGE 01]
25 January 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. POSSIBLE LONG-DISTANCE TEST FLIGHT BY SOVIET AIRCRAFT (page 3).

2. CHINESE COMMUNIST OFFICIALS INVITED TO BURMA BORDER CONFERENCE (page 4).

3. IRAQI PREMIER REQUESTS US SUPPORT AGAINST SAUDI SUBVERSION (page 5).

4. SAUDI INFLUENCE STRONG IN JORDANIAN CABINET (page 6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 7)

[PAGE 04]
1. POSSIBLE LONG-DISTANCE TEST FLIGHT BY
SOVIET AIRCRAFT

On 7 and 8 January an aircraft, tentatively identified as a heavy bomber under the control of the Ministry of Aviation Industry, flew from the ministry's test center at Ramenskoye, near Moscow, and returned on a flight which may have covered 7,500 nautical miles without landing. Although flight details are obscure for the first five hours and the aircraft was unreported for a two-hour period later, the aircraft was in continuous flight for 19 hours.

Comment
Refueling could have occurred during the two-hour gap in coverage. However, the turbo-prop heavy bomber BEAR, first observed in May 1955, is believed capable of a flight of this distance without refueling.

This flight, if continuous, would be the first noted Soviet flight in the ranges necessary for two-way bombing missions against the United States. The longest flight previously noted in Soviet communications occurred in September 1955 and covered approximately 4,300 nautical miles. (Concurred in by OSI)

[PAGE 05]
2. CHINESE COMMUNIST OFFICIALS INVITED TO BURMA
BORDER CONFERENCE

The Burmese government has invited Peiping's ambassador in Rangoon, its consul general in Lashio, and over 100 local officials and chieftains from Yunnan Province to attend a conference to be held on 7 and 8 February in north Burma near the Chinese border. Premier Nu will lead the Burmese government delegation.

The purpose of the conference will be to "promote the welfare of the border peoples of Burma." It is anticipated that about 3,000 people will participate.

Comment
This conference is apparently being convened primarily to impress on Peiping that Burma is determined to retain sovereignty over its border regions and that the border tribes are loyal to Rangoon. Portions of Burma's 1,000-mile frontier with China have never been demarcated, and Peiping in the past has sought to subvert border tribes. Moreover, periodic Chinese Communist military incursions into the Wa States have been reported.

By such a demonstration, the Burmese may hope to strengthen their position in future boundary negotiations against any revival by Peiping of Chinese claims that a large part of north Burma belongs to China.

[PAGE 06]
3. IRAQI PREMIER REQUESTS US SUPPORT AGAINST
SAUDI SUBVERSION

Iraqi premier Nuri Said has expressed to the American embassy his serious concern over Egyptian-Saudi subversive activities in Iraq and has made a strong plea for American support, stating that he hoped the United States would find some way to cut off the flow of Saudi money to agitators and intriguers.

Nuri and other Iraqi officials said that they had discovered an Egyptian attempt to subvert the Iraqi army, and that Egypt and Saudi Arabia were maintaining close contacts with anti-Nuri elements. The officials added that Egypt is involved in smuggling bombs and explosives into Iraq.

The Iraqi government has made several arrests and is carefully checking Egyptian and Saudi diplomatic missions and their nationals employed in the Iraqi government who are reported involved in espionage activities.

Comment
The Iraqis, who have previously reported Egyptian and Saudi intrigue, recently demanded the recall of the Egyptian army attache. They may be preparing for some kind of a showdown, possibly the severing of relations with Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

Egypt and Saudi Arabia strongly oppose the Baghdad pact and Iraqi attempts to gain more adherents. They are probably trying to incite disturbances and discontent in order to bring about the eventual downfall of Nuri, who was primarily responsible for Iraq's adherence to the pact.

[PAGE 07]
4. SAUDI INFLUENCE STRONG IN JORDANIAN CABINET

Comment
Rifai appears to have been trying to maintain a noncontroversial position since the formation of his cabinet on 9 January, but is responsive to pressure from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Syria aimed at inducing Jordan to renounce its annual British subsidy in favor of an Arab grant.

Although Jordan's King Hussain reportedly favors maintaining the alignment with Britain and ultimate adherence to the Baghdad pact, his influence has been ineffectual during the past few weeks. Saudi and Egyptian agents probably could incite new violence throughout Jordan should the Rifai government not appear co-operative.

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 24 January)

An Israeli spokesman told the American army attache in Tel Aviv that Israel fired with "heavy artillery" on Egyptian positions in the El Auja demilitarized zone on 21 January after 45 minutes of Egyptian mortar fire. The attache commented that this was probably 155mm howitzer equipment, which would be the first time the Israelis have used this size gun on the frontier.

The Jordan government has charged that an Israeli patrol penetrated six miles into Jordan territory south of the Dead Sea and exchanged fire with Jordanian national guardsmen. (Press)

In Damascus Chief of Staff Shuqayr, commenting to the American army attache on Israeli press reports that the Syrians were purchasing arms from the Czechs, said that a Syrian mission is in Prague to expedite shipment of spare parts for tanks. Shuqayr said Syria could get T-34 tanks with a five-year supply of spare parts if it wanted them but had taken no action yet as "some still oppose a deal with the Soviets." He also said Egypt would furnish Syria with some antiaircraft equipment in the near future but that he did not know whether it would be British equipment or Soviet (Czech) 85mm caliber. He added that the Israeli source of reports that Syria was dealing with the Czechs was an Israeli army purchasing mission in Prague.

Shuqayr's remarks regarding Syrian dealings with the Czechs are the first such admission to American officials.
