Situation in Laos

The commander of the 1st Military Region, Colonel Houmpanh, is going to come out in support of the Savannakhet rebels, possibly in the next day or so. Houmpanh, whose headquarters is in Luang Prabang, previously has maintained a cautiously neutral position between the rival camps, although during the past few days he has leaned toward Phoumi. According to Houmpanh, the top military figure in the Vientiane regime--General Ouanee--is associated with the plan.

If Houmpanh acts, four of Laos' five military regional commanders will be lined up behind Phoumi. Premier Souvanna Phouma, who recently decided to move his government to Luang Prabang, where it would be less subject to direct influence by Kong Le, would almost certainly reverse his decision. With the great bulk of the army arrayed against him, Souvanna would probably be forced into closer dependence on Kong Le, who today called for a shake-up in the top command of the Laotian Army, demonstrating once again that he does not see his role limited to that of a battalion commander.

Souvanna Phouma told the press on 14 October that he is determined to stick to his neutralist policy and added, "If the Americans are willing to understand this, it is fine; if they do not, it is too bad." Souvanna continues to hint broadly that he will be forced to turn to the Communist bloc unless American aid is resumed. Soviet Ambassador Abramov parried reporters' questions on possible Soviet aid on his arrival on 13 October but indicated he would make a statement on the subject after he presented his credentials to the King.

In the first substantive talks between the Vientiane government and the Pathet Lao on 13 October, the Pathets reportedly called for a "Cambodian-type neutrality" and for action against the Savannakhet regime. Vientiane is, in effect, being asked to sign a "separate peace" with the Pathets. The Pathet negotiator said that he reserved the right to attack any troops which in his opinion do not support the policy of neutrality.
