[PAGE 01]
23 Jmie 1951
Copy No. C, J- ~
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Malik intends to receive World Peace Council delegation (page 3)o
2. Canadians hesitant over Greek-Turkish NA TO membership (pag~ 3}o

FAR EAST
3. Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo adamant on reparations
(page 4).

NEAR EAST
4. British Government disclose,s policy in Iranian situation (page 4)o
5. Iran's requests for oil technicians rejected (page 6)0

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Violation of Czech airspace by US jets alleged to be fmtenUoinaJ
(page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Spain requests wheat loan from- Italy (page 7)o

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Malik int.enQs to receive World Peace Council delegation~: 3.3(h)(2)
Following a request from President Joliot￾Curie of the World,Peace Council, Soviet UN
delegate Malik, in his capacity as President
of the UN Security Council for the month of
June, has agreed to receive a World Peace
Council delegation in New York" The US del￾egation to the UN believes that this and other
developments may indicate a Soviet intention
to use the occasion of the first anmversary of
the Korean invasion as a sounding board for the
"peace campaign. " Amo:rig other possible steps, Malik may call a Security
Council meeting on 25 June for that purpose.

Comment~ ThE~ delegation mentioned above is
presumably the group which the World Peace Council previously sought to
dispatch to Secretary General Lie with demands for a revision of UN pol￾icies, particularly with respect to Korea. Lie has refused to see the dele￾gation in New York, although at one time he offered to meet it in Europe -·-
an offer which was declined by the WPC. Malik' s reception of the delegaUon
could be prevented by a US State Department refusal to grant entrance visas.

2. Canadians hesitant over Greek-Turkish NATO membership: 3.3(h)(2)

[PAGE 04]
Comment~ Pearson stated in an off-the￾record press conference on 8 June that Canada was not opposed to includ￾ing Greece and Turkey in NATO but would not take the lead to secure their
admission.

FAR EAST
3. Philippine Foreign Secretary Romulo adamant on reparations~ 3.3(h)(2)
Foreign Secretary Romulo has informed the US
Minister in Manila that his government is not
satisfied with the new US compromise formula
on Japanese reparations and that it will not re￾cede from the position that Japan must pay reparati.ons. He added that
failure to establish Japanese liability would be regarded in the Philippines
as evidence of the government's lack of an independent foreign policy" He
further stated that the Philippines did not want to be forced "to walk out of
the peace negotiations. "

Comment~ Any recession from the position
universally held in the Philippines, i. e. , that Japan both should and can
pay reparations, will expose the Philippine Government to severe political
attack" Romulo' s suggestion that the· Philippines might withdraw from the
treaty negotiations, however, should not bt~ taken seri.ously.

NEAR EAST
L.,,/
4. British Government discloses policy in Iranian situation~ 3.3(h)(2)
Permanent Under Secretary Strang of the UK
Foreign Office has told the US Embassy in·
London that measures are being taken to evacu￾ate Anglo-Iranian OU Company personnel from
outlying oilfields into the Abadan area" They
will be kept there as long as possible in the
fa int hope that a more realistic aUitude will
prevail among the Iranians, Strang stated that

[PAGE 05]
in the event the UK finds it necessary to withdraw, British shipping will not
move the Iranian oil -- which, the UK estimates, would cut Iranian exports
to about 5 percent of capacity. \

A British War Office official says that mil~
itary operations will be ordered only if British lives are endangered, in
which case troops would be flown from the Suez Canal Zone to Shaiba field,
Iraq, and would proceed overland toward Ahadan (about 40 miles) to cover
the evacuation of British personnel. These troops would be immediately
withdrawn when the evacuation is completed. Alerted fighter squadrons
would be used only to cover troop movements; naval units are also on hand
to assist if necessary. The number of transport planes based in the Canal /
Zone will be increased by6,'f 5 now being flown out from the UK. .,, 

In the event of a Communist comp foll.mying the
evacuation, the UK might wish to re-examine the si,wation in consultation
with the US; however, the British estimate that there is only a small pos￾sibility of a Soviet attempt to take control of the oil industry. According
to Under Secretary Strang, although no final decision has yet been take:n~
the UK mi.gh t ask the US to support an embargo agai.nst Iran9 and might
further ask the US to stop economic and military assistance to the Iranian
Government. 3.3(h)(2)

There is little hope that a nmore realistic
attitude" will be adopted by Iran towards the AIOCo On 21 lune~ Prime
'1!inister Mossadeq won a confidence vote from both the Majl is (Lower
lIGuse) and the Senate, which eliminates a:ny possibility that he might wavfff
at this late date in carrying out "nationalization" of the oil industry" Con--
fronted with this situation, the UK appears to hope that an opportunUy to
establish a bargaining position in Iran will present itself after the proposed
retaliatory measures have been applied and have hastened the deterioration
of Iran's economic situationo

[PAGE 06]
5. Iran's requests for oil technicians rejected; 3.3(h)(2)
The Italian Ambassador in Tehran has informE~d
US Ambassador Grady that several weeks ago
Prime Minister Mossadeq asked if the Italian
oil industry could supply Ira.n with oil techn.icians. 
The Italians refused this request, but agreed to send two representatives
of the Italian oil industry to confer with the Iranians on how the Italians
carried out oil nationalization. ·

Comment~ Iran has tried to get technicians
and advisors from various countries, including France, Switzerland~
Sweden, Germany and the UR So far it has obtained no firm commitments
from technicians in any forei.gn country, and it appears that Ira:n1 s efforts
along these lines may be unavailing. The major US oH companies have
tacitly agreed to have no part in the Iranian oil expE.oUation dispute, with
the ever ilncreasing likelihood that Iran will find itself exceedingly hard￾pressed if the AIOC withdraws its personnel from Iran. I I 3.3(h)(2)
I I the Soviet Oil Administration in Austria may have been mak--
ing a preliminary check to see who might he interested in. going toJ Iran.
However, there ha.s been no ccmfirmationl I 3.3(h)(2)

[PAGE 07]
EASTERN EUROPE
7. Violation of Czech airspace by US jets alleged to be intentional~
In a note delivered to the US Embassy on 21
June, the Czechoslovak Foreign Office stated
that the recent violations of Cz_ech airspace
were clearly not accidental overflights but de￾3.3(h)(2)
liberate incursions. The note reiterated previous charges that violatiorus
of Czech airspace by US planes are continually increasing;, listing 1T6
violations since 15 January, and added that in the most recent case the
planes were "heavily armed military jets in a state of· readiness to fire. "
For these reasons, the Czechoslovak authorities could not rely om US as -
surances that the two planes were on a training mission~ but must await the
results of a very careful exaininaUon. The note concluded that the Czecho￾slovak Government views the recent violation of its aerial border as partic￾ularly serious and will deal with the case i.n accordaIDl.ce wUh the principles
of international law.

WESTERN EUROPE
8. 0
Spain requests wheat loan from Italy; 3.3(h)(2)
The Italian Government has informed the ECA
mi.ssion in Rome that it is wHling to graht an
urgent Spanish request for a loan of 20~ 000 tons
of wheatJ provided either a US or British agency
guarantees the loan" The Italians refuse to accept the guarantee of Spanish
banks because they feel that economic ccmditions in Spa,i:m make doubtful the
repayment of the loan.

Comment~ It 1ls believed that wUh the harvest￾ing of the Spanish wheat crop, and with further foreign purchases~ Spanish
wheat supplies wUl be more than adequate to meet minimum consumption
needs. The efforts of the Spanish Government to obtain UaljaJJl_ wheat may be
caused by temporary shortages in local stocks. It is evident that the Span￾ish r,~gime i,s apprehensive, over_ the disaffection of the populace and fears
eve!\,temporary reduction-&( the bread ration.o . I,
