[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Comment on Soviet governmental reorganization (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
2. Comment on arrest of Hindu rightist leaders in India (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Comment on West German Court's decision on Bonn and Paris treaties (page 5).
5. French and British closer to EDC understanding (page 6).
6. Italian Communists reported preparing for violence to avert electoral defeat (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Comment on Soviet governmental reorganization:

The sweeping governmental changes, centralizing power in the Council of Ministers under Malenkov as Chairman and four first-deputy chairmen, Beria, Molotov, Kaganovich, and Bulganin, appears to be a move aimed at tightening and streamlining the administrative organization. The extensive reorganization and merger of several major ministries can also be viewed in this manner. Organizationally, it restores a system similar to that used during World War II.

The return of various members of the old Politburo as heads of key ministries places them in experienced hands. This is an important move in countering any unrest within the Orbit or possible aggression from the West.

Despite Malenkov's pre-eminent position, the fact that the top members of the old Politburo have been accorded prominence, with four of them renamed as deputy chairmen, suggests at least a temporary agreement among them and presents a united front to the Russian people and to the world. It is believed that these shifts significantly lessen the possibility of any immediate struggle for power or any violent internal upheaval.

While Malenkov headed the list of the party Central Committee Presidium, he was not specifically named the party's Secretary General. It is presumed that as senior secretary he presently has the power which this key position carries.

The extensive scope of the reorganizations, particularly the economic ministries, and the speed with which they were announced appears to reflect a previously well-organized plan for a crisis. Analysis of the reorganization of economic ministries indicates that the only two major fabricating industries not included in this reorganization were the Ministry of Armaments and the Ministry of the Aviation Industry. The eight remaining heavy fabricating ministries have been merged into two.
[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

2. Comment on arrest of Hindu rightist leaders in India:

By arresting the leaders of three rightist Hindu communal organizations and a number of other individuals in Delhi on 6 March, the Indian Government has taken its first important step in suppressing agitation for the immediate union of Kashmir State with India.

The arrests apparently followed an announcement on the same day that these three organizations had decided to launch a civil disobedience movement in Delhi and in Pathankot, near the Kashmir border, in support of Hindu landowners in Jammu. Since November, this latter group has carried on a campaign of violent opposition to the leftist land reforms and the Moslem leadership of Sheikh Abdullah's government in Indian-held Kashmir. The Nehru government, which to date has only verbally opposed Hindu rightist activities, will not tolerate communal unrest in the national capital.

The arrests may also indicate growing Indian recognition that continued use of violence by Kashmiri Hindus, supported by Indian communal organizations, might create a fear of Hindu domination and turn the Moslem population of Kashmir toward Pakistan, thus jeopardizing India's hold on the state.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on West German Court's decision on Bonn and Paris treaties:

Although the West German Constitutional Court rejected on 7 March the government's petition for an immediate ruling on the Bonn and Paris treaties, the Bundestag is expected to ratify them by the end of March. Bundesrat approval, however, has now become much more unpredictable and will probably not be forthcoming until summer, when the federal election campaign gets under way.

In any event, the opposition Social Democratic Party will almost certainly resubmit its case to the court should both houses of parliament approve the treaties in the next two months.

Should the court then declare the treaties incompatible with the constitution, a decision which is now somewhat more likely, a governing coalition of all major parties might be formed following the elections. After some delay this coalition would likely "re-ratify" the treaties by amending the constitution.
[PAGE 06]
5. French and British closer to EDC understanding:

An acceptable solution to the problem of British ties with the EDC may be forthcoming if Britain accepts a modified French proposal which would in effect ask Britain simply to reaffirm its present continental commitments under NATO.

The French Foreign Ministry has been more successful in negotiations with the British on this point than it has been willing to admit in order to give a domestic impression that the government has made every effort to force the absolute maximum in association from the British.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman, who has informed American officials of the new proposal, states that France will be satisfied with a link between British political participation in the EDC and British maintenance of troops on the Continent.

Comment: The British have already agreed to be represented at the EDC executive level. If the proposal for British "participation" satisfies the French Socialists, Premier Mayer will be able to ignore Gaullist pressure to scrap the treaty.

The Saar deadlock must yet be broken, however, before the government presses for ratification.

6. Italian Communists reported preparing for violence to avert electoral defeat:

The leadership of the Italian Communist Party has ordered the creation of action squads to stir up violence throughout Italy if the party's defeat appears certain because of the new electoral law. the squads would be made up of seasoned Communist partisans of World War II resistance groups.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Although the security forces would be capable of dealing with any disturbances, Communist filibusters have delayed final action on the electoral law until 22 March, and the government is using Communist obstructionism as an excuse for postponing EDC ratification.
