[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
31 October 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

3. Indian Ambassador believes Peiping "feeling way" toward compromise on POW issue (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. New French-German Saar negotiations appear distant (page 6).
8. Comment on growing pressure in France for four-power talks (page 7).

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Indian Ambassador believes Peiping "feeling way" toward compromise on POW issue:

Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai recently summoned the Indian Ambassador at midnight for a two-hour talk. Chou denounced the United States for refusing to discuss the latest Chinese proposals on the prisoner of war issue and insisted that all Chinese prisoners must be repatriated.

The Ambassador believes that the Chinese Communists are "feeling the way" toward a compromise based primarily on a distinction between Chinese Communist and North Korean prisoners.

Comment: Communist negotiators already have compromised to the extent of reducing their repatriation demands from 134,000 to 116,000 prisoners. Chou En-lai has further suggested a willingness to settle for repatriation of 100,000 provided they include all 20,000 Chinese of whom some 16,000 are unwilling to be repatriated.

Soviet officials have recently hinted in private conversations in New York that the Communists are approaching the UN position on the POW issue. Although Peiping may be preparing to compromise on its demand for the 20,000 Chinese, neither the latest Chinese proposals nor Chou's remarks to the Indian Ambassador provide specific evidence of such an intention.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. New French-German Saar negotiations appear distant:

The West German Government appears unperturbed by the recent breakdown of the Saar negotiations, and there is little indication that it will ask for a resumption of French-German talks soon.

In Paris, Foreign Minister Schuman is reported to have said that little possibility exists for a compromise of the disputed economic issues until a new West German Government is elected in 1953.

Minister President Hoffman of the Saar territory has declared that the Saar elections will be held on 30 November, and that no further postponement is possible unless France and West Germany reach an agreement before 8 November, when the electoral campaign will begin.

Comment: Chancellor Adenauer seems convinced that West German ratification of the Bonn and Paris treaties is assured, and apparently feels that an immediate settlement of the Saar dispute is now less urgent. West German diplomats also have suggested that the French Government may be more amenable to compromise when its domestic political position improves.

[PAGE 07]
8. Comment on growing pressure in France for four-power talks:

Growing pressure within Premier Pinay's coalition for four-power talks is suggested by the recent proposal of National Assembly deputy Andre Denis that opponents of the Bonn and Paris treaties unite in proposing immediate discussions with the Soviet Union. Denis made his proposal coincident with an announcement that he had had "most useful talks" in Berlin with East German Foreign Minister Dertinger and Deputy Premier Nuschke. The results of his visit, he said, had been made known to "those responsible for our policy."

[PAGE 08]
This pressure for four-power talks appears to be contributing to the government's consideration of Vyshinsky's recent approach to Ambassador Joxe for bilateral efforts toward an East-West detente. Denis is prominent among the approximately 30 left-wing deputies of Foreign Minister Schuman's own Popular Republican Party whom Pinay now needs to conciliate in order to avoid defeat in critical Assembly voting on foreign policy issues.
