[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

15 January 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SOVIET SIXTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN

4. ALGERIAN SITUATION WORSENING

5. LAOS SUBMITS PROPOSALS FOR SETTLEMENT OF
PAT HET LAO ISSUE

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. THE SOVIET SIXTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN

The draft directives for the Soviet
Sixth Five-Year Plan which will be
presented to the 20th Party Congress
continue the focus of Soviet economic policy on the growth
of heavy industry. Successful completion of the Fifth Five-
Year Plan (1951-55) has raised Soviet industrial output
from about one fifth that of the US to over one quarter.
Fulfillment of the new goals for industry, which are be-
lieved to be within Soviet capabilities, will make Soviet
production over one third as large as US production in
1960.

The new directives define surpassing
the United States in per capita production as "the main
economic task of the USSR." During the coming five years,
this policy will strengthen the USSR's military potential but
precludes any rapid improvement in living standards. The
plans for light industry and agriculture, which are less
likely to be fulfilled, are relatively modest in some instances
and will produce steady but small gains in individual consump-
tion.

Industrial output for the heavy industry
sector is to increase by 70 percent. In comparison, a 91-
percent increase was achieved under the previous plan.
However, growth of the energy sector will continue at ap-
proximately the same rate as that attained during 1951-55.
The 1960 output goals for steel, pig iron, coal, oil and elec-
tric power exceed by substantial margins the goals set by
Stalin in 1946 to be reached during 1960-65.

To accomplish these tasks, heavy indus-
try will receive the lion's share of new investments totaling
67 percent more than investments under the Fifth Five-Year
Plan. An increasing share will be devoted to advanced types
of machinery, with a goal of raising industrial labor pro-
ductivity by 50 percent. For the first time, existing plants
are to be modernized on a large scale. With the manpower
supply tightening, the state labor force is to grow by only
6.5 million in comparison with 7.8 million during 1951-55.
[PAGE 05]
Agricultural policy continues to rely on
the "new lands" and corn schemes, coupled with further
mechanization and closer control of the collective farms.
These policies have produced disappointing results to date,
and the 1960 targets remain unrealistic. Lagging agricul-
ture will continue to hamper the growth of light industry,
as the directives admit it has done in the past.

The large increase planned in total in-
vestment will also slow down the growth of consumption.
Retail trade during the five-year period is to increase by
only 50 percent as compared with about 90 percent in the
previous period. Increases in real income, according to
Soviet estimates, also are to shrink: the per capita gain
for state employees is planned at 30 percent as compared
to a 39-percent increase achieved from 1951 to 1955. The
figures for collective farmers show the same trend (40 per-
cent planned against 50 percent claimed for the Fifth Five-
Year Plan). The higher figures reflect the party's continu-
ing effort to bring rural living standards closer to those in
the towns. A vigorous attack on the housing shortage calls
for a doubling of state housing construction during the Sixth
Five-Year Plan.
[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
4. ALGERIAN SITUATION WORSENING

Military measures in Algeria remain
ineffective and terrorist activities are
spreading, in the opinion of the Ameri-
can consul general in Algiers. At the
same time, the differences between the extremists and
moderates are growing both among the French settlers
and the Algerian Moslems.

Jacques Chevallier, mayor of Algiers
and the leading local French liberal, informed the consul
general that a general insurrection is probable in 60 days
if France has not replaced the ineffective administration
in Algeria with something realistic.

Comment

Other sources confirm the worsening
situation in Algeria. The resignation
of Governor General Soustelle, who continues to advocate
closer Algerian integration with France, was reported
and denied on 12 January when details of his recommen-
dations were made public. His replacement nevertheless
seems assured.
[PAGE 10]
5. LAOS SUBMITS PROPOSALS FOR SETTLEMENT OF
PAT HET LAO ISSUE

The Laotian government in a letter of
7 January outlining new proposals for
a settlement of the Pathet Lao problem,
has suggested to the Geneva co-chair-
men, Eden and Molotov, that the Pathet Lao, under close
supervision of the International Control Commission, sur-
render their arms by 15 March. Pathet Lao personnel,
after processing, would be reintegrated into Laotian
society and all "foreign elements" returned to their coun-
try of origin. The letter concluded with a warning that un-
less the co-chairmen promoted some such remedy, the
government might be compelled to take direct action to re-
store order.

Comment

This letter reflects an increased de-
termination on the part of the Laotian
government, strengthened by the recent elections, to end
the dispute over the two northern provinces. The pro-
posals parallel closely those contained in a 7 January ICC
resolution, calling for the prompt restoration of royal con-
trol over the two provinces and the nondiscriminatory in-
tegration of the Pathet Lao into the national community.

The abstention of the Polish delegate
on the ICC resolution as well as the recent inauguration
by the Pathet Lao of a broadened national front indicates
that the Communists have no intention of giving up their
foothold in Laos at this time.
[PAGE 11]
