[PAGE 01]
4 January 1955

Copy No. 79

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Burma strongest advocate of Peiping's participation in Afro-Asian conference (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Comment on Iraq's suspension of diplomatic relations with USSR (page 5).
6. Israel planning further step to force West to recognize Jerusalem as capital (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

9. Comment on assassination of Panamanian president Remon (page 8).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Burma strongest advocate of Peiping's participation in Afro-Asian conference:

During the meeting of the Colombo powers last week, Burma was primarily responsible for Communist China being invited to the Afro-Asian conference which is to be held in Indonesia next April, according to the permanent secretary of the Ceylonese Ministry of External Affairs. The Burmese were reported to have indicated they would not attend the conference if Peiping were not invited. Ceylon and Pakistan were opposed, but India and Indonesia sided with Burma. The Ceylonese added that it was generally agreed the conference would be postponed if more than a third of the invited countries failed to accept.

[PAGE 05]
5. Comment on Iraq's suspension of diplomatic relations with USSR:

Iraq's suspension of diplomatic relations with the USSR on 3 January results from Prime Minister Nuri Said's long-standing determination to reduce Communist activity in the country.

[PAGE 06]
Nuri has pushed a strong anti-Communist line since he came to office on 4 August. Early in November, the foreign minister told the American ambassador that if the USSR did not voluntarily close its legation in Baghdad, Iraq "must find a way to close it."

With an estimated 12,000 to 15,000 Communists in Iraq--more than in any other Arab country--Nuri apparently hopes the closing of the Soviet legation in Baghdad will eliminate a source of considerable Communist agitation and thereby weaken internal opposition to his plans for strengthening Iraq's defenses with Western assistance. Czechoslovakia, however, continues to maintain a diplomatic mission in Iraq.

6. Israel planning further step to force West to recognize Jerusalem as capital:

French ambassador Gilbert in Tel Aviv told the American ambassador on 29 December that the Israeli government would insist on an exequatur to the new French consul general in Jerusalem. Both ambassadors believe this new demand of Israel's is a further step to force recognition of its position in Jerusalem.

Comment: The 1949 UN resolution placed Jerusalem under international administration, and currently none of the consuls there has an exequatur.

This new Israeli demand is a maneuver to gain French recognition of Israel's control over the new city of Jerusalem despite the UN resolutions. It may be followed by similar tactics against other countries having consuls in Jerusalem.

The Arab states were greatly concerned over the presentation of credentials in Jerusalem in early November by the British and American ambassadors. The Arabs would therefore probably try to force the issue of the internationalization of Jerusalem in the UN should this new demand of Israel's be complied with.

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
LATIN AMERICA

9. Comment on assassination of Panamanian president Remon:

The assassination of Panamanian president Remon on 2 January may introduce a new period of political instability into Panama. José Ramon Guizado, first vice president and foreign minister who was sworn in as president on 3 January, will, according to the constitution, complete Remon's term which would have ended in October 1956.

Guizado's administration can not be expected to have the strength which characterized that of Remon, whose position was based on his personal following among politicians, the police, and the public. The National Guard, however, Panama's only armed force, reportedly is supporting the Guizado government.

[PAGE 09]
Remon's death may delay formal signing and ratification of new agreements between Panama and the United States on the Canal Zone, especially since Guizado's attitude toward the United States is unclear. Communists have not been strong in Panama, but they, in combination with other oppositionists, probably will attempt to exploit the president's assassination and the treaty issue through disorders.
