[PAGE 01]
US OFFICIALS ONLY

2 July 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Turkish ambassador urges request for release of nationals held in Soviet Union (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Comment on situation in Cambodia (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Comment on Mossadeq victory in the Iranian Majlis (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Dutch lower house may postpone EDC vote until fall (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Turkish ambassador urges request for release of nationals held in Soviet Union:

On 25 June Turkish ambassador Hozar in Moscow recommended to Ankara that he be authorized to approach Foreign Minister Molotov requesting exit visas for the Turkish citizens who were removed for security reasons from the Soviet Black Sea coast to Siberia in 1949 and 1952.

He recommended that the approach be timed to coincide with the Turkish answer to the Soviet note of 30 May. Hozar feels that the chances of obtaining results from such a maneuver are better now than previously and that it would "provide at the same time the opportunity for a real test of the good intentions of the Soviets." According to Hozar, the Turks are in a camp of approximately 70,000, including Greeks and Iranians.

Comment: Release of a few Turkish, Greek, and Iranian nationals would be in line with Moscow's recent friendly gestures. The return of a large number of those removed from the Black Sea area for security purposes is not anticipated.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
3. Comment on situation in Cambodia:

A durable political settlement of the Cambodian dispute with France appears remote and an armed clash is possible at any time. A precarious modus vivendi may be reached, however, which would postpone a breakdown in relations. While the Cambodian people apparently are calm, the king can count on overwhelming popular support for whatever course he takes.

During the last few days, the French have reinforced their garrison at Phnom Penh, the capital, with two battalions of North African troops, which have an unsavory reputation in Cambodia. The Cambodian government countered by assigning its troops to guard public buildings in the capital. Cambodian forces would be no match for the French and general hostilities would probably be similar to the fighting in Vietnam: general insecurity outside of French-held urban centers.

The king's demands allow little room for negotiation. He wants France to grant Cambodia a status in the French Union comparable to that of a member of the British Commonwealth. While the French might shortly offer more concessions, they are not likely to give such complete independence, which would include the right to withdraw from the Union. The French also fear that Vietnam and Laos would immediately demand similar status,

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Comment on Mossadeq victory in the Iranian Majlis:

The 1 July election of a Mossadeq supporter, Abdollah Moazzami, as president of the Majlis was accomplished by

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
the National Front with the support of the independents. These deputies apparently responded to the prime minister's threat on 26 June to dismiss the Majlis if his government did not receive majority support.

Although Mossadeq now controls this important parliamentary post, the opposition can still prevent a quorum, and there is no indication that Majlis members will be amenable to his will in the future.

Mullah Kashani, former president of the Majlis, who on 30 June issued a strong denunciation of Mossadeq's dictatorial tactics, can be expected temporarily to limit his political activities. Kashani's own ambitions will induce him, however, to continue working against the prime minister.

WESTERN EUROPE

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
6. Dutch lower house may postpone EDC vote until fall:

Interpreting the postponement of the Bermuda talks as a lessening of the need for urgent action on the EDC, the Dutch Second Chamber is considering delaying a vote on the treaty until the fall parliamentary session, according to a leading Labor Party deputy. The American ambassador in The Hague believes that the government itself is having second thoughts about urging ratification during the present session.

Comment: The Netherlands is the only EDC nation where favorable parliamentary action on the treaty had been expected this summer, or in time to bolster Chancellor Adenauer's efforts to keep alive popular belief in European integration during the crucial West German election campaign.

- 6 -
