[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

4 June 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

3. Outgoing Vietnamese premier asks for direct receipt of US aid (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Germans react favorably to proposed Allied countermoves in Berlin (page 4).
5. East German Border Police expands (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Outgoing Vietnamese premier asks for direct receipt of US aid:

Premier Tran Van Huu told the American Minister in Saigon on 2 June that he hoped any additional American financial aid for the Vietnam Army obtained by Minister of Associated States Letourneau during his coming visit to Washington would be granted directly to the Vietnamese Government. American aid which passed through the hands of the French, Huu said, gave the latter too much power to intervene in internal political affairs and to maintain excessive privileges in Vietnam.

Comment: Bao Dai abruptly dismissed Huu on 3 June and appointed Interior Minister Nguyen Van Tam as his successor. Factors underlying this move appear to be Huu's limited ability and his increasingly open opposition to French power and privileges in Vietnam.

Tam has been praised by the American Legation for his energy and ability. He possesses a long record of close and harmonious collaboration with the French.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Germans react favorably to proposed Allied countermoves in Berlin:

West Berlin's Mayor Reuter approves of the American proposal to increase stockpiles in Berlin to provide a 12-month rather than a 6-month reserve of fuel and food, as a demonstration of willingness to assist Berlin. Reuter points out, however, that such a program would entail heavy costs and additional construction, since all available depots are already full.

Meanwhile, a report from the High Commissioner's office in Bonn states that the US proposal to stage a brief display of American air power in Berlin in the near future would have a salutary effect in West Germany. The report adds that even the small demonstration of power involved in the recent movement of several truckloads of armed American troops along the Berlin autobahn was favorably received.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
5. East German Border Police expands:

A reorganization of the East German Border Police, begun on 1 January, has resulted in a strength increase of approximately 17 percent, with an authorized increase in the strength of the average border unit from 820 to 960 men. The expansion appears to have affected only those units employed on the zonal border.

Reinforcements have been furnished by other civil police organizations as well as by the Alert Police.

Comment: The sudden East German decree increasing border security measures on 27 May, and the subsequent establishment of a three-mile security zone, had been carefully planned. In February of this year the Socialist Unity Party was already talking of the necessity of curbing the infiltration of the German Democratic Republic by Western agents. It is indicated that measures were taken several months ago to build up the border police, which are now reportedly replacing Soviet rifle battalions on frontier duty.

- 5 -
