[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

9 October 1958
Copy No. C 59

*Army and State Department review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
Watch Committee conclusion:  No Sino-Soviet bloc coun-
try intends deliberately to initiate direct military action
against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral
to the orbit in the immediate future, except as noted below.

*Macao:  Tension building up in Macao may lead to serious
disturbances between pro-Communist and pro-Nationalist Chi-
nese on 10 October, the Nationalist holiday.  Nationalist sym-
pathizers are infuriated by the Portuguese Governor's deci-
sion to ban ceremonial arches because of threats by local Com-
munists to call a general strike and forcibly remove the
Nationalist flags.  The Chinese Communists reportedly have
threatened to send troops into Macao and cut off its food and
water supply in the event of disturbances.

Communist China - Guinea:  Communist China's recogn-
ition of Guinea on 7 October, three days after a similar Soviet
move, is another indication that the bloc intends to move
rapidly to take advantage of the opportunity to increase Com-
munist influence in West Africa.  While the US and the UK

9 Oct 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
have delayed recognition in deference to a French re-
quest, Paris has denied official communications facil-
ities for congratulatory messages to Guinea Premier
Sekou Toure.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Cambodia:  Phnom Penh's decision to oust Nationalist
China's representative leaves the Chinese Communists vir-
tually unopposed in their efforts to control Cambodia's in-
fluential Chinese population.  This decision was almost
certainly taken with the approval of Premier Sihanouk.

Jordan:  Prime Minister Rifai has been subjected to
strong parliamentary attacks which possibly had support
within the palace.  This appears to be the first move in a
concerted effort by Rifai's enemies inside and outside the
government to force his resignation and pave the way for a
more "popular" government.  Pro-UAR elements would be
tempted to take advantage of the political turmoil which could
develop.

UAR:  Nasir's reorganization of the UAR administra-
tive structure, which appears to have transferred potential
Syrian troublemakers to Cairo, aims at increasing his con-
trol over Syria.  He has removed several other Syrian officers

9 Oct 58    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
from military posts by appointing them as members of the
executive council for Syria.  Troublesome but influential
Vice Presidents Hawrani and Baghdadi have been retained,
while a conservative but less important Syrian nationalist
Vice President Asali has been dropped.
(Page 8)

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East:  Although
a deliberate initiation of open hostilities in the Middle East
is unlikely in the immediate future, the situation remains
unstable throughout the area, particularly where US and UK
interests or commitments are involved, and incidents and
coups could occur at any time.

NOTE:  In Lebanon political and religious strife continue to
endanger the stability of the country, and incidents could oc-
cur involving US forces.

The survival of the Jordanian regime continues to be threat-
ened.  If the regime in Jordan collapses, action by Israel
and other neighboring countries to take control of Jordanian
territory is likely.  In Iraq internal conditions continue to
invite action by the Communists and pro-Nasir elements to
further their respective objectives.

Cyprus:  Talks under NATO auspices have been indefinite-
ly adjourned to allow additional behind-the-scenes attempts
to bring Greece, Britain, and Turkey together.  Such progress
as may have been made thus far is threatened by Ankara's cur-
rent negative attitude and by its unexpected appointment of a
new consul general to Cyprus.  This leaves his predecessor
as full-time Turkish representative to the Cyprus government
and is a move certain to irritate the Greeks.
(Page 9)

9 Oct 58    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Panama:  Striking secondary-school students appear
to be gathering support from university students and labor
unions in their efforts to enforce demands against the gov-
ernment.  The situation is explosive and agitators could
provoke riots with little warning in Panama City.

9 Oct 58    DAILY BRIEF    v
[PAGE 13]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laotian Political Situation

Prime Minister Phoui Sananikone touched off a political
storm when he signed a monetary reform agreement with the
United States on 30 September.  While there was considerable
opposition to reform in principle, assembly deputies are even
more annoyed at Phoui's failure to consult with them prior to
signing the accord.  Leaks almost immediately undercut Phoui's
efforts to keep the new dollar exchange rate secret until after
the assembly adjourns on 11 October.  Under public pressure,
he now plans to present the issue to the assembly on 10 Octo-
ber.

Bitterness is strongest within Phoui's own party, the re-
cently formed Rally of the Lao People (RLP), and ex-Premier
Souvanna Phouma and assembly President Pheng "Phongsavan
apparently are maneuvering to bring down the government on a
vote of confidence.  Souvanna's frequent meetings during the
last week of September with Souphanouvong, leader of the
Communist-dominated Neo Lao Hak Zat, and with the leader
of the leftist Santiphab party suggest that he may hope to head
a government of national union.

Phoui's position, however, has been somewhat strength-
ened by public backing from the crown prince and the recent
cooperation of Deputy Premier Katay.  In addition, RLP dep-
uties may fear that a vote against Phoui would probably split
their party on the lines of the former Nationalist and Independ-
ent parties, thus leaving the leftist opposition in a pivot position
in the assembly.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 16]
Cambodia Ousts Chinese Nationalist Representative

The Cambodian Government's order to Nationalist Chi-
na's unofficial representative, Consul Liao Chung-chin, to
leave Phnom Penh within the next two weeks has removed
the last rallying point for anti-Communist elements among
the local Chinese.  Communist China, which opened an
embassy in Phnom Penh only last month, now is virtually
unopposed in its efforts to gain control over the country's
large and influential Overseas Chinese population.  Phnom
Penh's action last May abolishing the long-established, semi-
autonomous Overseas Chinese administrative system had
already removed a major obstacle to Communist subversion.

This latest step against Taipei was undoubtedly taken
with the approval of Premier Sihanouk, possibly before his
departure for the United States in early September.  The
issue may, in fact, have been decided in principle at the
time of Cambodia's recognition of Communist China in
accordance with Peiping's insistence on the concept of
"one China."  Sihanouk, who opposes domestic Communism,
at the same time considers pro-Peiping sentiment among
the approximately 300,000 local Chinese as insignificant.

Peiping has been overtly circumspect in its relations
with Cambodia, but is making steady propaganda headway
through educational and cultural media among the local
Chinese.  At least one Communist propaganda film is being
shown daily in Phnom Penh and most provincial centers, and
Radio Peiping recently has undertaken to augment its daily
30-minute Cambodian-language broadcasts.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 17]
Developments in Jordan

Members of both houses of Jordan's Parliament on 7
October attacked the government's pro-Western policies and
its harsh internal rule in a debate over the reply to King
Husayn's speech from the throne.

In the House, a group led by Speaker Mustapha Khalifa
demanded restoration of normal relations with the UAR and
other Arab states, and the lifting of martial law and other
emergency measures.  Members called for immediate with-
drawal of British troops, and insisted that Parliament had in
no way agreed to the original request that the British come in.
In the Senate session, which was closed to the public, Dr.
Husayn Khalidi, a possible "popular" replacement for Prime
Minister Rifai, is said to have made violent attacks on the
government.

It is generally believed in Amman that the attacks could
not have taken place without foreknowledge and acquiescence
of the palace, and that this is another sign the King is preparing
to replace Rifai.  Although the King himself was responsible for
the decision to seek British intervention, it might suit Rifai's
rival, Court Minister Majalli, to blame all unpopular features of
present Jordanian life on Rifai.  The King appears convinced that
extensive cabinet changes are necessary before the departure of
British troops puts the government back on its own resources.
The King's recent conferences with opposition leaders further
suggest that an attempt to form a government with broadened
popular support is not far off.

King Husayn remains eager to depart for a "vacation" in
Europe following withdrawal of British troops.  His apparent
determination to hold a public trial of conspirators who planned his
overthrow early this summer could, however, arouse ultranational-
ist agitation and delay the British withdrawal.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 18]
Nasir's Reorganization of the UAR Government

The most important aspect of Nasir's reorganization of
the UAR administrative structure appears to be the transfer
of several potential Syrian troublemakers to Cairo and the
removal of a number of Syrian officers from military posts.
Baath leader Akram Hawrani, recently reported to be slated
for dismissal, has been retained as a vice president and
given the relatively unimportant post of UAR minister of jus-
tice with offices in Cairo.  Amin Nafuri, former minister of
communications for the Syrian Region, and former Minister
of Municipal and Village Affairs Abd al-Karim, who may have
been suspected of conspiring with Iraqi anti-UAR elements,
also have been shifted to Cairo.  These moves have eliminated
from the Syrian scene two ministers who may have retained
military followings there.

In the Syrian Region another ex-army officer was put in
charge of enforcing the new agricultural reform law, while
two other officers with army supporters were removed from
military posts and relegated to the ministries of municipal
and village affairs and social and labor affairs.  In all three
posts there are good chances of much public criticism and
well-publicized failure.  Syrian influence in what was once the
Syrian army has been further reduced.

Hawrani's removal from the Syrian scene at a time when
his long-cherished dream of land reform is to be carried out
by his rivals appears to be another step in downgrading his
Baath party, which has done much to promote land reform.
Nasir may have wished to eliminate Hawrani altogether, but
probably feared the possible repercussions in Syria at this
crucial time.  His decision to retain Abd al-Latif Baghdadi
as a vice president may be considered in much the same light,
while the dropping of the conservative Syrian nationalist, Sabri
al-Asali, was facilitated by his implication in "anti-Syrian"
Iraqi plotting.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 19]
Cyprus

Following a brief meeting on 8 October the North Atlantic
Council postponed discussion of the Cyprus issue indefinite-
ly to permit further informal conversations.

At a meeting on 6 October, agreement seemed near on ac-
ceptance of NATO Secretary General Spaak's paper which called
for a conference of interested parties in the Cyprus dispute.
Britain announced acceptance and the Greek representative ac-
cepted with the provision that the ultimate status of Cyprus--
following the interim British seven-year plan--could also be
discussed by the conferees.  The Turkish representative crit-
icized the Spaak paper but agreed to seek further instructions
from Ankara.

On 7 October, officials informed the American charge in
Turkey of Ankara's "last word" on the Turkish position.  The
Turks rejected the Spaak paper, refused to permit discussion
of a final solution for Cyprus because of "the present climate
of hostility," and declined to accept the suggested participation
of Spaak, Italy, France, or the United States at the proposed
conference.  In addition, the Turks again questioned Spaak's
impartiality and denounced NATO "pressure tactics."

On the same day, Turkish officials confirmed a press re-
port that the Turkish consul general in Liverpool had been ap-
pointed consul general in Nicosia to replace Burhan Isin, who
had recently been appointed the first Turkish representative to
Governor Foot.  Appointment of Isin to the additional post was
a move by Premier Menderes designed to calm Greek fears
that partition was being fostered by the British plan.  This lat-
est Turkish move will probably bring an angry reaction from
Athens.

The present Turkish attitude toward a conference and the
change in the status of Isin indicate that Foreign Minister Zorlu,
advocate of a "tough" policy on the Cyprus issue, has apparently
convinced Premier Menderes that the latter's conciliatory move
in appointing Isin, rather than another diplomat as Turkish rep-
resentative, was in error.  Zorlu's intransigent stand on matters
of Turkish foreign policy could make further negotiations toward
a Cyprus solution extremely difficult.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 9
[PAGE 20]
III. THE WEST

Panama

The Panamanian Government may be unable to contain
growing support for the week-old strike of secondary-school
students in Panama City.  University students and labor
unions are considering joining in the strike, which is aimed
at restricting the power of the corrupt National Guard, the
ruling oligarchy's main source of power and the country's
only armed force.  Although most university students oppose
violence and the National Guard thus far has been careful not
to provoke it, a few Communist and opposition agitators are
actively encouraging violent action and some student groups
are armed.  Tension is high and a relatively minor incident
could touch off bloodshed.

The striking secondary-school students seized control
of Panama City's largest high school on 4 October.  The
National Guard promptly surrounded the school, but efforts
to dislodge the students have failed.  Opposition politicians
are probably using student agitation in an effort to oust
President de la Guardia.  Communist student leaders are
exploiting student grievances to enhance their influence in
the ultranationalist student organizations, prime target of the
weak Communist party.

If the strike becomes general, violence may break out
before 13 October when the assembly is scheduled to take
up legislation to limit guard power.  Younger officers of the
guard are displeased with restraints imposed on them by
senior commanders in the face of provocation.  During
serious riots last May, agitators found how easy it was to
arouse Panama City's restless, poverty-stricken mobs.

9 Oct 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 10
[PAGE 21]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Special Adviser to the President
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 22]
