[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

6 December 1957

Copy No. 138

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. KHRUSHCHEV URGES WEST TO RECOGNIZE STATUS QUO
IN EASTERN EUROPE

3. COMMUNISTS HAMPERED BY BERLIN'S FOUR-POWER
STATUS

4. SPAAK PROPOSES SPECIAL NATO MINISTERIAL CONFER-
ENCE IN MARCH

5. GREEK TACTICS FOR CYPRUS DEBATE OUTLINED

7. GHANA DECIDES ON DIPLOMATIC EXCHANGE WITH USSR

8. INDONESIA LIKELY TO BE MORE RECEPTIVE TO BLOC
AID

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. KHRUSHCHEV URGES WEST TO RECOGNIZE STATUS QUO
IN EASTERN EUROPE

Comment on:

In a statement to a group of ambassadors
at a Burmese embassy reception on 3
December, Soviet party chief Khrushchev
called for Western recognition of the sta-
tus quo in Eastern Europe as the "important thing" in lessen-
ing East-West tensions. He disparaged the "hopes" of the
West that Communist control can be changed and called on
the West to give up such an objective in exchange for a Soviet
agreement not to attempt to change the system of government
in capitalist countries. In reply to a question regarding the
USSR's role if a Communist revolution took place in a capital-
ist state, Khrushchev asserted that the Soviet Union would not
intervene, but would give the revolutionaries "sympathy."

Khrushchev reiterated that the question of
German reunification must be settled directly by the Federal
Republic and the East German regime and asserted that the
USSR would not discuss the question even if the West "waited
a hundred years."

The party chief also repeated the Soviet
proposal that the NATO and Warsaw pact powers might be able
to conclude a nonaggression agreement and the view that fur-
ther progress in the UN disarmament talks depends on "bal-
ancing" the UN Disarmament Commission. When Ambassador
Thompson pointed out the difficulty of serious negotiations in a
further enlarged body, Khrushchev suggested that the size of
the commission could be reduced in such a way as to "balance"
its membership.

The ambassador believes that Khrushchev's
remarks reflect Soviet long-range concern over the situation
in Eastern Europe and fear of renewed satellite uprisings. Mos-
cow may feel that the present international situation has im-
proved the chances of gaining Western recognition of Soviet
hegemony over Eastern Europe.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. COMMUNISTS HAMPERED BY BERLIN'S
FOUR-POWER STATUS

Comment on:

Berlin's status as
a city under quadripartite control is
inhibiting measures the East German
regime considers essential to close the
sector border between East and West Ber-
lin,

the USSR had
given Party First Secretary Walter Ulbricht a free hand to
solve the Berlin problem, but there is evidence indicating
that he was warned not to violate the city's quadripartite
status. rapid and drastic measures
are required to halt black marketing, stop the flow of cur-
rency and refugees to West Berlin, and obstruct the activity
of Western agents.

In a further move to enhance East Ger-
man sovereignty, Soviet officials at the Berlin Air Safety
Center on 4 December rejected for the third time an Amer-
ican request for clearance for a courier flight between Ber-
lin and Warsaw on the grounds that such clearance can be
given only by the German Democratic Republic, which, Soviet
officials say, has full control over its air space. The Rus-
sians then made an informal offer to submit American requests
for the "consideration of the authorities of the German Demo-
cratic Republic." The Allied position is that the USSR, as one
of the four occupying powers, is the only responsible authority
in East Germany.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. SPAAK PROPOSES SPECIAL NATO MINISTERIAL
CONFERENCE IN MARCH

Comment on:

Secretary General Spaak's proposal for
a special NATO ministerial conference
next March to work out a unified military
policy seems designed to speed up action
by member governments on MC-70--the paper on the essen-
tial forces needed to carry out NATO's military mission--
which is to be completed late in January.

In the draft of his report to be made at
the 16-18 December NATO meeting, Spaak voices concern
over the widening gap between forces requirements and coun-
try commitments. He feels that foreign, defense, and finance
ministers and NATO military authorities should meet to analyze
the MC-70 conclusions and agree on a distribution of commit-
ments which might be more binding on the member countries
than present Annual Review procedure.

Spaak's suggestion is designed to facilitate
decisive action on politically sensitive subjects, by bringing to-
gether political, economic, and military officials at ministerial
level at the outset of planning for whose implementation they
would later be responsible. Spaak views the March conference
as preparatory to decisions which would be taken at the regular
spring NATO ministerial meeting usually held in May. The
proposal has some points in common with recent British ideas
on the need for a revised NATO strategy that "makes sense" and
is economically feasible.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. GREEK TACTICS FOR CYPRUS DEBATE OUTLINED

Comment on:

Greek Foreign Minister Averoff appears
willing to accept postponement until next
year of the UN Cyprus debate, scheduled
to follow the current debate on Algeria.

He will be particularly receptive to postponement if the UN
requests implementation of last February's General Assembly
resolution calling for continued negotiations toward a settle-
ment. Greece has consistently interpreted the proposed nego-
tiations as involving only representatives of Britain and Cyprus.

Postponement of the debate would serve
Greek interests by preventing Turkey from specifically being
recognized as a participant in the dispute. The Greek govern-
ment might even take the position that postponement affords a
means for deferring a decision until Britain has a labor govern-
ment, which would be more favorably disposed toward self-
determination for Cyprus than is the present government.

In any UN Cyprus debate, the Greeks,
pressed by Archbishop Makarios, are certain to bring up the
issue of alleged British atrocities on Cyprus. London has in-
dicated a desire for a short, smooth debate but has warned
that if Greece raises the atrocities question, Britain will re-
ply by presenting evidence that Athens and Makarios have been
connected with past violence on Cyprus.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. GHANA DECIDES ON DIPLOMATIC EXCHANGE
WITH USSR

Comment on:

Prime Minister Nkrumah of Ghana plans
to announce, probably about 15 December,
that his government will establish diplo-
matic relations with the USSR "in due
course." However, Accra apparently does not intend to ex-
change representatives until the latter part of next year.

Permanent Secretary for Defense and
External Affairs Adu says the USSR was told that a personnel
shortage precluded acceptance of a Soviet diplomatic estab-
lishment in the near future and that the Ghana government would
not enter such a relationship until after its trade mission visits
the Soviet Union "next July." Adu appeared confident that any
Soviet effort to advance the timing of the exchange could be fore-
stalled.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
8. INDONESIA LIKELY TO BE MORE RECEPTIVE
TO BLOC AID

Comment on:

Indonesia can be expected to be in-
creasingly receptive to Soviet bloc
offers of economic and technical as-
sistance in view of the anti-Dutch
drive which is almost certain to create
a serious vacuum of technical talent.

According to two reliable sources, the
Indonesian embassy in Moscow has been
approached by Soviet officials with an
offer of ships. According to another source, the Soviet em-
bassy in Djakarta has requested permission to hold an
atomic exposition in 1958 and has also asked if it may send
survey teams to Indonesia to test land and water for radio-
activity.

Approximately 1,000 Soviet jeeps have
been delivered under a contract signed about a year ago for
the purchase of 4,000. In addition, the Soviet aid agreement
for $100,000,000 is still awaiting implementation.

Faced with the probable loss of Dutch and
Australian pilots and technicians, the Indonesian national air-
line is seeking the services of other foreign personnel. The
British embassy in Djakarta has received a report that Indo-
nesia has asked Poland to provide pilots and maintenance men.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
ANNEX

Watch Report 383, 5 December 1957
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the
Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostil-
ities against the continental US or its possessions in
the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostil-
ities against US forces abroad, US allies or areas pe-
ripheral to the orbit in the immediate future.

C. A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is
unlikely in the immediate future. However, tensions in
the Middle East continue to create possibilities for serious
incidents.

6 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
[PAGE 14]
