FAR EAST

1. Comment on Chou En-lai's speech on foreign affairs:

Chou En-lai's 30 July speech on foreign affairs before the National People's Congress supports previous indications that the Chinese Communists at Geneva will attempt to set up negotiations with the United States on larger issues and that Moscow and Peiping are holding in reserve a proposal for an international conference on Far Eastern questions.

Chou said explicitly that Peiping will try to make the Geneva talks "pave the way" for further negotiations with Washington. Chou reiterated that the basic topic for such negotiations should be the American "occupation" of Formosa and American "interference with the liberation" of Nationalist-held offshore islands. He identified as related issues the "extremely unjust policy of blockade and embargo" and American "air intrusions, war maneuvers, and subversive activities."

Chou reaffirmed the long-standing Chinese Communist position that the United States should withdraw its armed forces from the China area, that there is no need for a cease-fire, and that the "liberation" of Formosa is an "internal" affair to be arranged if possible through negotiations between Peiping and the "local authorities" on Formosa.

Chou's generally conciliatory speech indicates that the Chinese Communists in the Geneva talks will avoid making proposals obviously unacceptable to the United States, such as the exchange of thousands of anti-Communist Chinese students in the United States for the few Americans detained in China. Chou suggested that the United States and Communist China each formally entrust a third party to look after the interests of its nationals, primarily their repatriation.

Resuming the line the Chinese Communists followed just prior to the summit talks, Chou stated that "we support the proposal" of various Asian leaders for an international conference on Far Eastern issues. In addition to the Formosa problem, "the most tense" in the Far East, Chou again identified the outstanding issues as the "threat" to the Geneva agreements on Indochina and the failure to achieve "peaceful unification" of Korea.

Chou for the first time explicitly stated that Peiping desires "a pact of collective peace" among Pacific powers, including the United States, "to replace antagonistic military blocs..."
