King Saud Moves to Resume Control of Saudi Arabian Government

After more than two years of intermittent maneuvering, King Saud appears to have succeeded at least temporarily in reasserting his authority over the Saudi Government. On 21 December he issued a royal decree "accepting the resignation" of his brother Crown Prince Faysal from the post of prime minister, and announcing that, in accord with Saudi law, all the other ministers were considered as having also resigned. In subsequent decrees, the King proclaimed that he personally was "assuming the powers" of prime minister, and he named a completely new cabinet.

Saud, now 58 years old, ruled as absolute monarch from November 1953 until March 1958. During this period he made a number of political blunders, including a clumsy attempt to have UAR President Nasir assassinated. He also sanctioned such lavish royal family expenditures that the country was brought to the verge of bankruptcy. In March 1958 a coalition of influential senior Saudi princes forced him to delegate most of his authority to Faysal, who became prime minister, as well as minister of foreign affairs, and for a time also functioned as finance minister and interior minister.

Faysal's administration restricted royal expenditures and restored financial order, but was cautious and slow to move in initiating even limited political reforms and economic development programs. The King, constantly seeking means of reasserting his authority and eager to line up the support of the "liberal" Saudi princes, as well as the influential merchants and traders, asserted that he would act much more decisively in these fields.

The composition of his new cabinet suggests that he now has the backing of the "liberal" princes. This factor, together with the adherence of most Saudi tribal leaders and the loyalty of at least the White Army and Royal Guard Regiment, would appear to give him the upper hand should Faysal and his supporters attempt a quick counter-move.

If, however, the King begins to act as ineptly as he did during his earlier period of rule, he might create, sooner or later, conditions which would not only assure his own displacement but also hasten the overthrow of the monarchy itself.

22 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
