Laos, of which at least 100 have been confirmed. North Vietnamese transports were also active on 20 December in flights to Na San and Dien Bien Phu, and several North Vietnamese aircraft were scheduled to make flights to Sam Neua, Vientiane, and Dien Bien Phu on 21 December. This is the first time North Vietnamese transports have been scheduled to fly to Vientiane.

No flights were made to Nanning by Chinese Communist transports on 20 December, and the Chinese Communist civil transports which had been shuttling between Nanning and Hanoi were also apparently inactive on 20 December. The three Soviet AN-12s which left Canton on 20 December have returned to the USSR, however, six additional AN-12's have been scheduled from Sverdlovsk to Irkutsk and it is possible that they may continue on to Peiping and thence to Canton with additional supplies for Laos.

Operations by General Phoumi's forces against the retreating Kong Le force were to have begun on 21 December. Commando elements under Major Siho have already advanced well up the road from Vientiane to Luang Prabang and expect to engage Kong Le's main forces shortly, about 40 miles north of Vientiane. Soviet aircraft have been observed dropping supplies to Kong Le in this area, which apparently is the base for the present regrouping and resupply operations. Kong Le is said to have two companies of his Second Paratroop Battalion there plus a reported 600 Pathet Lao troops. Some of the Soviet-provided howitzers used in the defense of Vientiane are reported to be in position in the vicinity.

The operational plans of Phoumi's forces call for the ultimate commitment of three infantry battalions, plus artillery and armored support elements. Elements of the First Paratroop Battalion will also be employed. The contemplated three-pronged offensive is aimed at dispersing the Kong Le and Pathet Lao forces into isolated pockets, to be dealt with in later phases of the operation.

The Boun Oum government is gradually establishing itself in Vientiane. Premier Boun Oum's first public pronouncements have been notable for their uncompromising tone in

22 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
