The Situation in Laos

King Savang now seems more disposed toward playing an active role in trying to resolve the crisis in Laos. General Ouane, secretary of state for defense, the King planned to broadcast a proclamation that he has "taken over" as "supreme commander." At the same time he will make public a letter of resignation already sent by Ouane to Premier Souvanna Phouma. The King and Ouane seem to be hoping that this step will induce Souvanna to resign, thereby paving the way for a transitional military government.

Ouane also claims that he is planning action against Captain Kong Le and his 2nd Paratroop Battalion. He will request General Phoumi to create a diversion by attacking Pak Ca Dinh, southeast of Pak Sane, which he hopes will draw Kong Le's paratroopers away from Vientiane. A force of 300 infantry under Captain Southep, now located in Vientiane, would then move to take control of the city. Ouane believes the Southep force will be ready for action in about a week.

The success of these plans would seem to depend in large measure on Souvanna's willingness to resign. Souvanna may refuse to recognize the validity of any proclamation by the King setting up a military government in Luang Prabang, claiming that Savang was a "captive" of elements in rebellion against the legal government. This would leave the situation sufficiently murky to give an air of justification to any Sino-Soviet bloc diplomatic support of Souvanna.

Ouane also states that Souvanna is requesting, through the Soviet delegation now in Vientiane, the return of the International Supervisory and Control Commission (ISCC) to Laos. Any such request may actually have been stimulated by Soviet Ambassador-designate Abramov. In his restrained remarks to the press on 15 October, Abramov noted that the USSR is a co-chairman of the Geneva Conference which set up the ISCC in 1954. Before its disbandment in 1958, a move opposed by the Polish member, the ISCC tended to favor the Pathet Lao.

19 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
