WESTERN EUROPE

8. Resurgent Nazi activity arouses concern:

American officials in West Germany, commenting on two recent meetings of former SS members, feel that their speeches partially reflect the attitude current among extreme nationalist elements, including some of the generals active in the new veterans' organizations. There is a tendency in these circles to regard the Western desire for German rearmament and a European defense force as belated American recognition of the Soviet danger and as proof of the justness of Hitler's crusade against the USSR.

At one of the meetings, attended by 1300 former SS members in Hamburg, a former Gauleiter addressed the group and an ex-SS general announced that an international convention of SS men would be held early in 1952. In Berlin, a former SS leader called for establishment of "relations with our comrades in the East Zone's People's Police."

Comment: These are the first reported meetings of SS members as such, although in the past they have participated in meetings of militaristic and political organizations. This new activity has aroused much adverse comment in the West German press. The government, already engaged in a program to fight political extremes, is seeking to ban the Socialist Reich Party, the leading neo-Nazi organization.

9. Italian Budget Minister now favors greater defense expenditure:

A US official in Rome states that Budget Minister Pella has indicated a changed attitude toward greater Italian expenditures for defense. He reports that if Pella can be encouraged in this new attitude, the American task of getting an adequate Italian defense program will be greatly facilitated.

Pella has indicated that for political reasons Parliament will be presented with a civilian investment program of approximately the same size as the expanded defense program. However, the increase in cash expenditures under the civilian investment program will be spread over several years, while increases in cash expenditures for the defense program will be telescoped.

Comment: Pella has obstructed an adequate defense effort. His change of attitude on defense spending may in part be occasioned by the large Italian surpluses in EPU, the reduced level of activity in the metal-mechanical sectors of Italian industry, and the strong pressure within Italy from industrialists for an adequate defense effort.

- 8 -
