[PAGE 01]
16 December 1959

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
16 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR renews charges that West German rearmament jeopardizes possibility that summit talks could achieve detente.

Soviet submarine detachment may again be operating in South Atlantic.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Soviet technicians to begin survey for improvement of highway into southern Afghanistan.

Morocco--King asks US for patrol ships to combat arms smuggling.

Outcome of Cyprus presidential election indicates probable decisive victory for Makarios followers in legislative vote next month.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
16 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - West Germany: Moscow's notes of 14 Decem-
ber to Bonn and other members of the Western European
Union, protesting a number of recent decisions "to speed up"
German rearmament, are further moves in the campaign
to discredit Bonn as the major factor obstructing a "peaceful
adjustment of postwar problems," which "could be achieved at
the coming summit meeting." The timing of the notes, antic-
ipating the NATO ministerial meeting in Paris on 15 December,
follows the usual Soviet practice, on the eve of high-level West-
ern meetings, of emphasizing the dangers of continued German
rearmament. Foreign Minister Gromyko delivered mildly worded
protests on 11 December against the establishment of NATO sup-
ply bases in Denmark and Norway for the possible use of the
West German forces; the protest coincided with the Norwegian
Parliament's consideration of legislation appropriating funds
for the bases.

Soviet Submarine Operations: The Soviet merchant tanker
Vilyuysk, which is in the South Atlantic off the west coast of
Africa, may be supporting the operations of several Northern
Fleet submarines. This operation probably is similar to the
one conducted last year in South Atlantic waters, which is be-
lieved to have included scientific observations and communica-
tions tests of basic military application. (TOP SECRET DAUNT)
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Afghanistan-USSR: A party of Soviet technicians will short-
ly begin a survey for improvement and surfacing of the 470-mile
road from the Soviet border through Western Afghanistan to
Kandahar under the Soviet-Afghan agreement announced in May
1959. This will bring substantial numbers of Soviet technicians

[PAGE 05]
into southern Afghanistan for the first time, and will prob-
ably cause concern to Pakistani President Ayub, who has
already denounced the road as more strategic than economic.
Negotiations are continuing on two large dam projects an-
nounced in early 1956, to be financed under the original
$100,000,000 Soviet loan. (Page 2) (Map)

Morocco: King Mohamed V on 12 December asked the
United States to supply Morocco with several Coast Guard
craft to combat arms smuggling along Morocco's Mediterra-
nean coast. Morocco would require at least two American
officers per craft as instructors. Anti-smuggling opera-
tions probably would be aimed more against arms destined
for possible Moroccan dissidents than against those consigned
to the Algerian rebels. The King's request apparently is a
follow-up to the Moroccan midsummer request for American
military equipment, and probably is unrelated to the crown
prince's recent desire for a secret consignment of small arms
to be distributed to "pure and uncontaminated" Moroccan ele-
ments.

Cyprus: Election of Archbishop Makarios as first pres-
ident of Cyprus by a two-to-one margin indicates that his
followers will probably win a decisive victory in the 10 Jan-
uary elections to the unicameral Cypriot legislature. The
Cypriot Communists, who apparently supplied most of the
votes for Makarios' opponent, are expected to become the major
opposition party. The size of the opposition vote de-
prives Makarios of his former stature as unchallenged lead-
er of all Greeks on the island.

16 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Submarines and Tanker in South Atlantic

The Soviet merchant tanker Vilyuysk, which called at
two Ghanaian ports on 10-12 December, now is off the west
coast of Africa, probably supporting the operations of several
Northern Fleet submarines.

The Vilyuysk left the Northern Fleet area for this voy-
age about the end of October. This tanker participated in an
extended cruise of one or more Northern Fleet submarines
into the South Atlantic as far as the tip of South America be-
tween November 1958 and March 1959. That operation prob-
ably involved concurrent tests of communications and a low-
frequency long-range navigation system.

16 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
All-weather road
MAJOR ROAD PROJECTS
USSR    US

UNCLASSIFIED

24703
912 15 8

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

USSR to Survey Road in Southern Afghanistan

A party of Soviet technicians will shortly begin a survey
for improvement and surfacing of the 470-mile road from
Kushka, on the Soviet border, through western Afghanistan
to Kandahar under the Soviet-Afghan agreement announced
in May 1959, according to a TASS report. This will bring
substantial numbers of Soviet technicians into southern Af-
ghanistan for the first time. Heretofore the major foreign
economic assistance activity in the area has been carried on
by the United States, notably in the Helmand Valley irrigation
project and on the Kandahar International Airport.

The presence of Soviet technicians so close to the Paki-
stani border will probably cause concern to Pakistani Presi-
dent Ayub, who has already denounced the road as more stra-
tegic than economic. Additional Soviet technicians may be
brought into southern Afghanistan close to the Iranian border
if Afghan Prime Minister Daud decides to seek Soviet assist-
ance to build a proposed dam near the Helmand delta area.

The USSR is apparently moving to implement the Kushka-
Kandahar road agreement promptly. Some construction work
has apparently been under way since last summer on the north-
ern portion between the Soviet border and Herat. The USSR's
rapid start on another road, which will eventually go through
the Salang Pass north of Kabul, has added to its reputation
for prompt implementation of agreed projects in Afghanistan.
Some Soviet projects financed under the Soviet $100,000,000
loan of 1956 have yet to get beyond the survey stage, however,
usually because of Afghan reluctance to accept Soviet cost fig-
ures for the construction work. Negotiations apparently are
continuing for a large irrigation dam project at Jalalabad and
a hydroelectric project at Naghlu, both of which were originally
established as agreed projects in early 1956.

16 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

16 December 1959
