Rhee Resignation Extends South Korean Political Crisis

President Syngman Rhee's formal resignation, submitted to the National Assembly on 27 April in the wake of new riots in the southern city of Pusan, is expected to be accepted immediately. Rhee's surrender of power transfers to the already seriously divided Assembly responsibility for solving the deepening political crisis. A caretaker government headed by Ho Chong, the new foreign minister named by Rhee on 26 April, is likely to oversee new elections following a move by the Assembly to implement Rhee's proposal for a constitutional amendment re-establishing the parliamentary system of government which was abolished in 1954.

A serious struggle looms in the Assembly on this issue. The ruling Liberal party is reported seeking to empower the Assembly to elect the president, while the opposition Democrats are insisting on a popular election. The outcome of this struggle may determine whether Rhee attempts to succeed himself. Additional difficulties may arise over the question of new elections for the Assembly as well.

The student-led demonstrations have not produced a candidate for national leadership, but Ho Chong, as acting head of state, may be emerging as a new power. He is a former Rhee lieutenant who was acting prime minister in 1951-52. More recently, as a political independent, he has enjoyed considerable prestige in Seoul where he served as mayor in 1958 and 1959. He is not in favor with the present leadership of the majority Liberal party but has been associated with Yi Ki-pung, the controversial vice president-elect whom Rhee relieved of all posts on 26 April.

Meanwhile, the possibility of reprisals against the police for their record of brutality has resulted in the disappearance of uniformed police from the streets in Seoul. General Song Yo-chan, chief of staff and martial law commander, reportedly believes that the police will be unable to maintain order, even in a less tense atmosphere, unless the major police officials in Seoul are removed and reforms instituted.

By contrast, relations between the demonstrators and the army troops enforcing martial law have been good. General
