[PAGE 01]
8 July 1959
Copy No. C 63
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]8 July 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping makes significant modification of a key feature of commune system.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iraq--Communists reported planning major demonstrations on night of 9-10 July; Qasim responds to UK arms offer, asks for jet bombers.
Yemen--Badr increasingly relying on Egyptian assistance to retain his authority; Imam may return from Italy shortly.
Further bloc protests expected with introduction of American personnel for joint US-French training of Laotian Army.
International Red Cross believes it must assist[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]] in [[PRED_REDACTION_2]]repatriating Koreans in Japan to North Korea.

III. THE WEST
Austria--Raab decides to resign as chancellor.

IV.
Conclusions of special USIB committee on Berlin situation[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communist China: Peiping has retreated on a fundamental feature of its commune system. A leading regime spokesman on agriculture stated in a recent magazine article that peasants are no longer required to eat in communal messhalls. This, in effect, constitutes a significant admission of failure to obtain peasant compliance in a major regime program.
([[PRED_REDACTION_3]]Page 1[[/PRED_REDACTION_3]])

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iraq: Iraqi Communists are reportedly planning a major demonstration in Baghdad on the night of 9-10 July. Qasim presumably has been alerted to this plan. A large Communist demonstration would be likely to end in considerable violence, and might well test the determination and ability of Qasim and the army to meet such a Communist challenge.
[[PRED_REDACTION_4]]Meanwhile, in his first active response to the British offer of arms aid, Qasim has requested 14 Canberra (B-57) jet light bombers from the UK, according to the British air attaché in Baghdad.
(Page 2)

Yemen: Crown Prince Badr is employing the large Egyptian military mission in Yemen to reinforce his authority, and is increasingly relying on Egyptian assistance in various fields. Reports of unrest in Yemen, and possible fear that Badr and the Egyptians are scheming to retain control there, are influencing the Imam toward returning home shortly from medical treatment in Italy, accompanied by his brother Prince Hasan, Badr's chief rival for succession.
(Page 3[[/PRED_REDACTION_4]])
[PAGE 05]
Laos: Prince Souphannouvong, chief of the Communist-front party in Laos, has protested vigorously against government repression of his party. He has asserted that he has solid foreign backing and has threatened a return to guerrilla warfare unless the government ceases its alleged persecutions.
Further protests from the Communist bloc can be expected over the introduction of American military personnel into Laos for joint US-French training of the Laotian Army. This training is to begin soon. The Communist bloc is still calling for the reconvening of the International Control Commission in Laos.
Ho Chi Minh of North Vietnam arrived last week in Moscow, probably for medical reasons, and is likely to review the Laotian situation with Soviet leaders there.
(Page 4)

Japan-Korea: The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), although it has not yet made a final decision, apparently feels that it is morally committed to assist in the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea. It believes that it might be able to make a private arrangement with the Japanese Red Cross which would give the ICRC an effective role in the screening of the repatriates. An ICRC official has stated that there is no possibility of including South Korea in the repatriation plan because of Seoul's long-standing opposition to the project.

III. THE WEST
Austria: Chancellor Raab's decision to resign as chancellor-designate results from his failure to form a new government following the 10 May general election. Resolution of the eight-week impasse between the conservative People's party and the Socialists--which have governed for more than 13 years--now largely depends on a successful last-minute move by President Schaerf to preserve the coalition. The alternative is an unstable government and a drift toward the bitter partisanship of the prewar years.
([[PRED_REDACTION_5]]Page 5[[/PRED_REDACTION_5]])

8 July 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
IV. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions are to be used in context with all SNIEs relevant to the Berlin situation.

1. During the recess of the foreign ministers' conference, ending 13 July, the USSR will not conclude a separate peace treaty with the GDR or turn over access controls to the East Germans. Moscow will continue to use threats of such action as a form of pressure on the West; nevertheless, as long as it estimates that there are any prospects for negotiations profitable to the USSR, it probably will not take such action. The actual physical transfer of controls could be accomplished with little or no warning.

2. Soviet diplomatic activity relating to the resumption of East-West negotiations at Geneva continues to aim at weakening the Western position with a combination of professed willingness to reach agreement and threats of crisis and possible war if no agreement is reached.

3. While there are no reliable indications of a bloc intent to deny Allied or West German access to West Berlin, or to seal off West Berlin in the immediate future, such action could be taken with little or no warning.

4. While public morale continues at a high level, some West Berlin political leaders during the past week have become concerned over Western "disunity" and fear that "Berlin fatigue" may gain ground in the United States. There has been no significant change in Berlin's economic situation.

8 July 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
5. There have been no significant changes in Soviet capabilities to respond to possible Western actions in the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade.

[[PRED_REDACTION_6]]6. There were no major intelligence indications of Western allied diplomatic intentions, apart from information obtained through official contacts with US representatives[[/PRED_REDACTION_6]].

8 July 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Further Modification in Chinese Communist Commune Program

The most significant modification to date of Peiping's commune program is revealed in the 16 June issue of China Youth, in an article by Teng Tzu-hui, the regime's leading spokesman for a conservative approach to agricultural problems. Rural cadres have been authorized to permit peasants to withdraw from commune messhalls without risking criticism [[PRED_REDACTION_7]]as[[/PRED_REDACTION_7]] "backward elements" or reflection upon their "progressiveness." While other reports have indicated that some messhalls in South China were being closed temporarily, this is the first indication of a country-wide movement to reduce their services.

Teng's article reports that only the "activists"--unmarried young people and childless couples--support the messhall idea, while the majority of peasants are either indifferent or opposed. Teng admits that many messhalls were inefficiently run and that some cadres had been guilty of graft. Teng also admits that some messhalls may have to close if voluntary withdrawals are permitted, but calls for the continuation of this service no matter how few persons participate. He justifies the retreat on the grounds that the opponents would withdraw whether permitted or not--a serious admission of Peiping's inability to extract total compliance from the rural population.

Teng, however, endorses the basic idea of the messhalls. He urges their reorganization with emphasis on reduction in size to 100 persons each and greater flexibility. The system has been undergoing overhaul since early last fall, but a successful solution has eluded the Communists.

Teng's article shows some of the same concerns that were forced on Soviet party leaders during a similar experiment with communes in the early days of the USSR. The experiment was a failure, and the program was abandoned by Stalin in the early 1930s.

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraqi Communists Planning Massive Demonstration

The Iraqi Communists are planning a major demonstration in Baghdad on the night of 9-10 July.

A number of bloody clashes between Communist and anti-Communist forces have been broken up by the army and police in Baghdad's suburbs recently, and such clashes may increase in frequency as the 14 July anniversary of last year's revolution draws near. A major Communist demonstration could well be the occasion for large-scale violence and might be designed to test the ability and determination of the Qasim regime's security apparatus.

The Communists have been dealt several severe blows during the past few days: Qasim has publicly expressed his disapproval of the Communist effort to reconstitute a "National Front" and has openly differed with his Communist-inclined aide-de-camp, Col. Lutfi Tahir, over the latter's suspension of an anti-Communist newspaper. The military governor of Baghdad publicly refuted an article in the official Communist newspaper on 4 July, calling it "a lying report." Salim Fakhri, Communist-line director of broadcasting, has been reported arrested.

The Communists may renew their demands for participation in a new cabinet expected to be announced around 14 July.

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
[[PRED_REDACTION_8]]Developments in Yemen

Crown Prince Badr's extraordinary reliance on the large Egyptian military mission in Yemen, and his increasing dependence on Egyptian assistance in a wide range of governmental matters, may lose him the essential support of Yemen's conservative tribal leaders. During June the Egyptian military mission was enlarged to about 100 men, who are apparently intended to function as instructors for a stepped-up training program and as a special task force to aid Badr.

Egyptian military personnel manned Soviet-manufactured tanks and armored cars while assisting loyal army units and armed tribesmen to disarm troops involved in disorders in mid-June. A UAR Air Force mission had arrived there to assist in putting Yemen's Soviet-manufactured combat aircraft--presumably the 50-IL-10 piston attack aircraft--in a state of readiness. Badr is also relying on Egyptian experts in police and security matters, and on specialists in government administration and in various technical fields, in an effort to consolidate his control of the government and to provide some evidence that more efficient administration is in prospect.

Popular disgust with incompetent and harsh government, and Badr's vacillation between leniency and severity, have contributed to a general state of unrest in Yemen since the Imam's departure. Elements in the army, aware of their ability to intimidate local officials, remain restive, watchful for signs of government weakness. Badr's major support against army dissidence has come from the chiefs of Yemen's principal martial tribes. Their support could waver, however, if Badr is unable to maintain subsidies to them from Yemen's near-bankrupt treasury.

Reports of unrest in Yemen, and possible suspicion that Badr and the Egyptians are scheming to retain control there, are said to have convinced the Imam that he must return home shortly from medical treatment in Italy. Egyptian aircraft would return the Imam to Yemen in about ten days. The Imam will reportedly be accompanied home by his brother, Prince Hasan, Badr's chief rival for succession.

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3[[/PRED_REDACTION_8]]
[PAGE 11]
Communist Bloc Expected to Protest Joint US-French Training
Of Laotian Army

The Communist bloc is likely to set up a greater cry over the introduction of American military personnel into Laos to begin joint US-French training of the Laotian Army than it did during the recent episode involving the rebellion of a former Pathet Lao battalion. Britain, in anticipation of Communist charges that joint US-French training violates the Geneva agreements, has informally requested the United States to supply it with an explanation of the training that it could use, in its capacity as cochairman of the 1954 Geneva conference, to counter the Communist charges.

Hanoi would regard the introduction of American military advisers into Laos as "confirmation" of its charges that the US is attempting to turn Laos into an American military base, and redouble its efforts to have the International Control Commission recalled. Since mid-June most of North Vietnam's statements on Laos have criticized the recent Vientiane-Saigon agreements, which Hanoi describes as an effort to bring Laos illegally into SEATO.

President Ho Chi Minh will undoubtedly review the Laotian situation during his current unofficial visit in the USSR, although the primary reason for his trip is probably medical.

Meanwhile, Prince Souphannouvong, chief of the Communist-front party in Laos, and only recently released from house arrest following the mutiny of the Pathet Lao battalion, has threatened to return to guerrilla warfare unless the regime ceases its alleged persecutions.

[[PRED_REDACTION_9]]Souphannouvong charged that over 300 of his followers had been systematically executed. He claimed that his party was strong, popular, and had solid foreign support[[/PRED_REDACTION_9]].

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Austria's Political Crisis

After eight weeks of effort to bring his conservative People's party and the Socialists together in a new coalition, Austrian Chancellor Raab has asked and received his party's permission to let someone else carry on future negotiations to form a new government. His resignation as chancellor-designate has been accepted by President Schaerf.

The two parties have been at loggerheads since the general elections of 10 May in which Socialist gains reduced the People's party's plurality to one parliamentary seat. The Socialists, with the largest popular vote, have accordingly insisted on a larger role in the government. Their demand for preponderant control over the nationalized industries apparently caused the talks to break down. The Socialists contend that this point had previously been conceded to them, and it is possible that Raab may again have been overruled by conservative elements within his own party who oppose his conciliatory tactics.

Prospects for restoring the coalition, which contributed so much to Austria's postwar economic and political stability, now largely depend on the mediation of President Schaerf. A Socialist devoted to the coalition idea, Schaerf reportedly does not sympathize with his party's tactics. There is, however, no readily apparent solution to the impasse, and its continuation would encourage the partisan excesses which characterized Austria in the interwar period. The Socialists probably could not form a minority government, and an attempt by the People's party to rely on the support of the small, right-wing, pan-German, Liberal party would be certain to provoke a violent Socialist reaction.

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 14]
