that the enlarged membership of the UN necessitated structural changes, but contended that such changes should not be dealt with in the context of the Congo problem. Nu's position on these issues is similar to that of Indian Prime Minister Nehru. (Backup, Page 6)

Belgium-Congo: Former NATO Secretary-General Spaak, in a conversation with the American charge in Brussels, voiced strong criticism of the Congo policies of the Belgian Government and was very pessimistic regarding the role of the UN. While Spaak does not feel that all Belgian political advisers should be withdrawn from the Congo, he favors immediate removal of the military "adventurers" and the progressive removal of paramilitary and military personnel. Recent reports indicate that of the 200-230 Belgian officers and NCOs serving in the Katanga army, only 30 have so far been ordered back to Belgium. In addition, there are several hundred advisers and technicians in Katanga and elsewhere. The embassy comments that Spaak, who is running for parliament on the Socialist ticket in the 26 March national elections, will remain cautious in voicing any public criticism of Prime Minister Eysken's government because of Socialist participation in the original Brussels round-table conference which outlined plans for the independence of the Congo. As a member of a Social Christian - Socialist coalition government that may be formed following the elections, Spaak would exercise a more stringent influence over the control of African affairs.

Communist China: Recent messages indicate that Soviet deliveries of petroleum to China in February were at a level comparable to that of the same month last year. Although talks on 1961 trade and future economic relations are still underway, these deliveries from the USSR suggest that the Chinese have resolved their indecision over petroleum imports and that they will continue to purchase large amounts of Soviet POL. Chinese imports of petroleum from nonbloc sources appear to be tapering off. (SECRET SABRE) (Backup, Page 8)

15 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii
