Souvanna Phouma reportedly is empowered to agree to a later conference between representatives of the Boun Oum government, Souvanna Phouma, and the Pathet Lao. The delegation's immediate concern is to discuss with Souvanna different methods for bringing about a cessation of foreign interference in Laos. If a decision can be reached on this, it will be brought to the attention of "the great powers" through their ambassadors in Phnom Penh.

Souvanna Phouma, meanwhile, has sent for Quinim Pholsena--minister of defense, finance, and foreign affairs in the rump government at Xieng Khouang--to join him in Phnom Penh to receive unspecified directives to be carried out during Souvanna's absence on his upcoming world tour. This request was sent on 11 March following Souvanna's talks with Phoumi but before he had learned of the impending visit of a second Vientiane delegation. It was forwarded on Souvanna's behalf by the North Vietnamese commercial delegation in Phnom Penh to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Hanoi for further relay to Quinim.

North Vietnam and the Xieng Khouang "government" have moved to put their relations on a more formal basis. Hanoi announced the appointment of a "economic and cultural representative at the Laotian Kingdom" on 13 March and reported that a Laotian economic and cultural representative had presented his credentials in North Vietnam. Claiming to represent Souvanna Phouma as the "lawful government of Laos," the Xieng Khouang group is consolidating Communist political control over northern Laos. Recently it agreed to exchange economic and cultural missions with Communist China as well as North Vietnam. Before he fled Vientiane last December, Souvanna agreed to cross-border trade with North Vietnam. Probably to support their professions of "neutrality," however, neither Souvanna nor his Xieng Khouang "representatives" have formally recognized Hanoi or Peiping. North Vietnam and Peiping can circumvent this technicality with the exchange of economic and cultural officials.

On 14 March, Hanoi announced that rallies will be held throughout North Vietnam between 15 March and 30 March to condemn "US"

15 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
