[PAGE 01]
26 April 1951

Copy No. CI-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

3. Chinese Communist - North Korean air potential (page 4).

NEAR EAST

5. Iranian Minister of Interior plans repressive action against leftist students (page 5).

6. Israel transshipping industrial diamonds to Soviet Bloc (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Chinese Communist - North Korean air potential:

Comment: The increased number of Soviet-type jet fighter and light bomber aircraft operating within Manchuria, and the continued efforts to maintain air facilities in North Korea indicate Communist intentions to utilize his air force in the near future.

On 18 April the US Air Force, Washington, estimated that there are approximately 700 enemy aircraft now operating in the Manchuria-Korea area. Of these, approximately 115 are conventional-engined fighter and ground attack planes operated by North Korean pilots. Of the other 585 aircraft, about 220 are believed to be jet fighters; some of these are operated by Chinese and others by Soviet pilots (the number of each is not known).

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST

5. Iranian Minister of Interior plans repressive action against leftist students:

The son of Iranian Minister of the Interior Zahedi has informed the US Embassy in Tehran that in the immediate future his father plans (a) to close all schools and universities in Tehran

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
to force a re-registration of students and, by this maneuver, to eliminate known Communist sympathizers, (b) arrest a considerable number of Tudeh Party members who participated in a recent parade he had prohibited and exile some of them to southern Iran, (c) install agents in the schools and universities to counteract Communism. Zahedi's son also stated that his father was angered by police inefficiency and was planning a shake-up in the police organization and in the gendarmerie.

Comment: Although both the Shah and the Prime Minister have shown a desire to clamp down on the pro-Soviet Tudeh agitators, it is doubtful that the present government is able to take effective action. Only recently the government prohibited street demonstrations; yet they have been held. Moreover, the Tudeh Party itself has long been officially banned, but its organization continues and its activities have increased in recent months.

6. Israel transshipping industrial diamonds to Soviet Bloc:

In commenting on Israel's transshipment of priority materials to the Soviet sphere, the US Ambassador in Tel Aviv recognizes the possibility that the re-export of such items as diamonds and diamond tools "may be reaching serious proportions". However, on the basis of conversations with Israeli Government officials and economic officers attached to various foreign missions in Tel Aviv, the Ambassador concludes that Western European countries, with the "partial exception" of the UK, have not taken effective action to prevent the re-export of their products and do not appear to be aware of the US concern over this matter.

Comment: Israeli transshipment of certain high-cost materials to the Communist world is well-known and has been periodically scrutinized by US officials. Israel has for some time conducted a flourishing re-export business with the Soviet Bloc in pharmaceutical and antibiotic materials (penicillin, streptomycin, etc.), as well as industrial diamonds and diamond tools. In the absence
[PAGE 07]
of any legal limitation, Israel will probably continue this very profitable re-export of strategic materials to the Soviet Bloc, particularly since certain Western European countries are also maintaining this trade.
[PAGE 08]
