*Iran: The success of the military coup in Turkey might
encourage Iranians opposed to the Shah's personal rule to at-
tempt a similar action. There does not appear to be any civil-
ian group well enough organized to undertake a coup but some
army officers have been making tentative plans for a possible
move against the government and the Turkish developments
could precipitate action. The parliamentary elections sched-
uled for July, if they are as blatantly rigged as now appears
probable, will greatly increase public dissatisfaction with the
Shah and might also serve as a pretext for a move against the
government.

Somalia-UAR: The trust territory of Somalia, whose popu-
lation is predominantly Moslem, faces a government crisis. The
aggressive parliamentary opposition is attempting to exploit a
UAR protest against the invitation to Israel to attend Somalia's in-
dependence ceremonies on 1 July. The UAR, in a formal letter,
has requested cancellation of the invitation to Israel, intimating
that Cairo might prevail upon other Moslem and Arab nations to
join the UAR in boycotting the independence celebrations if Moga-
discio fails to comply.
ordered the
UAR consul general to try to arouse Somali public opinion on this
issue. (Page 5)

India: The government has requested that the United States
sell it Sidewinder air-to-air missiles. Previous reports had
indicated India was negotiating with Britain for the more costly
Firestreak missile, but as yet no agreement is known to have
been concluded. Indian interest in maintaining at least parity with
Pakistan in air defense systems, heretofore a compelling motive
in Indian defensive measures, may in this case be overshadowed
by growing Indian concern over Chinese Communist intentions fol-
lowing the failure of the Nehru-Chou talks in April.

South Korea: Acting Chief of State Huh Chung may find it dif-
ficult to maintain orderly processes of government with the approach
of new National Assembly elections which are expected to be held
this July. Although Huh appears determined to prevent irrespon-
sible retaliatory action against government personnel, exploitation

28 May 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
