THE FORMOSA STRAITS

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Formosa Straits Problem

This report is based on information received in Washington up to 1100 hours 29 March 1955.

1. The Formosa Straits area has remained quiet. Weather prevented reconnaissance of airfields other than Swatow.

2. Chinese Nationalist reconnaissance of Swatow Airfield on 28 March revealed no change in its status and no indication of recent rehabilitation work. Swatow has one concrete runway 4300 feet by 160 feet and a gravel strip 3800 feet by 330 feet. In January, some repair work was done on the main runway, but there has been no detectable rehabilitation work recently. At present the site is little more than an emergency field, though it could be made capable of sustaining limited jet fighter operations within ten days.

3. As previously reported, the announced Soviet plan to evacuate the Port Arthur area by 31 May might involve reassignment of Soviet aircraft there to the Chinese Communists. Transfer of all Soviet aircraft in the area would represent a gain to the Chinese Communist Air Force of as many as 103 IL-28's and 306 MIG-15's. This would increase Communist China's jet bomber strength by 70 percent and its MIG-15 strength by about 40 percent.

4. In an interview requested by the Indian ambassador, Molotov on 25 March backed Peiping in rejecting any conference on the Formosa problem that included Nationalist China in any way. However, Molotov expressed a desire that exploratory talks continue among the USSR, Britain, and India.

Molotov's remarks reflect the two facets of recent Soviet policy on Formosa: a determination to support the Chinese Communist position politically to the utmost; and a desire to show an interest in negotiations on the question without changing any of the essentials in the Communist position. The current quiescence of both Moscow and Peiping on the Formosa question may be related to the Asian-African conference next month, at which the Communists apparently intend to stress peaceful coexistence.
