[PAGE 01]
27 May 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 May 1959
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: First Deputy Premier Frol Kozlov will represent the USSR at the opening of the Soviet exhibit in New York in late June. He will spend about two weeks in the United States. The 50-year-old Kozlov has risen rapidly to become a full member of the party presidium and is now one of the three or four most important leaders after Khrushchev (Page 1)

USSR-Iran: Soviet Ambassador Pegov will return to Tehran soon, Moscow may believe that its recent maneuvers to draw Tehran into new negotiations for a nonaggression pact would be bolstered by the return of an ambassador. Radio Moscow's propaganda attacks on the Iranian regime are continuing, however, and are reinforced by "The National Voice of Iran," a clandestine station whose personal attacks on the Shah have become increasingly ugly. Tehran insists that normal relations are impossible as long as this propaganda continues, but has indicated that following its cessation Iran would consider any Soviet suggestions for improved relations.

China-India: New Delhi and Peiping, apparently unable since last December to agree on a new long-term trade pact, have extended to the end of 1959 the agreement concluded in 1954.

27 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    i

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Union of South Africa: The police are taking seriously nationwide rumors of imminent African uprisings, and plan to take determined action should violence break out. The dates most frequently mentioned are 31 May and 26 June, African Freedom Day. The mass burning by natives of their identification passes, expected by the police on 26 June, could result in violence and mass arrests.

Laos: The rebellious Pathet Lao battalion is now loosely encircled by Laotian Army units.

IV. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions are to be used in context with SNIE 100-2-59 (24 February 1959) and with the review of that estimate in SNIE 100-2/1-59 (17 March 1959).

27 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
1. While there have been no indications at Geneva that the Soviet Union is willing to alter its firm position on Berlin, the USSR apparently would like to hold serious private negotiations on this issue as well as on nuclear tests and creation of an East-West German committee. The USSR continues to probe for differences among the Western powers and at the same time is attempting to create an impression that sufficient progress in negotiations on key issues could be made to justify a summit meeting.

2. All indications are that the USSR does not intend to take any action on 27 May with regard to turning over access controls to the GDR. So long as negotiations are in progress, or the Soviet Union estimates that the prospects for a summit meeting are good, it will probably not go so far as to turn over access controls to the GDR. However, the USSR may play up the possibility of such action at any stage in the negotiations should it consider greater pressure to be advantageous. The actual physical transfer of controls could be accomplished with little or no warning.

3. While there are no reliable indications of a bloc intent to deny Allied or West German access to West Berlin or to seal off West Berlin in the immediate future, the Soviet Union could take such actions with little or no warning.

4. There have been no significant changes in Soviet capabilities to respond to possible Western actions in the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade.

27 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Kozlov to Open USSR Exhibit in New York

First Deputy Premier Frol Kozlov will represent the USSR at the opening of the Soviet exhibit in New York in late June. He will spend about two weeks in the United States. According to the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs, he has not yet completed his plans for the visit.

The 50-year-old Kozlov has risen rapidly under Khrushchev and is now one of the Soviet leader's three or four most important lieutenants. Trained as an engineer, he has made his career in the party, with service on the central staff in Moscow and later in Leningrad.

In 1953 when Khrushchev ousted Vasily Andrianov, a Malenkov protegé, from the leadership of the Leningrad party organization, Kozlov was promoted to succeed him. Since that time Kozlov has benefited from Khrushchev's favor by being named candidate member of the party presidium in early 1957, and, following the defeat of the "anti-party" group, a full member in June 1957. In December 1957 he left his Leningrad party post to become premier of the Russian Republic (RSFSR).

When Khrushchev became Premier of the USSR in March 1958, Kozlov was made one of his first deputies, apparently specializing in internal government matters. Mikoyan, the other first deputy premier, specializes in foreign relations. When the problem of a successor to Khrushchev comes to the fore, Kozlov will probably be a leading contender. There are already signs that he is maneuvering his protégés into the party apparatus.

27 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Sino-Indian Trade Pact Extended to End of 1959

Apparently unable to agree on a new long-term pact, New Delhi and Peiping have extended to the end of 1959 their trade agreement concluded in 1954.

27 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Disorders Reported Im

The South African police are taking seriously the rumors current throughout the Union of South Africa that a native uprising is imminent.

Both 31 May--Union Day--and 26 June--African Freedom Day--are considered likely dates. The African National Congress has already called for a mass burning of native identification passes and the start of the first national boycott of Afrikaner-owned industry on 26 June, the anniversary of the Communist-inspired freedom charter against racial repression. Such a protest would be the most serious native civil disobedience in the Union's history and could easily provoke nationwide bloodshed and arrests if the police react with expected severity.

Although the non-European organizations are not able at this time to pose a serious threat to the government, widespread racial disorders would intensify foreign criticism of South Africa's policies, particularly by independent African nations. At the all-African Peoples' Conference in Accra last December these nations called for economic sanctions against South Africa, including a boycott of the Union's products and a reduction in the number of African workers entering the Union to work in the gold mines.

27 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 11]
