[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
29 November 1952
Copy No. 51

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. New Japanese jurisdiction issue may be developing (page 3).
2. Chinese Nationalists form governing committee (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iraqi crowd demonstrates against King Feisal (page 4).
4. British War Office sees possibility of guerrilla warfare in Kenya (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Vienna Embassy notes likelihood of small Communist gains in Austrian elections (page 5).
6. French Assembly may be given free rein on EDC treaty changes (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. New Japanese jurisdiction issue may be developing:

Ambassador Murphy comments that the recent arrest of a British and an Australian soldier in Japan may revive the dispute about criminal jurisdiction over UN troops and may adversely affect Japanese-British-Commonwealth relations.

The Japanese press has begun a campaign to highlight the allegedly high crime rate of Commonwealth forces in Japan and the Diet Judicial Committee Chairman has urged that Japan never accede to Australian-British demands for the soldiers' release.

The Australian Minister in Tokyo fears an "unpleasant" Australian reaction, while the British Minister indicates that London is determined not to acknowledge Japanese jurisdiction.

Comment: Japanese reluctance to grant extraterritorial privileges is particularly strong on the score of criminal jurisdiction over UN troops. The arrest and conviction of two British sailors by Japanese courts last summer strained Japanese-British relations.

In the present case, the Japanese Foreign Office sought to expedite handling without publicity to prevent another international incident. The Ministry of Justice, however, has apparently blocked the Foreign Office by speeding up pre-trial proceedings and by permitting the matter to leak to the press.

2. Chinese Nationalists form governing committee:

a "Superior Committee" now has supreme jurisdiction over Chinese Nationalist government and party affairs. This body, formed a few months ago, is composed of Chiang Kai-shek, his son Chiang Ching-kuo, and five other leading military, intelligence and police figures.

The members of this group are said to have taken elaborate precautions to prevent disclosure of its formation and activities.

Comment: The existence of such a committee has not been confirmed. In recent months, however, there has been an apparent increase in the power of Chiang Kai-shek, his son, and Nationalist military leaders closest to them.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iraqi crowd demonstrates against King Feisal:

A crowd of 100 students and street elements staged a violent demonstration on 19 November in Diwaniyah, 100 miles south of Baghdad, in which they shouted "down with the King." This occurred during a USIS mobile unit showing of films of King Feisal's recent visit to the United States. The crowd stoned and mauled the mobile unit driver.

Comment: This is the first public demonstration against 17-year old King Feisal. an article attacking the Royal Family appeared on 28 September 1952 in an Iraqi Communist paper at the direction of the Syrian Communist Party.

The Diwaniyah incident, which took place three days before the Baghdad rioting, shows the extent to which popular discontent exists in places other than politically-conscious Baghdad. Mild demonstrations have occurred in Basra and elsewhere as a result of the Baghdad rioting.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
4. British War Office sees possibility of guerrilla warfare in Kenya:

The British War Office reports deterioration in the Mau Mau situation in Kenya. Natives have stolen 100 to 150 firearms and the possibility of guerrilla warfare now exists. The governor of Kenya has requested the assignment of an expert on guerrilla warfare to direct military operations against the Mau Mau.

Comment: This is the first evidence that the Mau Mau have acquired firearms. Since much of the white settlement in Kenya is rural and isolated, guerrilla activity poses a real threat. The British Government can be expected to remain in control of the situation, although a costly campaign of eradication may be required.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Vienna Embassy notes likelihood of small Communist gains in Austrian elections:

The American Embassy in Vienna believes that the Communist gains expected in next February's election will not be large. The Socialist Party warns, however, that if the Communists gain more than two or three seats they will be in a position to hamper the ordinary functioning of parliament. The USSR, according to the Socialists, would then be encouraged to extend more overt support to the Austrian Communist Party.

Both coalition parties expect to lose votes to extremist elements, and the "big question," the Embassy feels, is still whether the People's Party will suffer important losses to the extreme rightists. The Embassy notes that the anti-American line followed by right-wing groups is already gaining support, particularly in the Western zones.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
6. French Assembly may be given free rein on EDC treaty changes:

On the basis of Defense Minister Pleven's recent public statements on French defense problems, the American Embassy in Paris concludes that the government has decided against seeking National Assembly ratification of the EDC treaty as it stands.

The cabinet has apparently rejected the idea of trying to soften Assembly criticism of the treaty by first attempting to obtain concessions from France's defense partners, as had been proposed by the French Deputy to the North Atlantic Council. Instead, the government will try to determine the Assembly's minimum conditions by going ahead with debate "more or less on schedule" and leaving to the Assembly the initiative of attaching conditions to the treaty.

The Embassy is unable to say at what point top government spokesmen might intervene to prevent the imposition of crippling conditions.

- 6 -
