[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

26 November 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH TO PRESS DEVELOPMENT OF IRBM
(page 3).

2. BRITISH REVIEW OF DEFENSE POLICIES MAY DAMAGE
NATO

5. SOUTH KOREAN MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND UNIFORMS
DESTINED FOR NORTH KOREA SEIZED

6. OUSTER OF PRO-COMMUNIST MAYOR ON OKINAWA

7. LABOR STRIKES CONTINUE ON CEYLON

8. SPAIN FEARS US ARMS DELIVERY TO MOROCCO
(page 10).
[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH TO PRESS DEVELOPMENT OF IRBM

Top French military research and
development officials informed
American representatives on 19
November that Minister of Defense
Chaban-Delmas has reached a firm decision to proceed
with development of an IRBM, presumably to be equipped
with an atomic warhead. The French officials said they
would like US help, since they are only in the initial stages
of development. They have given the project top priority
despite the heavy sacrifices such a program will impose
on France. They feel they must have a weapon with retal-
iatory capability because in the future there will no longer
be a choice between attack and defense, and purely defen-
sive weapons must therefore receive second priority.

On 21 November a French Atomic
Energy Commission official made the first explicit ad-
mission that work is in progress on a French atomic
weapon. This is one of several indications that the French
government has made the formal political decision, long
hinted as imminent, to proceed with the manufacture of atomic
weapons. French scientists and technical experts could prob-
ably produce a bomb in 1958.

The French public can be expected to sup-
port the government in its determination not to accept any
proposed NATO allocation of the Western defense effort which
would prevent France from becoming a nuclear power. The
Paris government and press reacted sharply last week to press
reports of an alleged Anglo-American agreement to monopolize
manufacture of nuclear weapons within the North Atlantic alli-
ance.
[PAGE 05]
2. BRITISH REVIEW OF DEFENSE POLICIES MAY
DAMAGE NATO

The United States NATO mission says
that Britain has indicated that it might
disown the recommendations that will
come from the US-British-French Mil-
itary Standing Group's current study of
the forces needed to defend Europe. The
mission believes that the very existence
of Britain's proposal for a new NATO
strategy review will tend to undermine the resolution of
those members who are determined to support present doc-
trine and procedure.

Britain's proposal that a small group, civilian
as well as military, be set up to study revision of strategy ap-
pears to stem partly from its desire to rationalize to British
public opinion its planned shifts in British defense policy.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]
5. SOUTH KOREAN MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND UNIFORMS
DESTINED FOR NORTH KOREA SEIZED

An American official in Seoul has con-
firmed a local press report that the
South Korean navy recently seized a
shipment of South Korean military equip-
ment destined for North Korea. The contraband reportedly
consisted of enough military supplies for a company, includ-
ing uniforms and insignia presumably to be used by "Commu-
nist spies or guerrillas" infiltrating into South Korea.

The American embassy notes that the
South Korean navy is investigating the affair and that the out-
come may prove extremely embarrassing to the South Korean
army.

Comment

While the running of South Korean contra-
band into North Korea has often been re-
ported, this is the first confirmed incident of major signifi-
cance. The involvement of army supplies probably will fur-
ther detract from the army's waning prestige, already under-
mined by factionalism, graft, and the assassination of "Snake"
Kim, the former army counterintelligence chief.

Should the opposition Democratic party
exploit the affair to embarrass the administration, the posi-
tion of recently appointed Army Chief of Staff Paek Son-yop
could be jeopardized. Paek already is opposed by some mem-
bers of the governing Liberal party and is harassed by sub-
ordinates who hope to benefit from his ouster.
[PAGE 09]
6. OUSTER OF PRO-COMMUNIST MAYOR ON OKINAWA

The reaction on Okinawa to the ouster
of pro-Communist Kamejiro Senaga as
mayor of Naha on 25 November is likely
to be one of relief that the months-long
political impasse is over. The leftist Okinawa People's
party, however, probably will call for protest demonstra-
tions to be staged by certain labor groups, teachers, and
students.

Senaga was voted out of office by the Naha
city assembly after the US high commissioner amended exist-
ing ordinances to permit the passage of a no-confidence motion
by a simple majority without the presence of the two-thirds
quorum formerly required.

A mayoralty election, from which Senaga
will be excluded, will be held early in January. The favored
candidate is expected to be Tatsuo Taira, a former governor
of Okinawa and a political independent, who appears to have
the best chance of multiparty support. Senaga's candidacy has
been blocked by extending from the central to the local level an
ordinance barring felons and certain other criminals from elec-
tive office. Senaga was convicted of perjury and conspiracy to
violate immigration laws in 1954 and was imprisoned for 18
months.

A spokesman for the Japanese government
refused to comment on the ouster, but the Japanese Socialists
are planning to promote a protest movement.
[PAGE 10]
7. LABOR STRIKES CONTINUE ON CEYLON

Week-end talks between Prime Min-
ister Bandaranaike and Ceylonese
labor leaders whose unions began a
crippling series of strikes on 20
November have apparently failed to end existing unrest.
Although some unions are said to have reported back to
work, having received promises their demands for higher
wages would be investigated, latest reports state that
12,000 hospital workers are to strike on 28 November,
1,200 members of the railway stationmasters' union have
served 21 days' strike notice, and 750 shipyard employees
are still on strike.

The pattern of the strikes suggests that
many unions, noting the government's willingness to make
concessions, are serving strike notices in the hope of par-
ticipating in any wage raises or other compensations ulti-
mately sanctioned. If this is so, Bandaranaike may find
himself faced with an increasing amount of labor unrest and,
consequently, with growing financial and political problems.
[PAGE 11]
8. SPAIN FEARS US ARMS DELIVERY TO MOROCCO

Spanish Foreign Minister Castiella in-
formed Ambassador Lodge on 23 No-
vember that he feared Moroccan King
Mohamed V would seek an arms deal
with the US during his visit to Washington. Castiella
warned that the consequences in Spain of such an agree-
ment would be serious.

Castiella expressed the fear that weap-
ons furnished under any such agreement would eventually
reach the irregular Moroccan Army of Liberation, which
clashed with Spanish forces in the enclave of Ifni on 22
November.

Comment

Morocco does not need arms as urgently
as does Tunisia, and it seems unlikely that
the King plans to request arms assistance from the United States.

Spain rushed reinforcements to Ifni and
Spanish Sahara early this month. Madrid may be expected
to become increasingly sensitive to any moves which might
strengthen the position of irregular Moroccan forces in the
area.
