Dalai Lama Plans Public Statement Announcing Fight
For Independence

The Dalai Lama apparently has decided he can no longer defer a public statement clarifying his firm opposition to Peiping’s action in Tibet. During his first meeting with Prime Minister Nehru in April, the Tibetan leader had agreed to avoid controversial statements pending efforts by New Delhi to intercede with Peiping on behalf of the rebel leaders.

the conditions on which negotiations with the Chinese could be based. These included a cease-fire in Tibet, withdrawal of Chinese military forces, and the sending of an international fact-finding commission to Tibet. By the third week of May, with no further word from Nehru or indication of Indian diplomatic efforts, the Dalai Lama and his advisers apparently agreed that he would soon have to make a "frank, complete, and positive" statement of his position. He decided to hold a press conference on 6 June in which he plans to condemn Peiping’s violation of Tibetan autonomy, make public his 7 May proposals to Nehru, and announce that Tibetans now are fighting for complete independence.

Nehru reportedly regards the Dalai Lama’s conditions for negotiation as unrealistic. Although he has advocated a peaceful approach to Peiping, aimed at securing recognition of Tibetan internal autonomy, he apparently has little hope that Indian intercession would be acceptable to the Chinese. Nehru is not likely to try to block a press conference for the Dalai Lama, since he has already advised him to deny Chinese charges that he is being held under "duress." He probably will increase pressure on the Tibetan leader, however, to withhold any statement on his future course of action.

Responsible officials of the Indian Central Intelligence Bureau meanwhile are reported to be advising the Tibetans--apparently without authorization from Nehru--that resistance activity in Tibet must be kept alive and that their propaganda efforts must be greatly expanded.

29 May 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
