[PAGE 01]
3 May 1951

Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST

5. Egyptian Foreign Minister claims impasse in Anglo-Egyptian defense talks threatens violence in Egypt (page 6).

SOUTH ASIA

6. Comments on Indian move to defy UN in Kashmir (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Iceland wants US troops to arrive on day pact is announced (page 7).
8. New "independent" Communist group challenges French Communist Party (page 8).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
5. Egyptian Foreign Minister claims impasse in Anglo-Egyptian defense talks threatens violence in Egypt:

According to US Ambassador Caffery in Cairo, Egyptian Foreign Minister Salaheddin has indicated his untenable position in regard to the Anglo-Egyptian defense talks. Salaheddin told Caffery that while the students and inflammable public had so far kept quiet, they would not do so indefinitely, and he did not want "frightening explosions to occur" in Egypt "as are now taking place in Iran." Salaheddin stated that the British hope to avoid replying to Egypt's counter-proposals for at least two or three months, but that he himself cannot wait that long. If the British reply is not received by early June, Salaheddin plans to advise the Egyptian Prime Minister to break off negotiations and denounce the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936. Salaheddin added that if his advice at that time is not followed, he will resign.

Comment: The untenable position of the Wafd government has resulted largely from the fact that Egyptian officials have publicly adopted an extreme position in regard to British evacuation of the Suez Canal base and of the Sudan, even though they have secretly indicated a more moderate position. Unless the UK offers additional concessions to those they have already made, a dubious possibility at best, Egypt will find it increasingly difficult to conceal the actual nature of the Anglo-Egyptian impasse -- an impasse which has been caused, in large part, by the conflicting purposes of the Egyptian Government itself.

SOUTH ASIA

6. Comments on Indian move to defy UN in Kashmir:

On 1 May Crown Prince Karan Singh, the puppet ruler of Indian-held Kashmir, issued an official proclamation convening a Constituent Assembly to draw up a constitution for the Kashmir State. This action, presumably undertaken at Indian

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
instigation or at least with Indian consent, occurred just one day after the appointment of Dr. Frank Graham as UN representative for the Kashmir problem and in open defiance of the UN Security Council -- which has feared that such an Assembly would act unilaterally to ratify the State's accession to India and thereby further complicate the Kashmir problem. The subject of accession was not mentioned in the Crown Prince's proclamation, but it will probably arise during the course of the Assembly meeting. The proclamation may therefore be considered a reiteration of Kashmir and Indian rejection of the US-UK Resolution on Kashmir, passed by the UN Security Council on 30 March 1951.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Iceland wants US troops to arrive on day pact is announced:

US Legation in Reykjavik expected to have the Icelandic Government's final acceptance of the bilateral defense pact by noon on 2 May, with the formal signing to follow shortly thereafter. The government desires that, as tentatively arranged with the US Legation, the arrival of a contingent of US troops should be timed for the day after the day of signature and simultaneously with the publication of the basic agreement.

Comment: The government's reason for desiring that the arrival of US troops (numbering some 200 or 300) be timed with the publication of the agreement is to present its people with tangible evidence of the protection the pact will afford to their completely unarmed country.

- 7 -
[PAGE 08]
8. New "independent" Communist group challenges French Communist Party:

A meeting of 300 to 400 miners, including ex-Communists and leaders of the Communist-directed General Confederation of Labor, was held on 29 April to launch an "independent" Communist movement which would embrace all persons who have left the French Communist Party. Charles Lemoine, a former member of the French Communist Party central committee who left the party in 1945, presided over the meeting. This French group, claiming to have already contacted the Italian Communist deviationists, echoed their line that "national frontiers will be defended against any and all aggressors" and announced that it would send a delegation to the Rome congress of Italian Communist dissidents. Lemoine asserts that the group is established in 30 of the 89 French departments. The US Embassy in Paris estimates that this group of deviationists is likely to develop into a cause of some embarrassment to the French Communist Party.

Comment: This incipient movement has already drawn the public censure of French Communist Party officials, who are seeking again to purge party ranks of those who do not wholeheartedly support the party line. This movement has been reported to be planning clandestine action within the party and the General Confederation of Labor in the hope of detaching members one by one. Only in the unlikely event that some first-line Communists should join, would the movement have any possibility of establishing a separate party.

- 8 -
[PAGE 09]
