Sino-Indonesian Relations

An Indonesian Foreign Ministry official on 13 February characterized present Sino-Indonesian relations as a "continuation of subsurface political and economic warfare." He said Djakarta would not abandon its domestic anti-Chinese program and that Peiping, in retaliation, was doing its utmost to intensify Indonesia's economic difficulties.

The Indonesian official also stated that the Chinese Embassy obviously would attempt to ship through diplomatic channels privately owned goods of Chinese who are leaving Indonesia. Suluh Indonesia, a progovernment daily, reported on 10 February that the Chinese Communist Embassy and Consulate have been converted into a "warehouse" where Overseas Chinese who are returning to mainland China are depositing goods which they are not permitted to take out of Indonesia. Chinese departing are turning over property deeds to the Chinese Embassy. Should the embassy seek to protect this property from confiscation, the matter would become a government-to-government problem rather than one involving the Indonesian Government and foreign citizens.

The reaction of Overseas Chinese to Djakarta's anti-Chinese campaign is contributing markedly to Indonesia's problem of spiraling inflation. The flight of local Chinese capital, principally to Hong Kong, and the purchase of large quantities of commodities by departing Chinese have accelerated rupiah depreciation during the past six weeks. The Indonesian Government, faced with serious economic and political internal difficulties, can be expected not only to persist in its program of "economic nationalism" but also to blame most of its economic troubles on the local Chinese and on Peiping.

The Chinese leaders foresee a long period of strains with Djakarta and have recently indicated that there will be "ups and downs" in Sino-Indonesian relations on the matter of the Overseas Chinese. They are seeking to avoid, however, the angry exchanges of late 1959 and are now careful to use Hong Kong newspapers--rather than the mainland press or radio--to launch any direct criticism of Indonesian mistreatment of Chinese.

16 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
