Turkey-USSR: Turkish President-Premier General Cemal
Gursel has told the Soviet ambassador in Ankara that he is too
busy with domestic problems to accept a recent invitation from
Khrushchev to visit Moscow. In addition, Ankara has not responded to recent Soviet approaches regarding economic aid.

Belgian Congo: The pre-independence governmental stalemate in the Congo may have ended with parliamentary approval of a cabinet by Premier-designate Patrice Lumumba on 24 June. However, the election of Abako leader Joseph Kasavubu as chief
of state will check Lumumba's drive to monopolize political
power. Lumumba's offer of one cabinet portfolio to the Con-
akat--the majority party in Katanga Province--has failed to
placate advocates of a separate Katanga state, and a secession attempt may be in the offing. (Page 2)

Afghanistan: Afghan Prime Minister Daud, in an apparent show of frustration, has told the Turkish ambassador that
"the Communists will win everything everywhere" as a result
of the West's lack of understanding of Afghanistan's Pushtoon-
istan policy. He attacked the British for failing to keep their alleged promise before the partition of India that they would "restore" to Afghanistan all territory west of the Indus River. Daud complained that the date London set for his visit to Britain would have required him to leave on two days' notice. The British have expressed relief that Daud did not come since it would have produced "nothing but trouble." (Page 3)

Nationalist China: Contrary to denials by officials of the
Chinese Nationalist Defense Ministry, Nationalist artillery on
Chinmen Island fired 1,318 rounds of high explosive on 17 June,
probably to sustain the morale of their troops, in retaliation for Communist fire on the eve of the President's visit to Taiwan.
Nationalists are disturbed over the effectiveness and concentration of Communist fire, which severely damaged the beach defenses. The army attache believes that the type of fire used by

25 June 60  DAILY BRIEF  ii
