[PAGE 01]
25 February 1955

Copy No. 88

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OSD, State Dept. reviews completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

4. Chinese Nationalists reaffirm intention to hold Matsus and Quemoys (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iraq and Britain near agreement on new defense arrangement (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. West German Socialists plan delaying tactics on defense legislation (page 6).

* * * *

25 Feb 55     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 04]
4. Chinese Nationalists reaffirm intention to hold Matsus and Quemoys:

The Chinese Nationalist defense minister has reaffirmed Taipei's determination to hold the Matsu and Quemoy Island groups, following the evacuation of Nationalist forces from Nanchishan. The Nationalists are beginning an "extensive effort" to reinforce the Matsu garrison and strengthen the defenses there, according to the American military advisory group in Taipei.

Comment: The Matsus are garrisoned by about 4,000 regulars and 1,500 guerrillas. These forces may soon be reinforced by a regiment of regulars. There are about 54,000 Nationalist regular troops and 1,500 guerrillas on the Quemoys.

The Chinese Communists are expected to occupy Nanchishan rapidly. Fresh probing actions in the Matsu and Quemoy areas may shortly follow.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iraq and Britain near agreement on new defense arrangement:

British ambassador Wright in Baghdad told Ambassador Gallman that the Anglo-Iraqi talks which opened on 22 February "went very smoothly." Wright indicated that no difficulty is expected in reaching agreement on the staging of British planes and the stationing of maintenance crews at the Habbaniya and Shaiba airbases. The new agreement will also cover training and the supplying of arms and equipment.

Wright said that the one big problem probably will be whether Iraqi or British flags will fly over the airbases and whether the officers in immediate command will be Iraqi or British.

Comment: Iraqi prime minister Nuri negotiated the Anglo-Iraqi treaty of 1930 and is now seeking to replace it by new agreements within the framework of the Iraqi-Turkish defense pact.

25 Feb 55     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 5

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. West German Socialists plan delaying tactics on defense legislation:

The West German Social Democratic Party will attempt to delay passage of defense legislation necessary to implement the Paris treaties "as long as possible," party leaders told American representatives in Bonn on 23 February.

The Social Democrats will press for an East-West conference on German unity prior to the passage of such legislation. They believe that Moscow will be willing to hold a conference on German unity following ratification of the Paris treaties, and they want West German participation in any talks, even if Moscow insists that East Germany also participate.

Comment: Although Chancellor Adenauer will probably oppose any delay in enactment of defense legislation, many of his supporters would probably favor deferring action until the West has tried to get Moscow into a meeting on Germany.

This is the first time any major West German party has indicated it would accept participation of the East German government in unity negotiations. The Social Democrats have heretofore maintained that Moscow would not negotiate on unity following ratification of the Paris accords.

25 Feb 55     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7

[PAGE 06]
