Chou En-lai's Letter on Sino-Indian Border Dispute

In an 8 September letter to Nehru, Chou En-lai expressed Peiping's willingness to join in "friendly negotiations" for set- tlement of Sino-Indian border problems. While this display of reasonableness seems intended to repair some of Peiping's damaged prestige, Chou made even "provisional" settlement contingent on withdrawal of Indian troops from posts activated along the McMahon line last spring. This apparently is intended to shift to Nehru responsibility for easing the current situation.

Chou's letter, which is Peiping's first direct comment on the border situation, detailed Communist China's claims to dis- puted areas all along the border. Chou characterized India's claims as a legacy of British "imperialism." But, while he re- affirmed Communist China's right to the disputed areas, Chou said his government "consistently" advocated negotiated settle- ment and he suggested return of troop dispositions along the Sino-Indian border to the "status quo" which existed before the Tibetan revolt. In this situation, "provisional agreements" could be reached "concerning isolated places."

Chou was clearly seeking to counter India's charges and to ward against further public criticism. He accused the Indians of "repeated incursions" into Ladakh and of "armed attacks" on Chinese frontier troops north of the McMahon line. He indicated annoyance over India's "bringing pressure to bear on China mili- tarily, diplomatically, and through public opinion" and warned that continued Indian criticism can only "impair" relations.

Nehru will be irritated by Chou's unyielding attitude on territorial claims and by his placing full blame for the recent clashes on "trespassing" Indian forces. Chou's claims to ex- tensive border areas long regarded as Indian will be unacceptable to New Delhi, which has repeatedly declared its "internationally recognized" frontier is not subject to negotiation--except for minor modifications. In view of Nehru's public pledges to

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
