Rhee Refuses to Approve Repatriation of Koreans in Japan
To South Korea

(South Korean Vice Foreign Minister Kim Tong-cho on 7 September informed Ambassador Dowling that he had failed to persuade President Rhee to agree to a plan for repatriating Koreans in Japan to South Korea. Such a plan has been encouraged by US officials to diminish the impact of the proposed repatriation to North Korea, scheduled to begin in November.
Rhee also has stated recently that he will not relax the ban on trade with Japan and that a settlement of differences is out of the question unless Japan accepts all South Korean demands. He continues to express his intention to use force to block the repatriation to North Korea.)

(Although some South Korean officials recognize the futility of further opposition to the Japanese - North Korean repatriation agreement, Rhee apparently has been persuaded by Foreign Min- ister Cho Chong-hwan and Ambassador in Japan Yu Tae-ha that repatriation to North Korea must be blocked before Seoul agrees to accept repatriates. The negative policy of South Korea toward the Koreans in Japan has already resulted in considerable dis- content among non-Communist Korean groups in Japan who feel that Seoul is neglecting their interests.)

(In view of Rhee's attitude, the current Japanese - South Korean talks in Tokyo hold little promise of settling any of the major is- sues between the two countries. Although the two sides have ten- tatively agreed to an exchange of Koreans detained in Japan and Japanese fishermen seized by South Korea, Seoul may temporarily continue to hold the fishermen as hostages in the hope of extracting concessions from the Japanese. Even should they be released, how- ever, Seoul could seize more fishermen for violation of the "Rhee fishing line"--as it did early last year after a mutual release of prisoners. There has been no indication of progress on any of the other issues under discussion.)

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
