[PAGE 01]
16 May 1961

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
16 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. South Korea. (Page i)

4. UAR: Khrushchev again chides Nasir for anti-Com-
munist measures within UAR. (Page iii)

5. Iran: Shah says he supports Amini's reform program
but will not become a figurehead. (Page iii)

6. Morocco: Most political factions oppose King's maneu-
vers to concentrate power in own hands. (Page iv)

7. West Germany: Parliamentary meeting in West Ber-
lin under consideration despite likely Soviet protests.
(Page iv)

8. USSR: Soviets say further nuclear tests by French
"may compel" USSR to resume testing. (Page v)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

16 May 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*South Korea: (Information available as of 0500 EDT)
The only military units thus far identified with the military
coup staged in Seoul in the early morning hours of 16 May
are elements of the South Korean Second Army and some
marine units. The rest of the army, the air force, and
most navy elements reportedly have not thus far participated
in the revolutionary activity; which way they will throw their
support is not clear. Although the "military revolutionary
committee" set up shortly after the coup claims that it con-
trols the entire country, and evidently does control the city
of Seoul, and possibly Taegu, it is still questionable whether
the coup leaders have sufficient support to retain power.

The "military revolutionary committee," which claims
to be anti-Communist, pro-US, and pro-UN, has been is-
suing proclamations over the name of Army Chief of Staff
Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong. Early on 16 May Chang asked the
commander of UN forces in Korea, US General Magruder,
for the assistance of American forces in putting down the
revolt, and the revolt leaders may be merely using his name.
Chang has, however, since been in contact with the coup
leaders, and his present position is not known; it is possible
he is working for a compromise which would avoid further
armed conflict. In any event, the real leader and chief
planner of the coup appears to be Maj. Gen. Pak Chong-hui,
deputy commander of the Second Army.

The whereabouts of Prime
Minister Chang Myon is not known, but he apparently escaped
when the coup leaders tried to capture him and is now in
hiding. According to press reports, a number of other govern-
ment officials are under house arrest in Seoul.

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
USSR-UAR:
While
Moscow has displayed irritation with the UAR from time to
time, usually through the international Communist press,
governmental relations between the two countries are rela-
tively smooth, and bloc economic and military aid to the UAR
continues.
Over the past week the Communist bloc has received some
adverse treatment by the UAR press and radio, with a marked
decrease in UAR criticism of the United States.
(Backup, Page 6)

Iran: The Shah has told the American ambassador that
the reforms being undertaken by Prime Minister Amini are
necessary and that he will support them. Nevertheless, he
said, the center of power in Iran has traditionally resided in

16 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
the Crown and must continue to do so. He added that he would
abdicate rather than become a figurehead being told what to do
and say by successive governments. The Shah is still sched-
uled to leave on 17 May for an official visit to Norway, but
plans to return directly to Iran rather than vacation elsewhere
in Europe as originally scheduled.
(Page 8)

Morocco: King Hassan II is continuing maneuvers to con-
centrate power and government administration into his own
hands. Apparently enthusiastic crowds during his recent offi-
cial visits to major cities seem to have convinced Hassan that
he can rule without political parties. Most major political fac-
tions, however, are becoming bolder in their attacks on the
King's personal rule. They will probably resent the appoint-
ment of a new cabinet--which is said to be imminent--if
Hassan chooses only nonpolitical technicians
loyal to him. The King is aware of this political opposition,
and some evidence suggests he is planning to initiate strict
police and military controls in the major cities of Morocco.
(Page 9)

West Germany: West German and West Berlin party lead-
ers are reported considering holding a meeting of the Bundesrat
--the upper house of the West German parliament--in West Ber-
lin, possibly on 16 June, the eve of the "Day of German Unity"
which commemorates the East Berlin uprisings of 17 June 1953.
Khrushchev told the West German ambassador on 24 April that
the bloc would be willing to postpone the conclusion of a separate
peace treaty provided the West made no "unexpected moves,"
presumably such as a parliamentary meeting in Berlin. It is
doubtful, however, that a Bundesrat meeting would materially
alter the timing of Soviet moves regarding Berlin. The inten-
sity of likely Soviet protests would depend to some extent on
the possibility of a meeting between Khrushchev and President
Kennedy.
(Page 10)

16 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 08]
*USSR-Nuclear Test Ban Conference: The formal Soviet
statement at Geneva on 15 May warning that further French
nuclear testing will make a test ban agreement "impossible"
and "may compel" the USSR to resume testing, appears de-
signed to divert attention from control issues. The long
delay in reacting to the French test of 25 April suggests that
the Soviet leaders hope to inflate the question of French
testing into a major point in the discussions between Presi-
dent Kennedy and De Gaulle. By repeating previous charges
that the French have tested in order to perfect weapons for
the benefit of NATO and thereby gain "unilateral advantages"
for the West, Moscow apparently hopes to minimize recent
Western concessions and create the impression that the
West has not negotiated seriously.

16 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    v

[PAGE 09]
South Korea

Major General Pak Chong-hui was court-martialed in
1948 on charges of being a Communist and was sentenced
to 10 years in prison. At the outbreak of the Korean War in
1950, he was recalled to service, and subsequently was
pardoned because of his war record. He is not known to have
re-established contacts with the Communists or to have been
connected with South Korean leftist groups since 1948. How-
ever, because of alleged efforts to stir up discontent among
officer elements following the revolt which toppled Rhee in
April 1960, there was some question of his loyalty and whether
he would soon be dropped from the Army.

The South Korean Second Army is largely composed of
training and logistical units. It is not known whether units
of the First Army--South Korea's combat ready force de-
ployed along the Demilitarized Zone facing North Korea--
support the uprising. First Army support for the coup could
ensure its success. Although a proclamation of the "revolution-
ary committee" has named the First Army commanding general
Yi Han-lim as "martial law commander" in the front line areas,

In a six point proclamation the insurgents, who have pro-
claimed martial law, have announced that they intend to strength-
en anti-Communist measures, observe the UN charter, wipe
out government corruption, rehabilitate the economy, work for
Korean unification, and eventually return the government to
civilian authority when their mission is accomplished. How-
ever, Pak and his sup-
porters had no definite plans for administering the government
after they seized power. There also were indications that the
Pak group was discontented over the loss of the privileged po-
sition enjoyed by the military under the Rhee regime. In the
year since Rhee's ouster, many senior officers have been
cashiered from the service, a civilian committee has been set
up to investigate military affairs, and the press has been per-
mitted to criticise the armed forces.

Army Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong was one of
those widely criticized in the press for his support of the Rhee
regime and accused of acquiring an illegal fortune through

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 10]
graft and corruption. Chang knew that Pak was planning a
coup, but claimed last month that he lacked sufficient evi-
dence to arrest the plotters. It is possible that Chang now
may be playing both sides of the fence in an effort to assure
his position whatever the outcome.

The North Korean regime has not yet commented on to-
day's events in South Korea. The only Communist bloc re-
action noted thus far has been a Moscow TASS item, and this
essentially was a repeat of American press reports.

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 11]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 12]
Khrushchev Criticizes UAR Policies

Relations between the Soviet and UAR governments,
however, have been relatively good in recent months. Work
on the Aswan Dam, for which Moscow has already extended
credits totaling $325,000,000, appears to be progressing
satisfactorily. Soviet technicians are also working on a
number of projects in the Egyptian region under a $175,000,-
000 credit granted in 1958. In early 1961 the USSR resumed
large-scale deliveries of arms including MIG-19 jet fighters.

Moscow has voiced approval when the UAR has taken a
stand in opposition to the West or in support of some Soviet
position. However, Soviet leaders have been irritated by such
actions as Cairo's refusal to endorse Khrushchev's proposal for
replacing the UN secretary general with a three-man secretar-
iat and to give fuller support to the USSR at the UN during the
Congo crisis.

The Nasir regime's attitude toward Arab Communists has
been a consistent source of irritation to the USSR. Khru-
shchev's public criticism of arrests of Egyptian and Syrian
Communists in late 1958 and early 1959 caused a deteriora-
tion of Soviet-UAR relations. Since then some features of
Nasir's policies, including the continued suppression of Com-
munists and the relatively slow pace of agrarian reform in
the UAR, have been criticized from time to time, usually
through international Communist journals and the Communist

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 13]
press in Lebanon. The current issue of the World Marxist
Review, published in Prague, carries a strong attack by an
anonymous author on the treatment of Communists in the UAR.

Nasir is sensitive to such criticisms and to the unfavor-
able comments made by Khalid Bakdash--head of the Syrian
Communist party who is in exile in the bloc--about the grow-
ing domination of Syria by Egyptians since the merger in 1958.

The US Embassy in Cairo believes that the recent shift
in UAR propaganda is also related to the deterioration of its
foreign exchange balance and to the Nasir regime's desire to
appear somewhat more friendly in anticipation of forth-
coming negotiations for additional US assistance in the form
of surplus agricultural products.

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 14]
Developments in Iran

The Shah told the American ambassador on 13 May that he
felt charges of corruption among government officials were
highly exaggerated but that arrests of those believed by the
public to be corrupt were necessary to calm the situation. Those
arrested would be tried, and if found guilty they would be pun-
ished. If they are found not guilty, the people's anger would be
directed against the minister of justice, and not against the
Crown.

The Shah noted that Prime Minister Amini now is rela-
tively popular, chiefly because he has been out of public office
for some time. He added that this popularity would diminish
as Amini failed to meet the demands of the people now support-
ing him. The monarch maintained that the recent crisis could
not have been solved if he had not had the power to dissolve
parliament and appoint a new government.

In other developments, Tehran announced that Mohammad
Derakhshesh, who led the teachers' strike which caused the
collapse of the previous government, had been appointed min-
ister of education. The teachers have been granted a 100-per-
cent increase in salary. This success is likely to encourage
demands and strike threats from other government workers.

The government has also announced the dismissal of ten
Ministry of Justice officials, and the public prosecutor has
stated that more than 100 electoral council members will be
tried for election irregularities. Several thousand electoral
council members participate in overseeing the elections in
154 constituencies. Cases of illegal interference with elec-
toral procedures could probably be made against most of them.

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8

[PAGE 15]
Moroccan King Moving to Consolidate Personal Rule

The King's tours around the country, accompanied by most
members of the cabinet, have resulted in an almost complete
paralysis of government operations in Rabat. The US Embassy
comments that the city is empty of any Moroccan at the policy
or decision-making level.

The US chargé, who was with Hassan's retinue during
"triumphal tours" of Casablanca, Fes, Marrakech, and Meknes,
feels that the vast majority of people sup-
port the idea of an absolute feudal monarch and fully accept
Hassan in this role, but that politically conscious elements of
all tendencies are increasingly irritated by the King's tactics.
The political parties are particularly incensed over the King's
delegation of the prime minister's powers last week to Ahmed
Reda Guedira, chief of his personal cabinet. Moroccan Min-
ister of Justice Torres said on 11 May that members of Hassan's
entourage had cited the King's "great popularity" with the masses
to help convince him that cheering throngs, rather than a con-
stitution or political parties, held the key to the retention of
royal power.

The police and security controls that Hassan reportedly in-
tends to establish in Casablanca, Marrakech, Rabat, and
Tangier will in effect constitute a state of military siege, with
the right to assembly either abrogated or greatly curtailed.
Apparently these measures, if taken, would be designed pri-
marily to hobble the vigorous Moroccan Labor Union (UMT),
whose strength--which was impressively manifested in a May
Day parade in Casablanca--is regarded by the King as a dan-
gerous political force. Such measures would require the loy-
alty of the army, and although Hassan has recently reassigned
some officers suspected of anti-monarchial sentiments and
taken other steps to maintain discipline, there continue to be
reports of wide-scale, although so far ineffectual, disaffection
within the army.

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 9

[PAGE 16]
Bonn Reported Planning Bundesrat Meeting in West Berlin

The East German news agency declared on 11 May that a
Bundesrat meeting in West Berlin would be "provocative," re-
iterating the contention that West German attempts to treat
West Berlin as part of the Federal Republic grossly violate
the existing unequivocal legal position and constitute a provo-
cation" against the regime. Earlier, the East Germans charged
that Mayor Brandt was attempting to foment a revolt in East Ger-
many and they probably would claim that scheduling such a meet-
ing on 16 June would be intended to spark a revolution.

Since July 1959, when Khrushchev attacked the meeting in
Berlin of the West German national convention which elected
West German President Luebke, the USSR has been attempting
to make an international issue of the question of holding meet-
ings of West German parliamentary bodies there. Annual meet-
ings of either or both the Bundesrat and Bundestag had been held
in West Berlin from 1950 to 1959 in order to foster the idea that
the city is still Germany's national capital and to stress West
Berlin's ties with the Federal Republic. These meetings have
been increasingly under attack by the Communists, and last July
Khrushchev threatened to "consider" signing a separate peace
treaty with East Germany if Bonn held its annual Bundestag ses-
sion in Berlin.

Following consultation with British, French, and American
representatives, Chancellor Adenauer last fall decided against a
Bundestag meeting in order to avoid doing anything which might
aggravate tensions in the city. Berlin officials, however, have
frequently expressed regret over the failure of the Bundestag to
meet in Berlin last year and stress the view that it would be
dangerous to let such an important link between Bonn and Berlin
as legislative sessions in Berlin be discontinued.

Mayor Brandt is reported to have raised the issue of a
meeting of only the upper house in Berlin with Franz Meyers,
president of the Bundesrat, during the latter's appearance in
Berlin on May Day. Meyers, who is now visiting the United
States and scheduled to visit in Washington from 21 to 24 May,

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 10

[PAGE 17]
is legally empowered to convene the Bundesrat where he
chooses, but he is not likely to do so if Adenauer strongly
objects.

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 11

[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 19]
