LATE ITEM

8. Comment on October Revolution ceremonies in Moscow:

Soviet Deputy Premier M. Z. Saburov delivered the major speech on the anniversary of the October Revolution in Moscow. Saburov devoted the first half of his address to a routine summary of Soviet economic progress in 1954. The last half was a recapitulation of Soviet foreign policies which gave no hint that any change is to be expected in Soviet tactics.

Saburov leveled relatively moderate criticism at some weaknesses in the economy, particularly agricultural difficulties and the continuing lag in the growth of labor productivity. His figures on economic performance expected during 1954 call for continuing rapid growth in heavy industry and manufactured consumer goods. Total industrial output is expected to increase 12 percent this year over last. Gains in industrial production thus far this year have been attained only with a labor force larger than that originally planned.

In agriculture, the key to the present drive for expanding consumer goods supplies, Saburov admitted that severe drought in the Ukraine and Volga regions had kept crops close to last year's level, which was relatively poor. He also revealed another upward revision in the "new lands" program. The goal of 37,000,000 acres to be reclaimed by 1955 has been raised to at least 49,000,000.

On foreign policy, Saburov devoted special attention to the USSR's current policy line promising peaceful coexistence, co-operation and negotiation, contrasting this with the "position of strength" taken by the United States. At the same time, he again warned that there will be no four power conference, and that Germany will not be unified for a long time, if the West persists in rearming West Germany. The USSR is counting heavily on this line to arouse opposition to ratification of the London agreements in France and West Germany which could create serious divisions within the Western alliance.

Saburov particularly emphasized the improvement of relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia as an
