Laos

Communist broadcasts describe the opening of the Geneva Conference as a complete success for the Communists and US agreement to equal representation for the three Laotian groups a "retreat." Peiping stated on 17 May that the US faces "utter isolation" because of "outrageous obstruction and disruptive maneuvers." Moscow reports that it was extremely difficult for the US to accept the compromise solution on Laotian representation.

The Soviet Union also is attempting to turn to its own advantage whatever differences exist between itself and Communist China on how best to handle the Laotian situation. Bloc sources in Geneva and Saigon recently have used nearly identical terms in describing the US and Communist China as the two extremes in the Laotian situation, while the Soviet position is pictured as one of reasonableness.

Moscow's vote would be that of arranging a compromise between the two extremes. Hinting that the USSR could contain the Chinese, the two delegations would present a "united front" at the conference and that there would be no "open break" between them.

Indian ICC Chairman Samar Sen observed to Ambassador Brown on 14 May that the ICC under its present terms of reference was powerless to investigate complaints and agreed that a more detailed cease-fire agreement pinpointing troop positions and specifying conditions of the truce was required. Sen expressed the hope that the RLG would be dissuaded from filing complaints with the ICC since they would merely generate countercomplaints and poison the atmosphere still further. He said the ICC already had more complaints from the other side than from the RLG. Sen stressed the urgency of an agreement among internal political factions on a coalition government, reiterating the standard Indian view that both Souvanna and the Pathet Lao enjoy considerable popular support and must be represented in any truly neutral government.

Krishna Menon, on the eve of his departure for Geneva, reportedly visualized an eventual settlement which would give the Neo Lao Hak Sat and Pathet Lao forces a clear victory.

18 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
