Iran: The Shah and a party of 19 left for an official visit to Norway on 17 May, and he is expected to be out of the country for about a week. Before leaving, the Shah appointed a regency council to rule in his absence consisting of Prime Minister Amini and Minister of Court Ala, and two members of the royal family, Prince Gholam Reza and Prince Abdol Reza.

Princess Ashraf, the Shah's twin sister, is reported to have left Iran on 14 May. Some of the royal family, particularly the two princes on the regency council, will presumably remain in Tehran at least until the Shah returns from Norway. Some of the Shah's unpopularity results from the intrigues and financial manipulations of the royal family, and their elimination from the scene would help further the image of a reformed government which Amini is attempting to create.

The Watch Committee at its meeting on 17 May reached the following conclusion concerning Iran:

The implementation of reforms by the Amini government will at least temporarily result in a period of increased political instability. The opportunity for reaction to these reforms may be enhanced during the absence of the Shah.

Note: While the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, agree that there is a continuing danger of a military coup in Iran, they do not believe that this danger is as great as it was several weeks ago or that it is materially accentuated by the absence of the Shah on a brief trip to Europe.

Iraq-Oil: Prime Minister Qasim apparently views recent conciliatory moves by the Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) to resume negotiations as indicating company weakness. He may now attempt to enforce his government's demands for more revenue and part ownership of the company. Qasim responded to IPC Board Chairman Lord Monckton's personal letter of 30 April by publicly castigating "the avaricious, monopolist-imperialist companies which suck the blood and wealth of the

18 May 61
DAILY BRIEF
iv
