[PAGE 01]
10 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL IN TUNIS ATTACKED
BY MOB (page 3).

2. BRITAIN DEPORTS ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS
(page 4).

3. ISRAEL EXPECTS EGYPTIAN ATTACK BY AUGUST
(page 5).

4. SOVIET LEADERS DISCUSS INTERNAL QUESTIONS
(page 6).

5. YEMEN TO ASK WHETHER USSR WILL EXPLORE FOR
OIL IN KAMARANS (page 8).

6. TUNISIANS OPPOSE DELAY OF NEGOTIATIONS WITH
FRANCE (page 9).

7. BRITISH SEE FULL-SCALE ATTACK AGAINST OFFSHORE
ISLANDS AS "HIGHLY IMPROBABLE" (page 10).

8. INDIA ACCEPTS SOVIET STEEL MILL
(page 11).

9. LEBANON MAY BE NEXT TARGET OF EGYPTIAN AND
SAUDI ARABIAN SUBVERSION (page 12).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 13)
[PAGE 04]
1. AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL IN TUNIS
ATTACKED BY MOB

The reported attack on the American
consulate general and information
center in Tunis by French mobs on
9 March is evidence of the strong
anti-American sentiment dominating
French settler thinking. It reflects a general French
sentiment against American information activity, which
has been favorably received by the Arab population. This
attack is the second on an American installation within
the past nine months. The information center was bombed
on 28 June, at which time an unexploded bomb was found
at the residence of an American vice consul.

The French high commissioner in
Tunis, who was also attacked by the mob, recently informed the American embassy in Paris that the French
population in Tunisia had not yet accepted the fact of full
Tunisian independence. The French settlers believe that
the United States has encouraged the nationalists in their
demands for full independence and intends to usurp France's
position and drive them out of Tunisia. They have been encouraged in this belief by recent statements made by
French foreign minister Pineau and Prime Minister Mollet,
who have claimed that France's policies are not fully supported by its allies. In view of the distrust of American
motives prevailing in France and French North Africa,
similar attacks on American installations in Algeria and
Morocco are possible.
[PAGE 05]
2. BRITAIN DEPORTS ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS

Britain's deportation of Cypriot
archbishop Makarios, in line with
its new tough policy, invites a new
wave of terrorism in Cyprus and
makes impossible any further negotiations for a settlement. The announcement of Britain's move interrupted Greek preparations for
Makarios' arrival for talks with Greek government officials and was followed by large-scale demonstrations
against the British in Athens and Salonika.

The Greek foreign minister
feared Greek reaction to an "all-out British clean-up" on Cyprus.
his government would not allow itself to be
divorced from Greek public opinion and would therefore
take a firm position on all issues involving Cyprus. Athens,
under a new government which is trying to develop popular
support, may seek to identify itself with public opinion by
some dramatic counter-move such as a rupture of relations with Britain.

The Greeks will give new encouragement
and support to violent resistance to the British on Cyprus,
and may also permit popular demonstrations against Britain,
Turkey and the United States.
[PAGE 06]
3. ISRAEL EXPECTS EGYPTIAN ATTACK BY AUGUST

Comment  The estimate is consistent with statements made by Israeli officials in
recent months that Egypt would be ready for general hostilities sometime between June and August. Israeli officials have also said that Egypt might launch an air attack at any time before then.
[PAGE 07]
4. SOVIET LEADERS DISCUSS INTERNAL QUESTIONS

At a reception on 6 March, the top
Soviet leaders emphasized to Ambassador Bohlen that under present conditions in the Soviet Union collective
leadership is the only form of rule possible. Khrushchev
claimed that it was "absolute nonsense" that he was on the
way to becoming another "great leader," and Mikoyan later
made a statement along this same line.

Khrushchev admitted that certain adjustments in economic policy had been necessary, partly
because the Soviet leadership came to realize that disarmament was not an immediate prospect. Both Khrushchev
and Malenkov vigorously denied, however, that there had
been any "quarrel" between them on economic policy, and
Malenkov reiterated that lack of experience was the reason
for his resignation as chairman of the Council of Ministers.
Bohlen comments that although candor marked these discussions, he felt the statements on Malenkov were not entirely frank.

Mikoyan described Stalin's later days
as "difficult times" and said that Stalin frequently made decisions on his own without consultation "with any of us." He
said that by this procedure Stalin had abolished the principle of voting in party organs and in effect had destroyed
their usefulness. Khrushchev stated that decisions in the
[PAGE 08]
party presidium are now usually reached without vote, but
in the event of disagreement which cannot be ironed out in
discussion, a vote is "obligatory."

Mikoyan intimated that the process of
rewriting Soviet history might be quite far-reaching and said
that in all probability Lenin's testament--his last statement
on the succession problem--would be made public.

Comment  These remarks provide the best evidence
to date on how collective leadership actually operates within the top echelons of the Soviet hierarchy.

Trotsky claimed that Lenin's testament
called for Stalin's removal as general secretary of the party.
Publication of the testament could be used as a device to discredit Stalin completely.
[PAGE 09]
5. YEMEN TO ASK WHETHER USSR WILL EXPLORE FOR
OIL IN KAMARANS

the king of Yemen expressed an interest in asking the Soviet
ambassador whether it
would be possible for the USSR
to explore for oil in the Kamaran
Islands.

Comment  Both Yemen
and Britain
claim jurisdiction over the Kamarans. An offer of exploration
rights to the USSR would likely
be an attempt to gain Soviet support for Yemen's claims through
a government-to-government
arrangement.

It is likely that Moscow would
consider such a request favorably
in view of its recent efforts to increase Soviet influence in Yemen
and its offer last November to
help Yemen "in everything." The
USSR recently renewed its 1928
treaty of friendship with Yemen.
In February, a Soviet economic
team went to Yemen to negotiate
a trade agreement which was
signed on 8 March in Cairo.
(Prepared by ORR)
[PAGE 10]
6. TUNISIANS OPPOSE DELAY OF NEGOTIATIONS
WITH FRANCE

The French government has requested
a recess of the current negotiations
with Tunisia during the National Assembly debate on Algeria, according to
Tunisian deputy premier Bahi Ladgham. He told the American embassy in Paris that France was trying to tie Tunisia's
hands in defense matters, although he admitted that the two
governments were virtually agreed on the conduct of Tunisian foreign affairs.

Ladgham fears that more than a week's
suspension would lead to an upsurge of Tunisian nationalism,
with many extremists joining the Algerian rebels. He said
that if an agreement were not reached before the Tunisian
elections are held on 25 March, the assembly then elected
would unilaterally declare the country's independence and
would abrogate the existing treaties with France.

Comment  Although an agreement in principle was
reached prior to the commencement of
these negotiations on 29 February, the deliberations apparently have not gone smoothly. The French high commissioner in Tunis, who was in Paris at the time, informed
the American embassy on 7 March that Minister of State
Savary disapproved an American plan to send food and clothing into Tunisia because France's position would be greatly
weakened if the Tunisians gained the impression that they
could get material or financial support elsewhere.
[PAGE 11]
7. BRITISH SEE FULL-SCALE ATTACK AGAINST OFFSHORE
ISLANDS AS "HIGHLY IMPROBABLE"

As long as the American 7th Fleet remains in the Taiwan area, it is "highly
improbable" that the Chinese Communists will launch a full-scale attack or
institute a blockade against the offshore islands,
the main deterrent to military action is
the unpredictability of American reaction, which could lead
to an extension of the area of hostilities--a result which the
Chinese Communists would wish to avoid at this time.

the Chinese
Communists are convinced that "time is on their side." They
expect Chinese Nationalist morale to deteriorate, and consider it pointless to fight for areas which they hope to acquire
in due course through subversion and propaganda.

Comment  The prevailing British thinking for some
months has emphasized that aggression
is not now in the Communist interest, and that the principal
threat arises from increasing Chinese Communist economic
penetration of neighboring areas.

Over the past year, Communist attempts
to capture Nationalist-held offshore islands have apparently
been deferred pending the outcome of Peiping's efforts to reach
a diplomatic settlement on the area. Although there are no
signs of an imminent attack against the islands, the Communists might at any time step up their harassing activity to support their diplomatic pressure against the United States in the
Sino-American negotiations at Geneva.
[PAGE 12]
8. INDIA ACCEPTS SOVIET STEEL MILL

The announcement on 8 March that
India has accepted the offer of a
Soviet steel mill indicates that New
Delhi is satisfied with Soviet terms
and equipment but that it has accepted only the original offer of a mill capable of producing 1,000,000 tons of steel ingots annually. It apparently has not yet accepted a recent Soviet offer to
increase the capacity of the mill by 300,000 ingot tons,
though at least one news release suggests it may do so
later.

Completion of negotiations and commencement of construction may lead to some loss of
public interest in the Soviet mill, which heretofore has
had a strong propaganda impact. The USSR may therefore search for another project of equal publicity value,
whose offer to India would keep public attention focused
on the USSR. Soviet interest in India's basic heavy industries suggests that any dramatic new Soviet offer might
deal with petroleum or mineral development.
(Concurred in by ORR)
[PAGE 13]
9. LEBANON MAY BE NEXT TARGET OF EGYPTIAN AND SAUDI ARABIAN SUBVERSION

the Saudi Arabians and Egyptians are
carrying out a campaign in Lebanon aimed at taking over
the country through a puppet government.
Lebanon was steadily losing ground in its effort to oppose
these moves.

informed groups
in Lebanon are rapidly coming to believe their country is
the next target of the Egyptians and Saudi Arabians.
there is an increasing inclination even among staunchly
pro-West Christians to think in terms of compromise or
partial accommodation. This might prove to be the first
step toward eventual capitulation.

Comment  The Saudis have been exerting economic
pressure and subverting the Lebanese
press, while Egypt's ally Syria has sought to draw Lebanon
into a bilateral military pact.

Lebanon, half-Christian, half-Moslem,
has traditionally tried to steer a neutral course in Arab
state politics and will probably try to continue to do so.
Lebanese alarm, particularly among the Christians who
fear being "swallowed up" by the Arabs, has been increased
sharply by the growing influence of Egypt in Arab affairs,
and particularly by recent events in Jordan.
[PAGE 14]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 9 March)

The American embassy in Tel Aviv believes
that Prime Minister Ben-Gurion's remarks in the Israeli parliament on 6 March, when he affirmed his government's intention to avoid a "preventive war," indicates Israeli leaders are
now concerned with restoring the public morale depressed by
earlier alarmist statements about growing Arab strength. The
embassy also believes Ben-Gurion's renewed rejection of preventive war, in the face of strong opposition criticism and
against the background of current border troubles, gives some
ground for believing that Israel may avoid "adventurous reactions" for the time being.

An Israeli newspaper reported on 29 February that the first volunteer members of an international Jewish
force are expected to arrive in Israel in March. An appeal was made early last November to Jewish communities abroad to send
100,000 immigrant youth to help defend Israel's borders. (Press)

Two factions have developed within the
Jordan Arab Legion, according to the American military attaché
in Amman. On the night of 6-7 March one faction attempted to
kidnap a leader of the other group. The basic cause of the factionalism is the question of officer assignments to replace departing British personnel. The attaché comments that King
Hussain is probably caught in the middle of this struggle, and
that a coup by one of the factions is possible if a compromise is
not worked out. These developments, he believes, bode ill for
the future of the legion as a military force.
[PAGE 15]
