[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
27 December 1952
Copy No. 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
SOVIET UNION
1. Improved Soviet air defenses in Black Sea area (page 3).

FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Egyptian group organized to curb French interests (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Employees of Western missions face restrictions in Poland (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION
1. Improved Soviet air defenses in Black Sea area:

Soviet aircraft were active in three areas near the route of the ferret plane but there was no indication of attempted interception.

Comment: During the past year the installation of improved equipment and the closer integration of the Soviet and Satellite air defense systems has significantly improved the early warning capabilities of the Soviet Orbit in the Black Sea area.

FAR EAST

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

NEAR EAST-AFRICA

4. Egyptian group organized to curb French interests:

An Egyptian committee, headed by former Foreign Minister Salaheddin, has been organized to unify all groups which support the North African nationalists. Special subcommittees have been established to spread propaganda and to organize a boycott of French trade and culture.

The committee reportedly intends to ask General Nagib to curtail French activities in Egypt.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: It is unlikely that Nagib will personally take charge of an anti-French campaign, although a diplomatic protest has been made by Cairo over developments in North Africa. The formation of the new committee, however, will aggravate the anti-French sentiment shown by the recent appeals of Egyptian religious leaders for a "holy war" against France and for Arab League condemnation of French policy.

[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE

6. Employees of Western missions face restrictions in Poland:

The Polish Government has modified its penal code in order to withdraw the immunity from criminal procedure of all non-diplomatic employees of foreign missions and their families, regardless of nationality. An official of the Polish Foreign Office has stated that no exceptions could be made on the basis of reciprocity.

The American Embassy believes the new law has serious implications from the standpoint of security and the morale of non-diplomatic employees of the Embassy and their families, especially those in the Military Attache's office.

Comment: The practical effect of this change in the penal code will be to curtail the Embassy's ability to observe developments in Poland.

Restrictive measures against the activities of Western diplomatic and non-diplomatic personnel in Poland previously have been much less severe in their practical application than those of other European Satellites.

WESTERN EUROPE

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Bidault's replacement of Schuman at the Foreign Ministry, which either he or Schuman has headed since 1945, would imply little change in French foreign policy. A Gaullist Defense Minister would, however, be in an ideal position to exert influence against the EDC.
