[PAGE 01]
23 February 1960
Copy No. C 67
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
23 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR and Israeli military forces strengthened; Cairo anticipates army coup in Iraq in near future.

Indonesia--Lack of rapport between Khrushchev and Sukarno may obviate any "deal" between the two.

Indian high official believes India may be compelled to recognize East Germany by end of 1960 despite Nehru's avowed intention not to do so in near future.

III. THE WEST

Initial series of French nuclear tests to involve three additional shots of lighter, smaller devices; weapon device not expected for a year.

Peruvian Communist congressman's request to Moscow for disaster relief brings reported offer of $7,100,000 loan.

Cuban Government reportedly to procure bloc arms and ammunition and British-built aircraft from UAR.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]UAR-Israel-Iraq: While no new major UAR troop movements into Sinai have been noted, some reserve units reportedly have been called up in both Syria and Egypt. Units deployed in Sinai have been issued extra artillery ammunition. Some additional Syrian troops have been ordered to the Israeli frontier.
Nasir was told that Lebanese Army intelligence had information that certain Israeli Army units had been strengthened along the Syrian border, but that these measures appeared to be precautionary and that no attack against Syria was expected[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

Indonesia: Indonesian Army leaders and civilian non-Communist government elements are hopeful that the lack of rapport between President Sukarno and Khrushchev and the latter's casual attitude and behavior, apparently irritating to Sukarno, will obviate a "deal" between the two.
Sukarno was willing to include Communists in the Indonesian cabinet and further
[PAGE 05]
reduce the army's power in return for major economic and military assistance from the USSR.

*Khrushchev's public reception during the first five days of his Indonesian tour has not been markedly enthusiastic except in Jogjakarta, where university students wildly applauded him, and in the Communist stronghold of Surabaya, where he addressed a cheering mass rally.

India -- East Germany: Indian Foreign Ministry Secretary Dutt believes India may be compelled to recognize East Germany by the end of 1960. Although Prime Minister Nehru has made it clear to East German representatives that he has no intention of extending such recognition in the near future, Dutt currently believes trade and political considerations may force Nehru to change his position.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]III. THE WEST

France: The initial series of French nuclear tests is expected to involve three additional explosions of lighter, smaller devices. The next shot is planned before May and possibly within a month. The third and fourth shots in the series are planned for the fall of 1960, presumably after September, when the summer heat abates. A version of the device suitable for use as a weapon is not expected, however, for about a year. The extent of adverse foreign reaction to the first test has reportedly annoyed President de Gaulle and will probably stimulate France to study means for underground testing. One of the three remaining shots may be an underground test, although the site has not yet been selected.

Peru: A Peruvian Communist congressman has requested Moscow to grant a loan for reconstruction in the area of southern Peru affected by the earthquake on 15 January and is said to have received an encouraging response. The reported reply offered a loan of $7,100,000--not a usual form of Soviet disaster relief--conditioned on official government acceptance from Lima. While the conservative Peruvian Government would prefer not to accept this offer, Prime Minister Beltran informed the US Embassy in Lima that he was on the spot, intimating that he might feel obliged to accept[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]. (Page 3)

23 Feb 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
Cuba: The Castro government's growing rapport with the UAR may be used to facilitate purchase of arms and the aircraft Castro has been seeking in many countries.
Czech arms and ammunition will be sent to Cuba under cover of a recent UAR-Cuban barter transaction.
Cuba is purchasing obsolescent British-built aircraft from the Egyptian Air Force. (Page 4)

23 Feb 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel-Iraq

Some reserve units have been called up in Syria and Egypt, and troop movements into Sinai are continuing. However, these appear to be in response to orders previously reported and do not seem to indicate additional troops. Extra ammunition for T-34 tanks in Sinai has been issued, UAR military authorities have commandeered some civilian vehicles to aid in the Sinai build-up, and ammunition trucks have been observed proceeding across the Suez Canal. As of 21 February, UAR authorities were still considering what civil defense measures to take.

Lebanese Army intelligence notified Nasir that certain Israeli Army units had been strengthened along the Syrian border and in the Acre-Nazareth-Safad area, and that movements of the local Arab inhabitants had been restricted. The Lebanese believe the situation shows no likelihood of an Israeli attack on Syria and that the Israeli action is precautionary.

UAR fears of an Israeli attack in the near future and disclosed that some Egyptian paratroops had been sent to Syria. While these ostensibly are available to assist in repelling an Israeli attack, they are in a convenient location should the UAR be called upon to aid anti-Qasim Iraqi elements, who are said to be planning a coup.

23 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Cairo expects an Iraqi army coup[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]] in [[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]the near future, but insists that its military moves are only of a defensive character and against Israel[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].

23 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Peruvian Communist Asks Soviet Aid for Earthquake Area

Shortly after the earthquake of 15 January which killed 35 and left 25,000 homeless in the area of Arequipa, Peru's key southern city, Antonio Rodriguez, a Communist congressional deputy, visited Moscow soliciting a reconstruction loan.
Rodriguez is said to have received that the USSR is willing to lend $7,100,000 for disaster relief, but that the Peruvian Government must accept the loan officially.

The reported offer, not Moscow's usual form of disaster aid, may be designed to encourage unofficial contacts with the Peruvian Government, with which Moscow has no political or economic relations.

This offer puts him on the spot. He termed it a "most clever" Machiavellian scheme, to which he has "no answer."
The conservative Peruvian Government would prefer to refuse the loan, although such action would strengthen the increasingly active opposition and give Rodriguez an opportunity for considerable propaganda in the Chamber of Deputies. Government-congressional relations are already severely strained by Communist-sparked efforts--now endorsed by all political parties--to effect radical changes in the status of a US-owned petroleum company.

23 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Cuban Arms Purchases

Expanding economic and political ties between Cuba and the UAR may facilitate the Castro government's efforts to obtain military aircraft and increase its already substantial purchases of arms and ammunition.

could accept 30 Cuban students, or up to 50 if Havana insisted, at its aviation college on 1 September.
23 British-made jet fighters as well as numerous lighter planes were available for sale at world market prices. Bombs and ammunition for each type were also available.

A recent $6,000,000 barter transaction between the two countries may be used to cover purchase of Czech arms and ammunition. A Cuban arms technician arrived there from Prague on 8 February to make final arrangements on a three-way trade. Under its reported terms, a large part of the Egyptian cotton bartered for Cuban sugar would be sent to Czechoslovakia in payment for arms to be delivered by the Czechs to Castro.

Other widely varying reports continue to be received that Havana is attempting to buy Czech planes, tanks, and arms.

23 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
