[PAGE 01]
DOCUMENT N9 17

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. British opposed to extending UN General Assembly's security role (page 3).

FAR EAST

4. Chinese Nationalist forces in Burma again pose problems (page 5).

NEAR EAST

6. Syrian cooperation with West appears to depend on Israeli compliance with 18 May resolution (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. High Commissioners favor rebuke to Germans for recalcitrant attitude (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. British opposed to extending UN General Assembly's security role:

The US Representative on the UN Collective Measures Committee sees a basic British disagreement with the US policy of extending the UN General Assembly's responsibilities for security, under last fall's "uniting for peace" resolution.

The UK representative on the Collective Measures Committee reportedly stated that Britain never liked the resolution, and was pushed into it only by US insistence. The UK objects, he said, to the fundamental American concept that the UN should have at its disposal the means for maintaining peace, pending the conclusion of agreements between member countries and the Security Council under Article 43 of the Charter.

The resolution provides for the prior designation of national military contingents for use by the UN in emergencies. He expressed the view that so long as the Security Council is unable to function, there should be no further efforts to make the UN effective as a collective security agency.

USSR

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

[PAGE 05]
4. Chinese Nationalist forces in Burma again pose problems:

General Li Mi's Chinese Nationalist forces, which were recently defeated by the Chinese Communists in Yunnan and driven back into Burma, are disintegrating. Furthermore, their looting of Burmese villages is arousing intense resentment among the local people.

The Burmese War Office has confirmed this information, according to the US Ambassador in Rangoon, and has dispatched reinforcements from its forces fighting Communist insurgents in central Burma to the border areas in order to control the Nationalists. The Ambassador comments that in view of these developments, it would not be surprising if Burma "soon again raises the problem" posed by the Nationalist violations of Burmese territory.

Comment: In April the Burmese threatened to submit the Nationalist problem to the UN for action. They were dissuaded at the last moment in part by a Taipei assurance that the Nationalists would be ordered into Yunnan. In addition, it was pointed out to them that elevation of the question to the sphere of international discussion would provide Communism with a highly exploitable propaganda topic.

[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST

6. Syrian cooperation with West appears to depend on Israeli compliance with 18 May resolution:

Current Syrian cooperation with the West will depend largely on gaining Israeli compliance with the UN Security Council resolution of 18 May concerning the Syrian-Israeli boundary dispute. Pointing to recent Syrian Parliamentary sympathy for Egypt in its difficulties with Britain, the US Minister in Damascus asserts that the Syrians would back Egypt's citation of Israeli non-compliance as a precedent for its intransigence on the Suez Canal restrictions. He is also concerned lest the new Syrian Cabinet, which he believes can now be counted on to cooperate with the US, should shift its present Western orientation because of a feeling that the UN had glossed over Israel's failure to comply with its instructions.

Comment: Israeli non-compliance with certain provisions of the 18 May resolution has worried the US, the UK and France, who are currently attempting to persuade Egypt to lift its restrictions on Suez Canal traffic. Although there is some sentiment for an immediate Security Council debate on the Israeli-Syrian dispute, no action is expected soon. General Riley, Chief of Staff of the UN Truce Supervision Organization, plans to file an interim report on the situation and then return to the area to carry out further negotiations with the two parties.

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. High Commissioners favor rebuke to Germans for recalcitrant attitude:

The three Western High Commissioners in Germany are concerned over the manner in which Vice-Chancellor Bluecher, opposition leader Schumacher and other German officials are whipping up German public opinion against the fulfillment of German obligations to the European community.

The Commissioners are agreed that immediate consideration must be given to the issuance of a high-level announcement stating that the establishment of a new relationship between the Allies and the Germans is not a foregone conclusion, but rather is dependent upon the manner in which Germany assumes and discharges its obligations. Unless the present trend is checked, US High Commissioner McCloy sees no possibility of concluding contractual arrangements to replace the occupation regime.

Comment: The Germans have lately given vent to strong resentment against Allied decisions, particularly those rejecting a reduction of Germany's coal export quota and insisting on full payment of occupation costs. Bluecher threatened to resign as representative to the Ruhr Authority where he was defeated on the coal issue, and even the conservative press has been talking in terms of the "disastrous" Allied policies, the "high political tension" in Bonn, and the probability of an internal German political and economic crisis.
