Nasir Appoints United Arab Republic Cabinet

In appointing a 131-man cabinet for the United Arab Republic, Nasir has side-stepped the selection of separate "sector" executive councils for Egypt and Syria as previously planned, apparently because of inability to find suitable or generally acceptable chairmen. By appointing both an Egyptian and Syrian minister for nearly every cabinet position, and by placing Egyptians at the head of four important combined ministries--war, foreign affairs, national guidance (propaganda), and education--Nasir has created at least a temporary balance which should minimize conflicts and disappointments and maintain his own absolute authority.

Appointed at the same time were four vice-presidents--former chairmen of the Egyptian National Assembly Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi and Marshal Abd Al-Hakim Amir, along with Syria's former Premier Sabri al-Asali, and former speaker of the Syrian chamber of deputies Akram al-Hawrani. In the Syrian sector, "strong man" Col. Abd al-Hamid Sarraj received the key Interior Ministry slot, while other members of the Syrian general staff have been relegated to such apparently innocuous sinecures as communications and social and village affairs. The pro-Soviet former Syrian Vice Premier Khalid al-Azm is conspicuously absent.

The capable director of Egyptian propaganda, Fathi Radwan, will serve as the single minister of national guidance. The unified Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be under Egypt's Mahmud Fawzi, probably seconded by Syria's former head of foreign affairs, Salah al-Din al-Bitar, as minister of state. Egypt's red-tinged former Minister of Commerce Muhammad Abu Nusayr has been assigned to what appears to be a less significant post as minister of municipal and village affairs for the Egyptian sector. The more conservative former Finance Minister Abd al-Munim al-Qaysuni will be the minister of economy and trade for Egypt. Ali Sabry, one of Nasir's closest advisers, remains as minister of state for presidential affairs.

7 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
