[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

29 February 1956
Copy No. 103

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ALGERIAN CRISIS DEEPENS

2. TAIWAN INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT FORMS PRO-
VISIONAL GOVERNMENT IN TOKYO

6. PEIPING OFFERS CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS TO
INDIA

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. ALGERIAN CRISIS DEEPENS

Former premier Mendes-France told Ambassador Dillon on 27 Febru-
ary that the Algerian situation had de-
teriorated considerably during the last
month and was beginning to show re-
semblances to the Indochina war. He
added that within the next three days
the French government would have
to make decisions crucial for solution
of the Algerian problem and for the future of France.

According to the American consul
general in Algiers, Algerian terrorist attacks have be-
come bolder, better conceived, and larger in scale. The
terrorists have harassed land communications to such an
extent that air travel is the only reasonably safe means of
transportation.

The consul general reports that the
nationalists plan to surround the city of Algiers and pos-
sibly to stage an uprising in the city within two weeks.
The local mayor insists that the police are not equipped
to handle the situation.

Meanwhile, the European settlers are
organizing for their own protection, in the belief that
France will abandon them. There is talk of establishing
a European-supremacy regime on the pattern of South
Africa.

Comment

The French army in Algeria, which
now totals about 200,000 men, is con-
tinuing to lose ground to the 20,000 to 40,000 Algerian
rebels. Some relatively large-scale defections of native
troops have occurred recently.

French plans to reinforce, regroup
and retrain military units for more effective action in
Algeria may not be accomplished quickly enough to fore-
stall the concerted rebel attacks expected to take place
in March.
[PAGE 05]
2. TAIWAN INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT FORMS
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT IN TOKYO

The Taiwan Independence Party in
Japan on 28 February formed a
"Provisional Government of the
Republic of Taiwan" with a five-man
"cabinet," according to press reports.

The Hatoyama government, in answer
to repeated Chinese Nationalist pro-
tests, claims it has no legal right to
suppress activities of the Taiwan Independence Party. A
Foreign Ministry official admitted to the Diet that the gov-
ernment was "interested" in the movement but that it was
"embarrassing to Japan." Foreign Ministry officials told
the American embassy they had called in the leader of the
movement and asked him merely "to take it easy."

Japanese government leaders are be-
lieved to favor creation of a local independent government
on Taiwan and under UN trusteeship. They reportedly feel
that Chinese Nationalist morale is deteriorating and that
this is the only way to keep the island out of Communist
hands.

Peiping denounced the Taiwan independ-
ence movement on 27 February as an intrigue of American
aggressors to occupy Taiwan permanently. Communist prop-
aganda emphasized that Taiwan is an "inseparable" part of
Chinese territory to be "liberated" by "peaceful" means if
possible, but by "means of war, if necessary."
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. PEIPING OFFERS CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
TO INDIA

The US embassy in New Delhi believes
that current Chinese Communist trade
promotion activity is certain to assume
considerable political significance, even
though the trade drive may not result in a great increase in
trade. The list of products being offered by the Chinese ap-
pears designed to demonstrate to Asians generally that rapid
industrialization has been possible in China under the Commu-
nist regime.

A new protocol to the 1954 Sino-Indian
trade agreement is being negotiated in New Delhi. Chinese
exports under this protocol are expected to include 50,000
tons of steel and other construction materials which India ur-
gently requires for its Second Five-Year Plan (1956-1961).
[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 February)

The American army attaché in Damascus
reports further Syrian troop movements to the Israeli border.
He adds that the bulk of Syrian artillery is now in position to
support the front-line brigades. This, plus the previous
Syrian troop movements reported on 25 February, indicates
that the bulk of the Syrian army has been moved close to the
Israeli border. The Syrian army strength on 1 December
1955, before recent additional call-ups, totaled 39,200 officers
and men formed into six infantry brigades, one armored
brigade, five artillery battalions, and one commando bat-
talion.

Colonel Kriebel, German military ad-
viser to the Syrian army, told the attaché that the Syrian units
are too far forward and they can now be easily reached and
mauled by Israeli forces. Kriebel said a forward defensive
line of only token strength, which he advocates, would neces-
sitate a real penetration of Syrian territory to reach the main
force and he believes the Israeli forces would not attempt
this.

Half of the Egyptian army is now in the
area adjacent to Israel. New Egyptian movements into the
Sinai area since the first of this year have added another
8,500 troops, bringing the present total to 42,500 officers and
men--seven times the strength in January 1955. These latest
increments are more significant in type than in numbers.
They include, in addition to an infantry brigade and an artil-
lery regiment, major armored units--two regiments of Sher-
man tanks (about 100) and a regiment of Centurions (36), to-
gether with armored car and armored infantry units. Also
reported is the movement into the Sinai of the equivalent of
two regiments (about 85) of the newly acquired Soviet T-34
tanks. These regiments, however, are not yet accepted as
fully operational units.
[PAGE 11]
