Comment: Viet Minh sponsorship of "free Thai" activities in Laos would appear to be a logical development, since northeastern Thailand is highly vulnerable to Communist penetration. It has a long frontier with Laos, its people are closely related to the Laotians, and Bangkok's neglect of the area's welfare has stimulated widespread resentment against the central government.

Tiang Sirikhan is generally believed to have been killed by the Thai police, but confirmation of his death is lacking. Prior to his disappearance, he was an antigovernment politician from the northeast, where he commanded a large popular following. Pridi Phanomyong, former Thai premier, was revealed by Peiping in July 1954 as its puppet.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on transfer of joint Soviet-Hungarian companies:

Moscow's announcement on 8 November of the transfer to Hungary of all five joint Soviet-Hungarian enterprises, including the important aluminum-bauxite company, and the Soviet-owned trade-industrial bank apparently marks completion of the Soviet program of withdrawal from direct operational control of numerous sectors of the Satellite economies. The only companies in which the USSR retains a direct interest are the uranium mining companies in several Satellites, the joint petroleum company in Rumania, and the joint nonferrous mining company in Bulgaria.

Hungary must repay the value of the Soviet share of the joint companies and the value of the trade-industrial bank "over a period of several years on preferential conditions." This obligation may place an additional burden on the Hungarian economy, already suffering from the failure of the new course program.

The Soviet withdrawals from the joint companies appear to result from a general Soviet policy designed to stress the economic and political independence of the individual countries of the Orbit. The return of these companies, however, will not result in a weakening of Soviet control of the Satellite economies, which will continue to be exercised through high-level government advisers and party leaders.
