[PAGE 01]
13 November 1957

Copy No. 158

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. SITUATION ON THE TURKISH-SYRIAN BORDER (page 3).

2. EGYPT CONTINUING CLOSE MILITARY COLLABORATION WITH SYRIA (page 4).

3. POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN JORDAN (page 5).

4. BRITISH TO MOVE AGAINST OMANI REBELS ON 15 NOVEMBER (page 6).

5. INDONESIAN COMMUNISTS LEAD IN JOGJAKARTA ELECTIONS (page 7).

6. SITUATION IN LAOS (page 8).

7. USSR PROPOSES EXCHANGE OF SCIENTISTS WITH JAPAN (page 9).

8. HONDURAS THREATENED BY REVOLUTION (page 10).

[PAGE 03]
1. SITUATION ON THE TURKISH-SYRIAN BORDER

Comment on:

The beginning of Turkish maneuvers has resulted in renewed Syrian charges that a Turkish attack is imminent. The maneuvers, apparently on a relatively small scale, now are scheduled to continue until 15 November. They are being conducted primarily by ground forces although there will be some practice coordination with air-support units.

Following the maneuvers, the Turks are expected to withdraw to their permanent duty stations all forces not regularly assigned to the Syrian border area. One F-86 squadron, deployed near the Syrian border in September, has already returned to its home base in northern Turkey.

[PAGE 04]
2. EGYPT CONTINUING CLOSE MILITARY COLLABORATION WITH SYRIA

Comment on:

Egypt is continuing to increase its military influence in Syria and attempting to restore prestige to the Arab Joint Command. Egyptian forces in Syria now are believed to number between 1,000 and 1,500.

During the week of 11 November, committees of Egyptian officers concerned principally with logistics and maintenance matters are to inspect Syrian army units and Egyptian forces in Syria.

An unspecified number of Egyptian national guard personnel is also scheduled to be sent to Syria this week--probably to train Syrian popular resistance groups.

Egyptian officers are to take command of several armored and parachute companies in the Syrian army.

[PAGE 05]
3. POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN JORDAN

Comment on:

King Hussayn believes that Egypt and Syria will attempt a coup in Jordan during parliamentary by-elections scheduled for 23 and 30 November.

Such action would be initiated, in the King's opinion, after candidates backed by Egypt and Syria have failed to win in the elections. In the interim, he expects that Egypt and Syria will continue to flood Jordan with money, will foment disorders and attempt assassinations. Hussayn added that the situation may force him to dissolve parliament and place Jordan under a military government. He indicated that at the end of this week he may contact Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Lebanon to determine what help they might provide if the situation in Jordan became more serious.

The King's assessment of the menace facing Jordan may lead to a request that the United States invoke its Middle East Doctrine, since Hussayn's allies would probably be reluctant to intervene militarily against the Jordanian population.

The King has received information that a "free Jordanian government" under Egyptian-Syrian sponsorship has been created in Damascus, headed by former ultranationalist premier Nabulsi. Jordanian political refugees are probably being organized into a military force under exiled former Jordanian officers. It is possible that some of the Egyptian military personnel now in Syria may be preparing to assist an antimonarchical coup in Jordan.

Moscow Arab-language broadcasts have joined Cairo and Damascus in denouncing Hussayn as an "ally and friend of the bitterest enemies of the Arab world--the USA, Britain and Turkey."

[PAGE 06]
4. BRITISH TO MOVE AGAINST OMANI REBELS ON 15 NOVEMBER

Comment on:

Britain plans to provide military support for the Sultan of Muscat's foray against the newly active Omani rebels scheduled to begin on 15 November.

A few aircraft from Aden will reinforce locally based planes and armored cars in their attempt to ensure the seizure of a rebel village and perhaps capture Talib, the principal rebel leader. London hopes that a successful operation would increase the Sultan's prestige and encourage a rebel chief, Suleiman bin Himyar, to come to terms with the Sultan. The British have earlier reported that Suleiman is disgusted with Talib and considering negotiating with the Sultan.

The British have been concerned over Talib's regaining the initiative in Muscat as a result of his seizure of the village of Tanuf on 17 October, and are anxious lest the rebels increase in strength and cause other villages to waver in their loyalty to the Sultan.

[PAGE 07]
5. INDONESIAN COMMUNISTS LEAD IN JOGJAKARTA ELECTIONS

Comment on:

The Indonesian Communists have taken what appears to be a commanding lead in early returns from the central Java sultanate of Jogjakarta, where the last of Java's local elections was held on 7 November. The major non-Communist parties--the Nationalist party, Masjumi, and Nahdlatul Ulama--follow in that order. These results are in line with Communist gains registered in local elections since late June which have given the Communist party a larger electoral base than any other political organization in Java.

The Communist party has been deeply involved in the anti-Dutch campaign in support of Indonesia's claim to Netherlands New Guinea. President Sukarno has called for the severance of trade relations with the Netherlands if the area is not "returned" to Indonesia, and has also suggested the confiscation of all Dutch property in Indonesia.

Communists and left-wingers apparently have been among Sukarno's major advisers in formulating the anti-Dutch drive. The Jogjakarta election results, if the present trend continues, will further convince Sukarno that he is right in bringing Communists into high government positions.

[PAGE 08]
6. SITUATION IN LAOS

Comment on:

Prime Minister Souvanna hopes to present a coalition government, including representatives of the Communist Pathet Lao, for investiture on 16 November.

He will request that a special session of the National Assembly convene on 15 November, at which time the Pathet Lao would formally surrender control of the two northern provinces. He would then present for investiture a government headed by him in which Pathet leaders Souphannouvong and Phoumi would receive the portfolios of reconstruction and religion, cabinet posts which would involve the Communists in national affairs on a wide front.

The prime minister asserted that the Independent party, Laos' second largest, had agreed to this timetable. If true, this would confirm tentative indications that Phoui Sananikone, leader of the Independents, was preparing to drop his opposition to the proposed settlement. Under the circumstances, Crown Prince Savang would be isolated in his opposition to a settlement with the Pathets, and would probably feel forced to accede to the government's request for a special session of the assembly.

[PAGE 09]
7. USSR PROPOSES EXCHANGE OF SCIENTISTS WITH JAPAN

Comment on:

Japanese Prime Minister Kishi probably will find it difficult to block an exchange of scientists which has been proposed "very recently" by the USSR. The Soviet offer is likely to have strong appeal in Japanese scientific circles which include persons who have won international prominence in the field of theoretical physics.

The proposal apparently is timed to take advantage of the new Soviet scientific prestige to promote closer Soviet-Japanese relations. The influential Japan Science Council, which has a strong leftist minority and acts in a semiofficial advisory capacity to the government in scientific matters, is reported to have recommended acceptance of the Soviet proposal and would handle the actual exchange. One of the major functions of the council is to assist in formulating Japan's nuclear energy policies.

The exchange of scientists probably would strengthen those Japanese scientists, industrialists, and political leaders who advocate drawing on the Sino-Soviet bloc as well as the free world in developing the nation's atomic industry.

[PAGE 10]
8. HONDURAS THREATENED BY REVOLUTION

The aged General Tiburcio Carias, powerful chief of the Honduran Nationalist party and dictator of Honduras for 16 years before 1949, seems determined to prevent the Liberal party, which received 61 percent of the votes in the 22 September constituent assembly election, from coming to power even if it means revolution.

Carias told Nicaraguan President Somoza that under no circumstances will he "allow" the popular Liberal leader, Dr. Ramon Villeda Morales, to become president and asked Somoza to help him prevent it. Although help will probably not come from Somoza, Carias may be receiving money from Generalissimo Trujillo of the Dominican Republic, who would like to make the Caribbean area his sphere of influence. With sufficient financial backing, Carias could cause serious trouble. He probably could not, however, gain effective control of the country, which gave his party only 32 percent of the votes in the election.

The country is still ruled by a military junta, pending the constituent assembly's completion of its work. Colonel Oswaldo Lopez, ambitious defense minister, may seize on any outbreak of political violence to justify continued military rule. Liberal leaders, miffed by Carias' flat rejection of their conciliatory offer that would have given the Nationalists three cabinet posts in the new government, may precipitate trouble by instructing the Liberal majority in the assembly to name Villeda constitutional president immediately. They had intended to delay this until after agreement was reached for Nationalist participation in the government.

[PAGE 11]
