Situation Deteriorating in Southern Rhodesia

Unrest among the African population in the native townships adjoining several of Southern Rhodesia's urban centers threatens to become explosive, perhaps during this week. Since July there have been several instances of racial violence triggered by some minor incident. These disorders are indicative of the underlying discontent arising from unemployment and poor housing, as well as from growing nationalist fervor to end white minority rule.

The situation is complicated by the conviction of local Africans that the shooting by police, particularly the inexperienced white police reservists, during last week's disorders was "unprovoked" and was intended to cow the Africans by firepower. The government's intention to deal sternly with disorders was indicated by the statement of the Federation's press and public relations director to an American official on 9 October. "If there is more trouble," he said, "police and federal troops will teach the Africans a lesson they won't forget for years and years. There will be so many corpses out there you won't be able to count."

Leaders of the colony's largest African movement, the National Democratic party (NDP), reportedly told Prime Minister Whitehead on 12 October there would be a general strike unless he agreed to political discussions with the NDP and called off enactment of tougher security measures. The NDP warned that any action by it would be concerted "with demonstrations by nationalist groups of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland."

Apparently because of these threats and his anxiety that whites might attempt vigilante reprisals after the next African demonstrations, Whitehead immediately began a program of tightening up security in Southern Rhodesia. On 13 October he mobilized 1,600 white national guardsmen and stationed them in platoon strength at strong points in the African townships adjoining Salisbury, Bulawayo, and Gwelo. On 14 October, Whitehead imposed a one-month ban on all public meetings--except those of a cultural, sports, or religious nature--in all African townships in the urban areas of Southern Rhodesia. This week he plans to propose new legislation to strengthen the colony's police power.

17 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
