France's Community Concept Challenged

Four West African states of the French Community which follow the leadership of Ivory Coast Premier Houphouet-Boigny have posed a major challenge to France's concept of this institution. The four--Ivory Coast, Upper Volta, Niger, and Dahomey--have requested immediate independence within the Community without prior commitments on their part as to future ties with France.

As originally launched last year, the Community was a close-knit association linking under one sovereignty France and 12 autonomous Black African states. Its constitution has just been revised to permit the African states formal independence without sacrificing their membership in the Community. Paris has insisted, however, that negotiations for independence be accompanied by the simultaneous negotiation of wide-ranging bilateral "cooperation accords" designed to preserve intimate links between France and the African members.

Mali and the Malagasy Republic--the first two Community states to invoke the new option--initialled such accords in early April and have been expected to complete action on them immediately after becoming independent this summer. Houphouet's four-state group, in contrast, has indicated it will discuss such accords only after its members have obtained their independence and been admitted, separately, into the UN. They have threatened, should this procedure be denied them, to become independent outside the Community, as did Guinea in 1958. However, none of the territories involved desires a rupture with France on the Guinea model.

The American Embassy in Paris believes the group's move was prompted by Houphouet's inability to secure from De Gaulle assurances that the four states--which have been the most loyal to France--would have a preferred status within the "renovated" Community. Houphouet's chief lieutenant in Abidjan, however, claims that the move was motivated by a restrictive French

11 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
