French-African Community: The bid by Ivory Coast and three other West African Community states for independence within the Community without prior commitments as to future ties with France poses a major challenge to this institution, which embraces ten states in Africa and the Malagasy Republic (Madagascar). There are signs that De Gaulle will accede to the bid. This would almost certainly hasten the Community's evolution toward a still looser association. Should De Gaulle reject the bid, the four states have threatened to become independent outside the Community, as did Guinea in 1958. However, none of the territories concerned could afford a complete rupture with France on the Guinea model, and none desires it.
(Page 3)

III. THE WEST

France: Jules Moch, France's delegate at the ten-nation disarmament talks, has described the new Soviet disarmament plan as essentially a good one which he hopes to accept for further negotiation if the "little bad in it" can be removed. Moch admitted that there was disagreement between President de Gaulle and the French Foreign Ministry on disarmament policy, and his statements imply that De Gaulle's views are close to his own. Moch, who has often acted in a freewheeling manner on disarmament matters over Foreign Ministry objections, will leave for Paris this week end in an effort to sell his views to the Foreign Ministry.
(Page 6)

Cyprus: Negotiations continue to be stalled over questions regarding British bases on the island. Archbishop Makarios insists that Britain specifically agree that bases be transferred to Cyprus if the British abandon them. Britain has refused, fearing that Cypriots would begin early attempts to force the British out. The impasse could delay the formal grant of independence for Cyprus this summer. The British Parliament, which must pass independence-enabling legislation, is scheduled to recess at the end of July. The new regime in Turkey has announced it will abide by all agreements reached thus far and is seeking a formula to break the present deadlock.
(Page 6)

11 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
