[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

3 March 1951

Copy No. C I - 9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. French estimate Viet Minh capabilities (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Large numbers of empty boxcars move east from East Germany (page 3).

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
2. French estimate Viet Minh capabilities:

A French official in Tonkin has informed US Consulate Hanoi that the Viet Minh can regroup and resupply themselves suffi-
ciently within three weeks to launch another offensive in the Red River Delta and, in such an event, probably would achieve better
coordination than in the January attack. The official added that there was, however, no indication that an imminent Viet Minh ac-
tion was planned.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Large numbers of empty boxcars move east from East Germany:

[from 9 to 23 February four trains of approximately sixty empty boxcars each and one or two trains of sixty flatcars

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
equipped with side racks were dispatched daily from Frankfurt-
am-Oder to Brest Litovsk. Since 15 Feb-
ruary most locomotives in the Frankfurt-am-Oder area have been
employed on missions to the east.

Comment: This is the first report that
large numbers of boxcars have moved east. If it is true, approxi-
mately 3,000 boxcars would be involved. Beginning February 20,
unusually large numbers of empty flatcars capable of transporting
military equipment and vehicles (although only a few can carry
tanks) were assembled at various points in the Soviet zone and
moved east to Brest Litovsk. In view of these reports, an influx
of Soviet military units into East Germany, possibly destined for
the still largely-unoccupied Zossen-Wuensdorf area, is a distinct
possibility. About 1,800 freight cars are required to transport
one full-strength Soviet mechanized division; the number of cars
believed to have moved eastward would suffice for about three
divisions.

- 4 -
