I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Continues Effort to Push Detente With Greece

Moscow is continuing to urge Greece, apparently regarded by Soviet leaders as a "soft spot" in the Western defense system, to take advantage of the current international "thaw" to improve relations with the USSR and other bloc countries. The Soviet Embassy in Athens has recently sought an invitation from the Greek Government for Premier Khrushchev to stop over for talks in Athens on his way to visit De Gaulle, according to Foreign Minister Averoff, who said that the proposed visit was rejected as "not opportune." A Greek newspaperman was used to make the approach, presumably to avoid the risk of a direct refusal but probably also to ensure publicity and provide an issue on which the left can criticize the government for failing to improve relations with Moscow.

Averoff stated on 3 November that he had also rejected a proposal by Soviet Ambassador Sergeyev that Averoff and Prime Minister Karamanlis visit Moscow. The Soviet official asked what "you Greeks are afraid of," now that Khrushchev and President Eisenhower are exchanging visits. Sergeyev has also used this line in requesting favorable Greek action on Soviet requests to increase cultural exchanges and to reroute Moscow's air service to Cairo through Athens instead of through Albania.

In recent months Rumania and Bulgaria have attempted to stimulate opposition in Greece to any strengthening of Greece's defense ties with the West, such as missile sites on Greek territory. Rumanian Deputy Premier Joja--the highest ranking Rumanian to visit Greece for several years--is talking with Averoff and other officials, presumably to take a new sounding of Athens' attitude toward bloc schemes for closer Balkan collaboration. Recent developments suggest that bloc leaders are planning to renew their bid for a conference of Balkan-Adriatic countries to consider an atom-free zone in the area.

5 Nov 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
