Free World Comments on US Policies and on Khrushchev's Summit Proposal

South Asia: Prime Minister Nehru, in "gratefully" accepting Khrushchev's invitation to participate in a summit meeting, stated that India "would welcome a peaceful approach by negotiation through the United Nations or its Security Council or otherwise." The reply reiterated India's opposition to armed intervention by foreign troops, and noted that "we have urged the US and Great Britain to withdraw their forces." Official Indian sources are reported to have expressed doubt, however, that a high-level meeting in the present atmosphere would produce any quick results, and they indicated regret over the "words of threat" used by Khrushchev.

Nehru and senior Indian officials were reported pleased with President Eisenhower's letter explaining the US position. They liked the letter's personal tone and the careful explanation of American motives. Nehru especially appreciated the long rundown on background events. Nehru is "absolutely convinced," however, that Nasir will not violate the Lebanese border while it is being patrolled by a UN group, and that US troops are accordingly serving no useful purpose.

In Pakistan, responsible opinion is ranging itself behind the US-UK action. Foreign Minister Baig stated that nothing would be done with respect to King Husayn's appeal for help to oust the new Iraqi regime without consultation with President Mirza, whose return from Tehran is expected on 22 July.

Greek Prime Minister Karamanlis has long believed that the US had either to make a friend of Nasir or destroy him. He believes that Western success in the present venture is fundamental to the free world's security and that vacillation or retreat would only increase the danger of a world conflict. Meanwhile, other Greek officials privately expressed delight over the US action, but are being cautious in public comments in order not to lose Arab support on the Cyprus question.

Far East: According to press reports, the Japanese Foreign Ministry feels that Khrushchev's proposal for a summit

21 July 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
