The Far East Command observes that the "skilled manner in which the pilots combined attacks with the use of radar-directed searchlights indicates a high degree of proficiency."

Anticipating an increase in both the number and effectiveness of enemy night interceptions, FECOM believes that the enemy's capability to restrict UN night operations has considerably improved and may be expected to be a limiting factor on future UN night air activity north of the Chongchon river.

Comment: If the Communists fully attain the capability to deny the air over northwestern Korea to UN night bombers, it will permit the nearly unmolested completion of their program of basing jet and conventional aircraft on airfields within Korea.

3. Dutch-Indonesian relations at impasse over West New Guinea question:
The Dutch Foreign Minister, discussing with US representatives in Paris the current impasse between the Netherlands and Indonesia over West New Guinea sovereignty, requested US support in the event Indonesia unilaterally abrogates the Netherlands-Indonesian Union and probably other agreements negotiated by the two countries in 1949. He emphasized that transfer of New Guinea from the Netherlands to Indonesia at present is a political impossibility.

Meanwhile, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, also in Paris, has proposed a de jure transfer of sovereignty over the area with a guarantee of national treatment to Dutch subjects and the extension of certain privileges to the Netherlands for a period of twenty-five years. No Dutch comment on his proposal has been received. The Indonesian Foreign Minister doubted that his government would be willing to accept a Dutch proposal to negotiate a bilateral treaty to replace the 1949 agreements and then allow some time to lapse before considering the New Guinea question.

Comment: The Dutch and Indonesian attitudes on New Guinea are forcing both governments into relatively uncompromising positions. Continued intransigence from both governments could lead to a break in Dutch-Indonesian relations. The Dutch, who have continually sought postponement of action on Dutch-Indonesian issues until after the 1952 parliamentary elections, are not expected to give way to Indonesian demands. The question is further complicated by the attitude of Australia, which has always opposed the transfer of West New Guinea sovereignty to Indonesia.
