II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Italy: The strikes and rioting deriving from the neo-Fascist party's attempt to hold a party congress in Genoa reflect Communist exploitation of a widespread popular apprehension over the resurgence of Fascism as exemplified by the reliance of Premier Tambroni's caretaker government on neo-Fascist parliamentary support. The tensions which have been building up over the gradual moves to the right of recent Italian governments will probably continue, and even more extensive disorders are possible. Although the neo-Fascists would be reluctant at this time to withdraw their support of the government, they may do so if the government is forced to take an openly anti-Fascist stand in parliamentary debates this week. It is also possible that, if the government does not dissociate itself from the Fascists, it may lose sufficient numbers of Christian Democratic deputies in a vote of confidence to bring it down. The Communists may use this agitation to revive their hitherto unsuccessful campaign against US missile bases in Italy.

Austria: Top defense officials have informed the American Embassy that they now have dropped the plan to buy MIG-17 aircraft from Poland, and are considering the purchase of military jets from Sweden instead. Austrian officers plan to go to Sweden in August for final negotiations. Such a deal would further the Austrian policy of increasing trade with European Free Trade Area partners.

Finland: The Finnish Government expects to open negotiations next week on the question of most-favored-nation treatment for Soviet exports. The Finns consider solution of this problem a prerequisite to Finnish affiliation with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and a special session of parliament reportedly will be called following the negotiations. The Finnish export industry, which strongly advocates ties with EFTA, has anticipated such a link by reducing prices of certain exports to EFTA countries equal to the 20 percent tariff reduction they put into effect on 1 July.

8 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
