Comment: The security treaty does not specifically commit the United States to protect Japanese territory, but the Japanese generally interpret this to be the case. Soviet planes have violated Japanese territory over northern Hokkaido at least four times since September.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. Widespread arrests in Bangkok aimed at junior officer opposition:
The series of arrests begun by Thai police on 9 November involved chiefly junior military officers and left-wing journalists. The chief purpose of the arrests, according to the American Embassy, was to stamp out junior officer opposition to the regime by connecting it with communism. The Embassy states that rival Thai leaders are apparently cooperating in this operation, but warns that the "purge" may degenerate into a struggle for power within the ruling clique.

Comment: Discontent among junior officers has been previously reported. The wide range of arrests suggests, however, that the government was more interested in demonstrating its strength against its various opponents, who have recently become increasingly active.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Iranian official in new maneuver for American aid:
Iran's Chief of Staff Baharmast has suddenly become extremely friendly toward Americans,
Baharmast is reportedly contemplating the transfer of suspected pro-Communist officers to southern Iran, where they will be less dangerous.

Comment: Mossadeq's advisory committee recently told him that the new US administration would assist Iran in solving its economic and financial difficulties. Baharmast's changed attitude may indicate a new Iranian campaign to secure American support.

6. Egyptian military regime to seek $100,000,000 in US economic aid:
Colonel Amin, a member of the Egyptian army inner circle, has indicated to Ambassador Caffery that the military regime intends to request approximately $100,000,000 in economic aid from the United States.

In addition Colonel Amin handed the Ambassador a note from General Nagib including a list of military equipment desired and stating in general terms Egypt's desire to cooperate with the United States.

Comment: This is the first time that Egypt has revealed the extent of its economic demands in return for cooperation with the West. According to General Nagib, Egyptian participation in MEDO is also dependent on withdrawal of British troops from the Suez area.

7. British Government sees possibilities in Egyptian proposals on Sudan:
British officials in London, Khartoum and Cairo state that the Egyptian proposals for the Sudan seem generally acceptable
