[PAGE 01]
3 June 1961
Copy No.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 June 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Dominican Republic. (Page i)

2. Laos. (Page ii)

3. South Korea. (Page iii)

4. USSR: Generally successful ICBM test operation follows possible failure. (Page iii)

5. USSR: Indications of preparations for space vehicle launching. (Page iv)

6. USSR: Pravda article reiterates importance of Berlin problem on eve of Khrushchev talks with President. (Page iv)

7. East Germany: New trade and credit protocol signed with Moscow. (Page iv)

8. Angola: Portuguese district official reports on worsening military situation. (Page v)

9. India - Communist China: Indian Army's new chief of staff recommends strengthening of border positions. (Page vi)

10. El Salvador: Dissident group of army officers reportedly plans coup in near future. (Page vi)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 June 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*Dominican Republic: Arbitrary arrests, torture, and murder of suspected dissidents have been intensified as the dead dictator's survivors seek to avenge his assassination. The American consul reported on 2 June that moderate dissident elements in the capital are terror-stricken and are urging the United States to send help immediately on whatever pretext. The consul was informed that General "Ramfis" Trujillo, the late dictator's 31-year-old son who on 1 June was named head of the joint chiefs of staff of the Dominican armed forces, has vowed to "wipe out" the opposition. The consul is convinced that President Balaguer is now "firmly in the hands of 'Ramfis', Abbes, and company." John Abbes, de facto head of the hated Military Intelligence Service, is one of the most ruthless of the Trujillo hatchetmen and has long been associated with the clique around "Ramfis."

Venezuelan President Betancourt told the American ambassador that he intends shortly to issue a categorical statement that he will use Venezuelan air, naval, and if necessary, army forces to prevent any Cuban invasion of the Dominican Republic.
(Backup, Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page

[PAGE 06]
Laos: No progress was made in the political and military talks at Namone on 2 June. At the political talks, the session was given over mainly to an exchange of accusations, with the Pathet Lao dredging up the government's arrests of Souphanouvong and other Pathet Lao leaders in 1959.

The Communist forces continued small-scale probing actions in the Pa Dong area during the night of 1-2 June, although there was no artillery fire. Small-scale attacks and ambushes continued to be reported at scattered points in the country. A government convoy proceeding on Route 13 north of Vientiane engaged in two short-fire fights with enemy guerrilla elements.

Bloc airlift operations continue to be scheduled through 3 June.

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 07]
South Korea: The revolutionary Supreme Council for National Reconstruction voted on 2 June to relieve Lieutenant General Chang To-yong of his substantive posts--army chief of staff, minister of national defense, and martial law commander. Chang for the time being will retain the titular post of chairman of the Supreme Council. The move allegedly results from Chang's procrastination in supporting the coup during its early hours on 16 May, the council's belief that Chang is regarded by US officials as lacking real authority, and the conviction among the revolutionary leaders that Chang has been attempting to build up his personal power by appointing to important posts officers loyal to him. stated that new appointees to the positions vacated by Chang would be selected within five days. The appointment of the new army chief of staff will reportedly be made after prior consultation with the UN commander, General Magruder.

Chang had been credited with exercising a moderating influence on the regime and was believed to favor a relatively early return to civilian government. The reduction of Chang's influence will enhance that of the young colonels surrounding Major General Pak Chong-hui. This group is strongly nationalistic and eager to undertake extensive reforms but lacks positive plans or the experience to administer the government. They are likely to push for increasingly repressive measures, particularly in the event the regime fails to win wide public support.

USSR: An ICBM test vehicle may have failed shortly after launch from Tyura Tam at 0512 GMT (0112 EDT) 2 June.
and final assessment must await analysis of the telemetry intercept tapes.

Approximately ten hours later at 1530 GMT (1130 EDT) an ICBM test vehicle was launched from Tyura Tam. If the telemetry on the earlier launch attempt later proves invalid,

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 08]
the second launch may have involved the same test vehicle. Preliminary evidence indicates this vehicle reached the nor-

USSR: There are indications of preparations for a space vehicle launching at Tyura Tam. These include a recent practice countdown characteristic of space operations, flight by certain aircraft associated with previous space events, and activity by Soviet direction-finding facilities.

The nature and timing of the operation under preparation cannot yet be determined.

USSR: An authoritative Pravda article on 2 June reiterated current Soviet views on Berlin and emphasized that the attitude toward a German peace settlement is the "touchstone of sincerity and peacefulness for any politician, any state." This apparently was in response to the announcement that the President and General de Gaulle had agreed on action to maintain Western rights in Berlin. Pravda also warned that the Soviet Union has no intention of tolerating the existing situation or of being intimidated by press accounts of Western military plans for "saving" West Berlin. A number of bloc officials have adopted the line that Khrushchev will be seeking a definite commitment for new negotiations, and if this fails the USSR will be "obliged" to sign a separate peace treaty. East German party chief Ulbricht in a 1 June public interview claimed he could state "unambiguously" that a peace treaty would be concluded in the "foreseeable future."

while Khrushchev would not take the initiative he would agree to a foreign ministers' conference if the US proposed it. Khrushchev was considering making a "very favorable" proposal to bring about agreement on a nuclear test ban.

East Germany - USSR: The unprecedented scope of the Soviet - East German economic protocol, signed on 30 May, is

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 09]
3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page

[PAGE 10]
probably at least partly intended to serve notice to the West that the USSR will fully support East Germany should the Western powers in the future apply economic sanctions against that country. In the past few months Khrushchev has told Western diplomats that he expects such economic retaliation in the event Moscow signs a separate peace treaty with East Germany. Under this protocol, which followed months of negotiations, the USSR has promised to deliver during the next four years essential raw materials and machinery over and above the amounts provided for under the five-year trade agreement between the two countries. According to the East German press, Moscow has also agreed to make available a long-term credit of "over two billion Deutsch marks," approximately $500,000,000 at the official rate of exchange normally used for such transactions. At this rate, this would be the largest single economic development credit ever extended by the USSR to any country. Soviet deliveries of investment commodities may enable East Germany to raise its investment goals which had been cut back last year. The West, and particularly West Germany, however, will continue for some time to be an important source of modern highly specialized commodities not available within the bloc.
(Backup, Page 2)

Angola: the Angolan governor general relayed to Lisbon an official report on the worsening military situation in one of the important districts of northern Angola. The district official reported, "Without military forces to ensure the safety of the Europeans and the workers, it is useless to think about a coffee harvest. Please realize that I am in a powerless position where I must watch the collapse of a district of the government without being able to prevent it."

four thousand nationalists recently scored a significant victory by capturing the major Portuguese military air base in the Angolan Congo district and killing all of its 950 Portuguese defenders.

According to the same report, the nationalists now plan to capture several other towns in northern Angola and hope to be able to cut the

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF v

[PAGE 11]
3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page

[PAGE 12]
rail line between the port of Lobito and the mineral-rich Katangan-Rhodesian area.
(Backup, Page 3) (Map)

India - Communist China: General Thapar, the Indian Army's new chief of staff, who recently inspected the northeast frontier area opposite Tibet, was reportedly disturbed by the inadequacies he found in India's defensive posture there. He has recommended to Nehru further strengthening of combat and support units, especially in Sikkim, a major effort to improve military communications, the construction of new air strips to facilitate aerial patrolling, and urgent measures to improve morale and combat subversion in the frontier areas. Thapar's report reflects the army's concern over its capability to secure eastern India against the substantial Chinese Communist forces in the border area opposite Sikkim.
(Backup, Page 4) (Map)

El Salvador: A dissident group of senior army officers is continuing to plot the ouster of the ruling civil-military directorate, and now plans a move within a few days. Hitherto the group's chances had been generally rated as poor because it consists mainly of men in exile who had been prominent in the Communist-infiltrated regime overthrown last January. The plot is now, however, reported gaining support among influential junior officers in the country.
(Backup, Page 5)

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF vi

[PAGE 13]
Dominican Republic

General "Ramfis" Trujillo's appointment to the highest armed forces post places him in a power position comparable to that of his late father. However, he does not have the respect of numerous older officers, who resent his youth, his rashness, and his reputation as a pampered playboy. Unconfirmed press reports say his appointment ran into some cabinet opposition on 2 June. In any event, "Ramfis" will be in a precarious position and will have to rely on continued force to maintain his position, relying on his clique of personal supporters who include the most radical and ruthless faction in the regime, who also share his hatred of the United States. "Ramfis" is reported to have personally sought to establish ties with the Soviet bloc late last year after advising his father that such action would be the most effective means of surviving the economic sanctions imposed by the OAS and supported by the US.

John Abbes, who was involved in the late dictator's subversive activities in Central America and Venezuela, is also believed to have been active in the attempt, apparently unsuccessful, to seek a rapprochement with the Soviet bloc. "Ramfis" supporters are also active in the management of Radio Caribe, which has been disseminating violently anti-US pro-Soviet and pro-Castro propaganda over the past ten months.

The American consulate has received unconfirmed reports that military opposition to the regime has already broken out in the interior of the country, with General Estrella, commander of one of the country's six regional garrisons, in open revolt.
Estrella is one of the active duty generals who was involved in the plot

Cuban comment on Dominican developments continues to stress that the dictator's death will not alone change the Dominican political situation, "since this depends on action by the masses." There are still no indications of any imminent action by Cuba

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 14]
in the Dominican Republic. President Betancourt told the American ambassador in Venezuela that he is now ready to "go to the limit to prevent any interference by Castro" in the Dominican Republic, even "if it involves fighting against Cuba."

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1(a)

[PAGE 15]
East Germany Receives Substantial Additional Aid From USSR

The Soviet agreement to provide the estimated $500,000,000 credit is a result of more than six months of effort by East Germany to obtain Soviet help in carrying out its long-term economic plan. Last September, East Germany asked for and was refused $375,000,000 to cover prospective trade deficits in 1961. The resulting readjustment in trade plans was followed by a cutback in 1961 investments and was a factor in the lower rate of economic growth planned for this year. Since then East German State Planning Chief Bruno Leuschner has made four trips to Moscow to discuss economic matters; the first of these trips was in October, when he requested aid specifically to meet the anticipated effects of the West German threat to cancel the interzonal trade agreement on 31 December. Throughout the negotiations the Soviets have been hard bargainers, and this may account for Leuschner's emphasis, in his remarks at the signing of the protocol, on East Germany's firm intention to fulfill its trade commitments to the USSR.

Since 1945 the USSR has provided, exclusive of this latest credit, economic development aid to East Germany amounting to some $878,000,000, about $665,000,000 of which has been for commodity deliveries and economic development and $215,000,000 has been in the form of foreign exchange. Although the form of this new credit is not known the announcement implies that it is an additional credit to finance purchases of commodities. On the other hand, the new credit may be in the form of a deferment of repayments due on previous Soviet credits which, it is estimated, may be roughly of the same magnitude during the next five years. In either case, the credit constitutes substantial aid and should make it possible for East Germany to adhere more closely to its original goals for investments.

Increased Soviet deliveries will include complete installations for the metallurgical, power, and chemical industries; non-ferrous metals; rolling mill products; chemicals; and machine tools--many of which are of priority importance in East Germany's investment program. Although there is no evidence that the agreement includes specific provisions against the contingency of a Western trade embargo, it is a strong indication of Soviet readiness to support East Germany in the event of such an embargo and as such could make the threat of West German economic sanctions less effective in deterring East German harassment of West Berlin.

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 16]
Situation in Angola

The Angolan nationalists control much of the rural area of northwestern Angola and have cut many transportation routes by destroying bridges. They have not yet taken over any of the larger towns--many of which are garrisoned by Portuguese troops. Successful implementation of reported nationalist plans for the capture of Damba and San Salvador could deal a blow to Portuguese morale and set back arrangements for Portuguese military counteraction.

the Angolan People's Union (UPA) has established a military training camp in Angola near the Congo border. The UPA, however, does not have tight control over the nationalist bands, and members frequently participate in terrorist attacks for only a short time before dropping out of sight or fleeing to the Congo. The UPA headquarters in Leopoldville reportedly has in Brazzaville 50,000 rounds of rifle ammunition and a supply of powder for the muzzle-loaders which are still in use in the area. However, Congolese army troops patrolling the Angola border interfere with the delivery of arms into Angola, and customs checks between Brazzaville and Leopoldville prevent the UPA from smuggling powder into Leopoldville.

The UPA may soon step up its efforts to infiltrate southern Angola--which is currently quiet--in order to force a dispersion of Portuguese troops now concentrating in the north, and to win the support of the Bailundo tribal group. The Bailundos are being used for plantation labor in the north and have frequently fired on the nationalists. Reportedly they have been persuaded by the Portuguese that the nationalists plan to exterminate them and seize their lands. If the UPA, which apparently is preparing propaganda tracts, can gain Bailundo support, the Portuguese might be faced with such a widespread nationalist revolt that they would be hard pressed to hold even the major towns in Angola.

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 17]
Indian Military Measures to Strengthen Sino-Indian Border

Other recent steps undertaken by the Defense Ministry have been to step up recruiting for and restrict discharges from the army, to purchase Soviet transport aircraft and British jet light bombers, and to present to Parliament its largest budget to date, more than $661,000,000. Another aspect of Indian efforts has been the reported arrival in Bhutan of an Indian brigadier heading a four-man group of military advisers to that government. India's military leaders have long been concerned over their formal responsibility to defend a country to which traditionally they have not been admitted by the Maharaja. The arrival of military advisers lends support to earlier reports that Indian troops may in time be sent to Bhutan.

The preoccupation with the military aspects of the frontier dispute and the lack of any movement toward a negotiated solution heighten the possibility of isolated armed clashes and emphasize the low state of prospects for any early solution to the question. While neither side appears ready to resort to military operations along the Himalayan border, the Indians are extremely suspicious and are taking all measures to ensure their control of the territory they now hold.

Peiping's actions with regard to the dispute suggest that it wishes to keep the issue quiet at present. Chinese troops who were nearby made no effort to prevent Indian soldiers from taking possession of an upland pasture in the disputed Bara Hoti area in the western segment of the frontier this spring. Moreover, Chinese propaganda has not touched on the border question recently and continues to take a relatively moderate tone toward the Nehru government, despite New Delhi's recent forcible deportations of several pro-Peiping Overseas Chinese who were living in eastern India.

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 18]
Salvadoran Senior Officer Plot Reportedly Gaining Strength

A group of junior officers has been insisting that the government which came to power in January undertake social and economic reforms to undercut Communist demands.

The plotters believe they are gaining strength among junior officers who are jealous of the roles other junior officers are playing in the present government. The plotters claim the allegiance of at least half the provincial army garrisons, some air force officers, and some important officers in Fort Zapote, which dominates the city of San Salvador.

A representative of the cabal is planning to seek support from Col. Jorge Rovira, the chief of the air force. Col. Rovira purportedly is a personal friend of former Defense Minister Col. Castillo Navarrete, who reportedly was elected leader of the coup and head of the interim regime which the dissidents plan to set up after assuming control. Col. Castillo Navarrete also is a lifelong friend of Col. Anibal Portillo, a member of the ruling directorate.

The plotters, if successful, reportedly plan to call for congressional elections within a week and have congress choose a provisional president to govern for two years. The plotters claim the wealthy landholders will be excluded from any part in the coup and that former President Osorio will back the coup but will divorce himself from future political activity.

There is considerable doubt that the plotters have the capability to carry out their plans. Although anti-Communists and avowed proponents of reform, these men proved irresolute against Communist infiltration of the provisional government overthrown in January, and most of them probably would again be susceptible to influence from wealthy landowners who are resisting the present government's reform program. Any interruption of this program would be exploited by Communists and Castro sympathizers.

A leftist university federation, where Communist and Cuban influence has been strong, is planning a "parade of silence"

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 19]
and a demonstration at the US Embassy for 3 June "in memory" of students who fell in riots against the conservative Lemus government last year and in the January coup which brought the present government to power. There is no evidence that this group is working with the military plotters.

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 20]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Under Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 21]
