I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sino-Indian Relations

Friction between India and Communist China over border problems was given new emphasis with the Indian Government's issuance on 7 September of a White Paper documenting New Delhi's case against Peiping. The 122-page document includes the texts of a series of Indian protests and Chinese replies on questions of disputed border claims, Tibetan refugee activity, treatment of Indian and Bhutanese nationals in Tibet, and the recent border incursions. In presenting the paper to Parliament, Prime Minister Nehru stated that there had been no further developments on the northeast frontier since 26 August.

The Indian Government early in September apparently notified the Soviet and Polish ambassadors formally of its serious concern over Chinese border incursions. According to a report considered probably true, the Indian foreign secretary advised the ambassadors that if the incidents were to continue, New Delhi would be forced to reappraise its policy of nonalignment.

Peiping appears anxious to minimize the seriousness of the frontier situation. The staff of a Hong Kong Communist newspaper reportedly was told on 31 August that publication of any stories concerning India's northeast frontier must await a formal statement from Peiping. The staff had been told earlier that tension over Sikkim and Bhutan was an "unfortunate mix-up" and a "regrettable error," not a prelude to hostilities against India. There has been no comment on the recent border situation in newspapers on the China mainland. The first extensive comment on the situation from the Communist bloc was a Prague broadcast on 4 September denying Indian charges of Chinese "territorial expansionism" and stating that Premier Chou En-lai views negotiations as the "only means" for solving border questions.

Peiping's current policy toward Nepal seems designed to allay fears in Katmandu raised by China's activities along the border. In

8 Sept 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
