GENERAL

1. Comment on Soviet proposal of 24 July:

The immediate objective of the Soviet proposal of 24 July appears to be to prevent French ratification of EDC. Its probable longer-term objectives are to encourage elements in the British Labor Party and in West Germany which oppose German rearmament, and to isolate the United States. The wording of the proposal suggests that even if the Western European nations reject the idea of an all-European conference on the question of collective security, the USSR will organize some form of meeting as a means of keeping the issue alive.

The notes to the Western big three, all temperate in tone, exploit the usual themes of the arms race, American bases, and "war propaganda." Moscow points to the Geneva conference as "proof" that negotiations can be successful. As an additional lure, a reference to economic co-operation is included.

Ambassador Dillon has stated that the Indochina cease-fire "may well induce" a mood in France receptive to Soviet four-power conference proposals on European "security," and there is accumulating evidence that French public opinion is already favorably disposed. Although Mendes-France is believed to be pro-Western in orientation, his more neutralist-minded advisers can be expected to try to exploit the atmosphere resulting from the Indochina truce. Paris' final reaction to the present Soviet proposal may be largely determined by whether the French can avoid the appearance of being dictated to in replying to the overture.

Certain elements in West Germany are favorably disposed toward negotiations with Moscow, and at their recent convention the opposition Social Democrats made a European security system a condition for their approval of German rearmament. Despite the growing body of neutralist opinion, however, Chancellor Adenauer can be expected to hold his government coalition firmly in the Western camp.

The British public, especially left-wing Laborites and other elements who have growing doubts about rearming West Germany, will probably take to the Soviet note more kindly than the present Conservative government. Britain rejected the 31 March Soviet proposals to which the most recent statement appears to add little. The Soviet suggestions bear only a superficial resemblance to Churchill's "master thought" about Locarno-type pacts, and Churchill can hardly regard this as a call for "a meeting at the summit."
