[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. GREECE PLANS TO PRESS FOR RENEWAL OF CYPRUS NEGOTIATIONS

2. POLITICAL UPHEAVAL LIKELY IN PAKISTAN

3. POLISH WRITERS DEMAND CHANGES IN POLITBURO

4. JAPANESE FOREIGN MINISTER MAY BE REPLACED

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. GREECE PLANS TO PRESS FOR RENEWAL OF CYPRUS NEGOTIATIONS

Greek foreign minister Theotokis plans to approach both Turkish foreign minister Koprulu and British foreign secretary Selwyn Lloyd during the 4-6 May ministerial meeting of the North Atlantic Council in an attempt to reopen consideration of the Cyprus dispute, according to Ambassador Cannon.

Theotokis reportedly wants to examine with Koprulu ways of improving Greek-Turkish relations. He hopes that Turkey can be persuaded to adopt a more flexible attitude toward the Cyprus problem.

Theotokis intends to tell the British that if a "forward-looking statement" could be made about the groundwork being done on the proposed Cypriot constitution, the present impasse would be broken. Theotokis will try to dissociate Athens from the terrorism on Cyprus and ask for British understanding while the Greek government is "working its way" on this problem.

Comment

The plans outlined by Theotokis suggest that the present Greek government intends to continue its moderate approach to solving the Cyprus issue. Prime Minister Karamanlis just survived a strong opposition attempt to unseat him on the Cyprus issue and if this moderate policy fails, a new attack on his government may be successful.

The British have maintained publicly that negotiations cannot be resumed until terrorism on Cyprus has been suppressed.

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. POLITICAL UPHEAVAL LIKELY IN PAKISTAN

An important change in Pakistan's fragmented political leadership appears imminent as a result of mounting pressure from the new Republican Party in West Pakistan and growing political and economic unrest in East Pakistan.

It appears likely that Awami League leader H. S. Suhrawardy will succeed Chaudhri Mohammad Ali as premier. This would almost complete the break-up of the Moslem League, which founded Pakistan.

There is an additional possibility that powerful old-line West Pakistani Moslem Leaguers may join with East Pakistani dissidents in order to pass a legislative resolution demanding the ouster of President Mirza and the present provincial chief ministers. Rather than allow this, Mirza would probably flout the recently enacted constitution and attempt to dictate new appointments in both Karachi and the provinces. This course would involve considerable risk, as Mirza's influence with civil and military officials may not be strong enough to sustain him in such an action.

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. POLISH WRITERS DEMAND CHANGES IN POLITBURO

A meeting of Warsaw writers on 27 April strongly criticized the regime and demanded that elections to the politburo be held in the near future in order to remove those responsible for past abuses.

The writers also attacked General Witaszewski—the political aide to Marshal Rokossovski—who at a recent meeting in Lodz allegedly attempted to enlist the workers' support against the intellectuals. three quarters of Witaszewski's audience walked out.

Comment

Criticism in recent weeks has apparently gone beyond what the regime is willing to permit.
that the recent dismissals of Polish officials are only a beginning and that such politburo members as Deputy Premiers Berman and Jozwiak-Witold may be dismissed.

The regime's concern over the rapidly mounting criticism was indicated by First Secretary Ochab's warning on 29 April that "politically unstable" elements would not be permitted to attack party unity or party policy.

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. JAPANESE FOREIGN MINISTER MAY BE REPLACED

Japanese foreign minister Shigemitsu may be replaced shortly after Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Kono, who is now in Moscow negotiating a fisheries agreement, returns to Tokyo, according to Shigemitsu's predecessor, Katsuo Okazaki. Okazaki told Ambassador Allison on 30 April that Shigemitsu's position is growing weaker all the time and that he expects Shunichi Matsumoto, Japan's chief negotiator at the London negotiations with the USSR, to become foreign minister with Kono's support.

Comment

Matsumoto, while not unfriendly to the United States, is known to favor a more independent position for Japan and closer relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc.

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 1 May)

Israel has charged that Jordanian infiltrators clashed with Israeli settlers south of Lake Tiberias. Israel intercepted an Egyptian-chartered Dutch plane over the Negev which it suspected was engaged in photographic reconnaissance and forced it to land at Lydda airport for investigation. (Press)

UN truce supervision headquarters in Jerusalem has announced agreement by Israel and Egypt to strict cease-fire observance along the Gaza strip and to establishment of UN observer posts and mobile patrols along the 35-mile Gaza border. Final adoption of the truce plan is to be by action of the Egyptian-Israeli Mixed Armistice Commission. (Press)

Syria has informed Secretary General Hammarskjold that it cannot promise to refrain from opening fire if Israel resumes its Jordan River water diversion project at Banat Yacov. (Press)

Jordan has still not given a clear-cut answer to Hammarskjold's proposals for a cease-fire. Prime Minister Rifai said Jordan's reply was "harmonious with the attitude of the other Arab states" and another official said Jordan's reply was "positive to a certain extent." (Press)

1. reports that it appears that most Jordanian units which were moved into West Jordan and the Jordan Valley on 10-11 April have now returned to their usual locations in the vicinity of Amman.

2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7

[PAGE 09]
2 May 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8
