[PAGE 01]
7 August 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2.

SOUTH ASIA
3. Portuguese expect early armed attack on possessions in India (page 5).
4. Pakistan eager to participate in SEATO arrangements (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5.

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST
1.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2.

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

3. Portuguese expect early armed attack on possessions in India:

The Portuguese defense minister expects an armed attack on the enclave of Damao in northwest India by 8 August and a similar assault against Goa by 15 August, the American military attache in Lisbon reports.

The minister also stated on 4 August that the governor general of Portuguese India, who considers that a state of war exists, has assumed command of all Portuguese troops on the subcontinent.

The attache believes, contrary to Portuguese statements, that the first reinforcements from Portugal have not yet left, but will leave between 9 and 12 August. The attache believes that Portuguese African troops, amounting to one battalion, have already been sent.

Comment: The Indians have maintained that Portuguese territory is being taken over by "passive resistance volunteers" and that almost no force has been necessary. The American embassy in New Delhi reported on 5 August that it saw no indication that India intends to use its army to invade the Portuguese territories.

[PAGE 06]
4. Pakistan eager to participate in SEATO arrangements:

Ambassador Hildreth sees increasing indications that Pakistan is willing not only to join SEATO but even to take the initiative in persuading Ceylon to do so. He notes that if Pakistan is encouraged to take this kind of initiative, it will expect returns in the form of additional American political, military and economic support.

Comment: Karachi's eagerness to volunteer support for SEATO has probably been based from the outset on the calculation that it will thereby have stronger claim for more American aid. Such aid would serve in turn to quiet the government's domestic opposition.

Pakistani leaders hope to seize this opportunity to gain material benefits and a larger voice in international affairs. They have repeatedly expressed chagrin that they missed such an opportunity during the Korean war.

NEAR EAST -- AFRICA
5.

[PAGE 07]
