USSR and Satellites May Propose a Balkan Summit Meeting

Moscow may attempt to bring greater pressure on the Italian and Greek governments on the subject of missile bases. The USSR is likely to join its Balkan satellites--Albania, Bulgaria, and Rumania--in formally calling for a summit conference of Balkan states and Italy, to discuss the creation of a zone free of nuclear weapons and missiles in the Balkan and Adriatic area. The Soviet leaders probably anticipate that rejection by Turkey, Greece, and Italy of such a proposal would provide a pretext for carrying out Khrushchev's recent threats to establish missile bases in Albania "aimed at Italy and Greece."

Renewed bloc interest in pressing for a Balkan conference and denuclearized zone was reflected in Khrushchev's speeches in Albania and in the Soviet-Albanian joint statement. The Soviet premier recalled Rumanian Premier Stoica's 1957 proposal which called for a Balkan summit conference and reaffirmed another proposal, first made by Bulgarian Premier Yugov in January 1958, for a Balkan zone in which nuclear weapons and missiles would be prohibited. He called on the Balkan peoples to "start a struggle to prevent the establishment of rocket bases and the stockpiling of atomic weapons on Balkan soil and in the Mediterranean basin."

The joint statement asserted that a Balkan conference could contribute to the cause of "turning the Balkans into a zone of peace and quiet" by renouncing missile bases and nuclear weapons. A TASS summary of a Soviet New Times article stated on 3 June that the USSR and Albania propose to call a Balkan "summit" meeting to "discuss urgent questions and turn the Balkans into a denuclearized zone."

Belgrade has long opposed the introduction of nuclear weapons into the Balkans and favors a Balkan summit meeting to ease tensions in the area. Yugoslavia qualified its acceptance of Stoica's 1957 invitation by insisting that all Balkan states be represented; Turkey and Greece refused.

Rome, Athens, and Ankara would probably reject any bid for such a summit meeting on the grounds that attendance would conflict with NATO obligations and that the proposal is clearly an effort to split NATO solidarity.
