II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Korea - Japan: Existing tension between Japan and South Korea over Tokyo's negotiations with Pyongyang regarding the repatriation of Koreans in Japan will be heightened by a new fisheries incident. According to a Japanese report, a South Korean patrol boat reportedly has fired on a Japanese patrol ship attempting to obtain the release of a Japanese fishing boat taken in custody by the South Korean Coast Guard. This is the first time a South Korean ship has fired on Japanese patrol craft since March 1958.

*Indonesia:
several Indonesian dissident leaders, including ex-Colonel Kawilarang, former military attache in Washington, plan to leave Manila soon for Taipei and Tokyo. President Sukarno is to visit Japan from 6 to 19 June. While Djakarta, out of concern for Sukarno's safety, has asked that the Japanese security service be alerted, the nature of the dissident group suggests that this step is largely routine. The group may plan some approach to Sukarno to suggest a negotiated settlement of the rebellion.

Nepal: Communist China's ambassador to New Delhi, who is also accredited to Nepal, was in Katmandu on 1 June, possibly to urge the establishment of a resident diplomatic mission. Nepal agreed in April to the opening of a Soviet embassy in Katmandu. Indian Prime Minister Nehru, who plans to go to Katmandu on 11 June, will probably attempt to discourage Nepal from increasing its ties with the outside world too rapidly. (Page 4)

Turkey: A serious split has apparently developed within the ruling Democratic party and between President Bayar and Prime Minister Menderes over the degree of repression to be exerted against the press and the political opposition. Menderes has made it clear to press leaders that Bayar is the leading exponent of the tough line. Menderes, who may feel that he can strengthen his political position by a more moderate government approach, appears to be in a strong position to ease repression and also to maintain his control. (Page 5)

4 June 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
