[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
3 October 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. YUGOSLAVS ADMIT SERIOUS DIFFERENCES WITH THE USSR

2. NASR ADVISER SAYS EGYPT IS READY FOR NEGOTIATIONS ON SUEZ

4. BRITISH LABOR PARTY CONFERENCE

8. LAOS REPORTEDLY TO ESTABLISH DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH THE SOVIET UNION

* * * *

3 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. YUGOSLAVS ADMIT SERIOUS DIFFERENCES WITH THE USSR

High Yugoslav officials now admit that the Soviets have been undermining Yugo-
slav relations with the Satellites, ac-
cording to Ambassador Riddleberger.

Yugoslav foreign under secretary Prica
on 29 September that the atti-
tude of Soviet party boss Khrushchev in his talks in Brioni
had been an uncompromising reversal of the 20th Commu-
nist Party congress doctrine, on the "many roads to social-
ism." When Tito threatened to publish their respective
positions, Khrushchev invited him to the USSR to discuss
their differences with the Soviet leaders. Prica added that
the Soviet leaders apparently had expected that Yugoslavia
would return to the Soviet fold and were now worried about
the effect of their policy of liberalization in the Satellites.
Molotov and others had always opposed the policy and the
great majority of the Soviet presidium and central committee,
including Khrushchev, now support Molotov's views. Prica
stated this had created such a wide gap between Soviet and
Yugoslav ideas on socialism that it could never be bridged.

Riddleberger concludes that this devel-
opment, if as described, must be a bitter blow to Tito, who
has predicted fundamental changes in the USSR in justifying
his foreign policy.

Comment
Because of the extent of the ideological
differences, any durable Yugoslav-Soviet
compromise is unlikely, although both sides will try to avoid
another open split.

Tito's visit to the USSR, despite the un-
favorable Western reaction he feared would result, indicates
that he feels he must make every effort to protect Yugoslavia's
growing prestige in Eastern Europe.

3 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]
2. NASR ADVISER SAYS EGYPT IS READY FOR
NEGOTIATIONS ON SUEZ

Ali Sabri, Egyptian president Nasr's
principal political adviser, stated on
29 September prior to his departure
for New York that he believes the mo-
ment has come when the parties to the Suez dispute can
accept negotiations and reach a mutually satisfactory set-
tlement without loss of face. Sabri said this applies, how-
ever, only if the West's objective is a settlement and not
just to "get" Nasr.

Sabri said Egypt hopes the UN Security
Council will designate a negotiating body. He added that
his government had no set requirements for the composition
of such a body and would accept negotiations with the Western-
sponsored users' association, although such negotiations
would not satisfy "the world"--i.e., the USSR. Sabri re-
peated assurances given earlier by other Egyptian spokesmen
that Egypt would be willing to enter detailed agreements on
such questions as tolls and administrative regulations, pro-
vided Egypt remained the actual operator of the canal.

Comment
Apart from the emphasis on Egypt's read-
iness to negotiate now, Sabri's statements
indicate that Cairo has not lowered its terms for a settlement
in any significant respect.

A French Foreign Ministry official has
emphasized to the American embassy in Paris the danger of
permitting the Security Council, or any group delegated by it,
to assume the role of negotiator in international disputes,
since this would create a precedent for further Soviet inter-
vention in affairs in which the USSR has no direct concern.

3 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
4. BRITISH LABOR PARTY CONFERENCE

Aneurin Bevan's election on 1 October as
party treasurer at the British Labor Party
conference, only a year and a half after
he was almost expelled from the party,
shows the degree to which party unity has been restored un-
der Hugh Gaitskell's leadership. Despite his past conten-
tiousness, Bevan's moderation during the last six months
made him acceptable even to Gaitskell, who preferred his
right-wing opponent. The party treasurer automatically
sits on the National Executive Committee, the top policy
board of the party.

Probably more significant for future party
policy is the growing militancy of the trade union movement,
previously a major moderating influence. Under stimulus of
the new head of the influential Transport and General Workers
Union, the unions have reversed their position by demanding
further nationalization of industry and by rejecting the gov-
ernment's plea for restraint in wage demands. The party will
vote on these and other issues before concluding its confer-
ence on 5 October.

3 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
8. LAOS REPORTEDLY TO ESTABLISH DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH THE SOVIET UNION

The Laotian cabinet has approved the
establishment of diplomatic relations
with the Soviet Union,

Meanwhile,
Pathet Lao representatives on the
mixed commissions negotiating a final settlement with the
royal government have insisted, but without success, that
diplomatic relations also be established with Communist
China and North Vietnam.

Comment
The Laotian prime minister has ex-
pressed a willingness to open relations
with both countries if they will treat Laos as a fully inde-
pendent and sovereign state.

3 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
