[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

US OFFICIALS ONLY

14 June 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Enemy increases capabilities on east central Korean front (page 3).
2. Muccio believes Rhee no longer effective leader (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Communists draft plan for cutting West Berlin utilities (page 5).
6. Pinay to ban Communists from administrative and military positions (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Enemy increases capabilities on east central Korean front:

The Chinese Communist 12th Army, though to have been relieved in east central Korea on 9 June by the 60th Army, remains in combat, according to Far East Command. Recently captured prisoners of war in the Kumsong-Yulsa sector indicate that one division of the 60th and two divisions of the 12th are in this sector, which was previously occupied by the 12th Army alone.

Despite the presence of elements of two armies in this area, the Far East Command points out that the pattern of enemy activity along the rest of the front has been one of "a series of reliefs in place."

Comment: Although the 12th Army may yet be withdrawn, hostilities in this sector have been intensified in the past few days.

2. Muccio believes Rhee no longer effective leader:

Ambassador Muccio believes that the United States can no longer expect effective leadership from President Rhee and that the power-seeking group headed by Lee Bum-suk "has practically taken Rhee over completely." The Ambassador sees as a probable development "a precipitous deterioration of the situation . . . which may even be in the form of a violent forceful move . . . by Lee Bum-suk acting ostensibly in the name of Rhee."

The Ambassador reached these conclusions following a "futile" hour-long meeting with the President on 12 June, in which Rhee was "so completely irrational that it is impossible to make a detailed summary of his wanderings." Muccio considers that the President is both physically and mentally exhausted and does not know to whom to turn.
[PAGE 04]
Page Denied
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Communists draft plan for cutting West Berlin utilities:

Members of the Socialist Unity Party, meeting on 6 June with the Soviet Control Commission, made plans for a complete severance of public utilities between East and West Berlin. There is, however, no present intention to proceed with these measures.

Meanwhile, US observers in Berlin feel that the first phase of the Communist harassment campaign has passed without appreciably affecting the status or security of West Berlin. Drastic Communist measures have failed to materialize. The only actions which have aroused concern are the denial of free access for West Berliners to visit relatives or farms in the Soviet Zone, and the temporary interference with the daily routine of several suburbs. In general, life in West Berlin is normal.

6. Pinay to ban Communists from administrative and military positions:

Premier Pinay and Minister of Defense Pleven have agreed to take steps to ban Communists from positions in the French Government and armed services,

Comment: It now appears certain that the French Government intends to take every measure calculated to reduce the power of the Communist Party short of depriving it of parliamentary representation or outlawing it. The rightist press is demanding severe screening in the armed services and war industries, and vigorous government efforts to prove espionage charges are continuing.
