[PAGE 01]
25 January 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 January 1961

CONTENTS

3. Nasir, deeply involved in aiding pro-Lumumba elements in Congo, may be drifting toward greater dependence on Communist bloc. (Page ii)

4. West Germany urges continued NATO restrictions on East German travel until Ulbricht regime ends Berlin pass requirements for West Germans. (Page ii)

5. Salvadoran ruling junta has complied only in part with army's demands to curtail Communist activities. (Page iii)

6. Agitation by leftist extremists impedes Western economic aid plan in Bolivia. (Page iv)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
UAR-Africa: On 23 January President Nasir--addressing the UAR National Assembly--again attacked Western "imperialist" policies in Algeria and the Congo, claiming they are designed to divide and suppress the people of Africa. Nasir also called for the end of "imperialist maneuvers" in the United Nations, which he described as the proper instrument for accomplishing African freedom and prosperity. He repeated previous warnings on the alleged role of Israel as one of imperialism's tools in Africa.

Nasir's continued interference in African affairs is bringing him into sharper conflict with the West and contributing to a drift away from his avowed policy of "positive neutrality" and toward a greater dependence on the Communist bloc for diplomatic and material support.

Cairo is giving refuge and financial assistance to many radical African nationalists, and Nasir has personally tried to pressure African chiefs of state into following his policies.

West Germany: A West German Foreign Ministry official told American officials in Bonn that the East Germans are continuing to require passes for West Germans entering East Berlin, but that Bonn expects a de facto relaxation of the pass requirement probably by the end of January or early February. Such a relaxation was one of the major points of the agreement

25 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
on 29 December which allowed West - East German interzonal trade to continue. The East German negotiator has claimed the delay is a "face-saving" device of the Ulbricht regime and implied it would be only temporary. Nevertheless, Bonn is still urging that NATO restrictions on travel of East Germans to NATO countries be continued pending clear evidence of East German compliance with the terms of the agreement. The Allied restrictions and Bonn's cancellation of the trade agreement last fall were precipitated by the East German imposition last September of new controls on the travel of West Germans to and within Berlin.

El Salvador: The Salvadoran armed forces, gravely concerned over the steady Communist gains since the 26 October coup replaced the weak administration of President Lemus with a six-man military-civilian junta, may oust the junta if convinced that it does not intend to implement the commitments extracted on 16 January. The military leaders are reportedly receiving only partial compliance with their 16 January demands that the governing junta curtail Communist and pro-Castro activity in El Salvador.

The military leaders appear to have resolved at least partially the differences among themselves. Many officers, however, still fear taking any drastic action that might lead to bloodshed and the assumption of unpopular political responsibilities by the army.

Meanwhile, the Communists are steadily strengthening their mass support for any showdown with the military. Since October, Communists and pro-Communists have been appointed to important posts throughout the bureaucracy and have been permitted free rein outside the government. Their drive to organize the peasants is progressing rapidly throughout the country and they are increasing their influence in labor and student groups.

25 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
Bolivia: Agitation among tin miners led by Communists and extreme leftists threatens to disrupt an arrangement whereby the US and West Germany are cooperating with Bolivia to reorganize and re-equip the tin mines on which Bolivia's economy depends. The West German Government may withdraw its technicians, who are essential to the project, should the present unrest lead to the violence which is characteristic of Bolivia's mining areas. An increase in extremist agitation has been brought about in recent months by Soviet overtures concerning economic aid, including a $150,000,000 credit offer.

25 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
Agitation by Leftist Extremists Impedes Western Economic
Aid Plan in Bolivia

Agitation led by leftist extremists is impeding a triangular US - West German - Bolivian plan to reorganize and re-equip the tin mines, which are the basis of Bolivia's economy. The government has just settled a strike, which began on 17 January and prevented an initial survey of the mines, but continued agitation may prompt West Germany to withdraw its technicians, who are vital to the project.

The triangular plan is West Germany's first substantial venture in economic assistance to a Latin American country. The Bonn government is backing a private firm's offer to provide financial, technical, and managerial skill for the mines, where production has declined since 1945. The United States has supplemented the German offer with a $10,000,000 credit for mine development.

The five-month-old administration of President Paz Estenssoro is under strong domestic pressure to make demonstrable progress in economic development, especially since Paz is the leader of the party which won the sweeping leftist revolution of 1952 but has since been unable to improve living standards substantially.

Extremist agitation has been increased in recent months by Soviet overtures concerning economic aid, particularly Soviet offers to construct a tin smelter in Bolivia and to extend a $150,000,000 credit. Previously the largest credit offers by the USSR in Latin America have been $100,000,000 each to Argentina and Cuba.

A press report on 21 January stated that President Paz has announced Soviet offers of aid for hydroelectric power and lead mining, probably as projects under the proposed $150,000,000 credit. Earlier this month a Bolivian government spokesman announced that Czechoslovakia had decided to offer to install an antimony smelter in Bolivia.

25 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 17]
TOP SECRET
