Honduran Coup Attempt Further Intensifies Military-Civilian Frictions

The attempted coup initiated early on 12 July by retired Colonel Armando Velasquez against the moderate government of President Ramon Villeda Morales was suppressed after about 12 hours of fighting in the capital city. Velasquez apparently had the backing of some dissident military elements. Major military elements apparently remained loyal, however, and civilian groups were armed by the government for action against the rebels. By late in the day the rebel ringleaders had surrendered, with the condition they be granted asylum in the Costa Rican Embassy.

Velasquez, who returned recently to Honduras from exile after an abortive effort early this year to lead a revolution from neighboring Nicaragua, probably did not have Nicaraguan support in his latest effort. He apparently estimated that the long-standing and deep-seated frictions between the armed forces and the dominant faction of the governing Liberal party had reached such a peak that the military was on the point of revolt. The armed forces, under the constitution virtually independent of the chief executive, have been regarded with deep suspicion by the Liberals since they came to power in Honduras' first free election in 1957. The Liberals regard the military as the instrument of repression employed by past dictatorial governments, and the more extreme Liberals have even proposed that the army be abolished. Constant efforts to weaken the position of the military, despite generally ineffective efforts by the President to maintain a balance, have antagonized armed forces leaders. The prospect of almost certain widespread and sustained civilian resistance to any military coup, however, has restrained them.

Although most of the army apparently remained loyal during the 12 July coup attempt, the extreme antimilitary Liberal faction may now feel emboldened to force a showdown with the military. The large number of armed civilians in the capital late on 12 July suggests that further disturbances are likely.

A factor which may have brought the civilian-military feud to a head was the recent Honduran Army capture of two Cuban-supported rebel groups preparing to launch invasions of

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
