Developments in Yemen

Crown Prince Badr's extraordinary reliance on the large Egyptian military mission in Yemen, and his increasing dependence on Egyptian assistance in a wide range of governmental matters, may lose him the essential support of Yemen's conservative tribal leaders. During June the Egyptian military mission was enlarged to about 100 men, who are apparently intended to function as instructors for a stepped-up training program and as a special task force to aid Badr.

Egyptian military personnel manned Soviet-manufactured tanks and armored cars while assisting loyal army units and armed tribesmen to disarm troops involved in disorders in mid-June. A UAR Air Force mission had arrived there to assist in putting Yemen's Soviet-manufactured combat aircraft--presumably the 50-IL-10 piston attack aircraft--in a state of readiness. Badr is also relying on Egyptian experts in police and security matters, and on specialists in government administration and in various technical fields, in an effort to consolidate his control of the government and to provide some evidence that more efficient administration is in prospect.

Popular disgust with incompetent and harsh government, and Badr's vacillation between leniency and severity, have contributed to a general state of unrest in Yemen since the Imam's departure. Elements in the army, aware of their ability to intimidate local officials, remain restive, watchful for signs of government weakness. Badr's major support against army dissidence has come from the chiefs of Yemen's principal martial tribes. Their support could waver, however, if Badr is unable to maintain subsidies to them from Yemen's near-bankrupt treasury.

Reports of unrest in Yemen, and possible suspicion that Badr and the Egyptians are scheming to retain control there, are said to have convinced the Imam that he must return home shortly from medical treatment in Italy. Egyptian aircraft would return the Imam to Yemen in about ten days. The Imam will reportedly be accompanied home by his brother, Prince Hasan, Badr's chief rival for succession.

8 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
