groups may attempt an uprising in the near future, but there
is no information to suggest that a major Communist and
Castro-led movement is about to break out in Guatemala.
(Page 5)

Albania-USSR: The USSR may be withdrawing some of
its diplomatic and trade specialists from Albania.

flight
reservations for one-way trips from Tirana to Moscow were
made for ten persons constituting families who may be asso-
ciated with the Soviet Embassy in Tirana and for one person
associated with the USSR's trade representation there.

the Albanians
in late May expelled the Soviet naval attache and an unspecified
number of military experts. In another development, one of
the two Soviet cargo/transport vessels that arrived in Albanian
waters on 19 May was scheduled to pass through the Bosporus
into the Black Sea on 4 June. The usual turn-around time for
such ships in Albania is four or five days. Meanwhile, there
has been no indication of any replacement for the submarines
which left Vlone Bay on 26 May.

South Korea: South Korean insurgent leaders reportedly
are considering the adoption of a new constitution patterned on
that of the French Fifth Republic, providing for a strong execu-
tive. After the fall of the Rhee government last year there was
considerable interest among more conservative South Korean
elements in such a constitution. However, a spokesman for the
ruling Supreme Council for National Reconstruction has vigor-
ously denounced as "absolutely groundless" and "irresponsible"
recent press speculation forecasting an early return to civilian
control. US Charge Green in Seoul notes that, so far, embassy
contacts with government officials and members of the junta tend
to indicate that those insistent on an extended period of military
rule continue to exercise decisive influence in the Supreme Coun-
cil.

Meanwhile, the regime is moving ahead with plans to promul-
gate a "basic law" that will in effect set aside those provisions of

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii
