[PAGE 01]
8 January 1958
Copy No. 143

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. REPORT OF SOVIET LAUNCHING OF MANNED ROCKET PROBABLY UNTRUE (page 3).

2. PEIPING SHIFTS TO HARSHER POLICY IN TIBET (page 4).

3. SOVIET SUBMARINE ACTIVITY IN ATLANTIC AREA DURING AUGUST (page 5).

4. USAF PILOT MAY BE DOWN IN ALBANIA (page 7).

5. USSR PRESSES INDONESIA TO ACCEPT ARMS AND ECONOMIC AID (page 8).

6. ARMY AND POLITICAL MODERATES MOVING TO EXPLOIT SUKARNO'S ABSENCE (page 9).

7. DUTCH WARSHIPS BASED IN SINGAPORE MAY EMBARRASS BRITISH (page 10).

8. INTERNAL STRUGGLES IN SYRIA (page 11).

9. ADENAUER ADVISERS URGE REJECTION OF RAPACKI PLAN (page 12).

10. URUGUAYAN OFFICIALS BLAME US FOR ECONOMIC PLIGHT (page 13).

11. PANAMA MAY PRESS CANAL CLAIMS (page 14).

12. ITALIANS CONCERNED OVER SOVIET AID OFFERS AT CAIRO CONFERENCE (page 15).

[PAGE 04]
1. REPORT OF SOVIET LAUNCHING OF MANNED ROCKET PROBABLY UNTRUE

Comment on:

A spokesman for the Soviet Academy of Science laughed off the report with the comment that "It must be based on the Sputnik film."
An official in the State Committee for Cultural Relations said, "If the report were true, it would be in the Soviet press." TASS has denied any knowledge of such a launching.

The reports may have been based on a Moscow broadcast on 5 January of a fictional report "from the not-too-distant future" of the launching of a manned satellite.

The USSR claims to have launched rockets containing dogs to altitudes ranging up to 130 nautical miles, recovering the animals by parachute. Accomplishing a similar feat with a man, which would require a larger rocket and more equipment, is probably within current Soviet capabilities.

[PAGE 05]
2. PEIPING SHIFTS TO HARSHER POLICY IN TIBET

Comment on:

The Chinese Communists are taking a more aggressive attitude toward Tibetan officials and plan large-scale arrests of resistance leaders in Lhasa,

Chang Ching-wu, Peiping's representative in Tibet, had "rushed back" to Lhasa from Peiping in order to settle "many problems." Last week the Dalai Lama announced that Chang had brought "important instructions" from Chou En-lai.

Tibetan leaders will attempt to prevent the Dalai Lama's scheduled trip to Peiping later this month, fearing that he will be kept there and forced to make concessions. If these attempts fail, or if the Chinese begin large-scale arrests in Lhasa, Tibetan resistance leaders have decided to start a "full-scale uprising" and appeal to the Indians for support.

Active resistance to Chinese rule has thus far been confined to eastern Tibet, where harassment of Chinese Communist work teams and road traffic has been going on for more than a year. However, potential resistance groups may by now have moved as far west as Lhasa.

The Indian Government has previously shown a reluctance to become implicated in efforts to assist the Tibetan resistance movement, and probably would continue to refrain from any overt support likely to antagonize Peiping.

Nehru's publicly proposed trip to Tibet and his recent endorsement of an air connection between India and Lhasa may have been designed to show tacit support for the traditional leadership of Tibet.

[PAGE 06]
3. SOVIET SUBMARINE ACTIVITY IN ATLANTIC AREA DURING AUGUST

Comment on:

an unprecedented number of submarines were operating in widely diverse areas of the Atlantic during August.

One group, consisting of a minimum of 22 to 26 submarines, was involved in anti-ship exercises in the Norwegian Sea, while a second group was apparently active in waters off eastern Canada. In conducting such extensive operations simultaneously, the Soviet commanders met conditions which they would face in directing an all-out submarine war in the Atlantic.

[PAGE 07]
The Norwegian Sea operations involved submarine "wolfpack" attacks against two simulated enemy forces. One force was a detachment of light surface forces moving from Spitzbergen in the direction of Jan Mayen Island. These light units then joined the cruiser Nevsky and a destroyer returning from the Baltic to Northern Fleet waters to form the second force. As many as seven "wolfpacks," with up to seven submarines in each, were noted during one phase of the exercise. This exercise apparently simulated the defense of the Soviet Northern area against "enemy" aircraft carrier forces.

The unknown number of submarines active off eastern Canada may have been involved in exercises simulating attacks on merchant shipping lanes. Operations in this area may have accounted for some of the unidentified submarine contacts of higher validity reported by Canadian authorities.

[PAGE 08]
4. USAF PILOT MAY BE DOWN IN ALBANIA

Comment on:

The Albanian radio announced on 7 January that an American air force pilot in a jet trainer had violated Albanian air space and was forced to land by Albanian fighters.

The aircraft is believed to be one missing since 23 December on a flight in the area.

[PAGE 09]
5. USSR PRESSES INDONESIA TO ACCEPT ARMS AND ECONOMIC AID

Comment on:

The Soviet Union is putting "extreme pressure" on Indonesia to accept economic aid, military equipment, and ships for the present emergency. Indonesian Premier Djuanda told the American ambassador in a "friend-to-friend" talk on 7 January that the early return to Djakarta of the Soviet ambassador, who interviewed the premier on 6 January, was for this purpose. Conditions of payment need not be arranged until after the arrival of the equipment, according to Djuanda.

The USSR is able to provide arms on short notice, and bloc vessels are able to meet Indonesia's overseas shipping needs.

[PAGE 10]
6. ARMY AND POLITICAL MODERATES MOVING TO EXPLOIT SUKARNO'S ABSENCE

Comment on:

Both the Indonesian Army and moderate political elements appear to be moving to take advantage of President Sukarno's absence from Indonesia to bring about changes in the government's policies, if not in the government itself. Their efforts seem aimed at decreasing Communist influence and mollifying the dissident regions. The army has ordered town commanders to hold large-scale "security exercises" beginning on 9 January which would provide an ideal cover, if needed, for any governmental changes that are contemplated.

Sukarno had barely departed before Premier Djuanda called a cabinet meeting, attended by Chief of Staff Nasution, to consider "trade relations" with the outer islands. Nasution has also "summoned" a prominent leader in East Indonesia to Djakarta to report on the local situation.

Former Vice President Hatta and General Nasution plan to visit Sumatra in the near future. The strongly anti-Communist governor of the Bank of Indonesia, Sjafruddin, who has either "resigned" or is on extended "leave" from his job, is also in Sumatra. Hatta and Sjafruddin undoubtedly will hold discussions with the dissident colonels and other civilian leaders who have already met at Padang to discuss activity during Sukarno's absence. Nasution also will probably consult with many of them.

Colonel Simbolon, former commander in Sumatra and a leader among disaffected elements there, was quoted on 6 January as having said the Communists had pressed the Djakarta government into its "reckless" anti-Dutch campaign and that Indonesia's independence was in jeopardy because of the regime's leanings toward the Soviet bloc. Simbolon also said that the non-Javanese areas were not willing to become "playthings of the Communist-infiltrated central government."

[PAGE 11]
7. DUTCH WARSHIPS BASED IN SINGAPORE MAY EMBARRASS BRITISH

Comment on:

Popular resentment against the British may erupt in Singapore, Malaya, and Indonesia over the continued use of Singapore port facilities by Dutch warships, particularly if there should be an incident involving these ships.

Indonesia is preparing to reactivate former Dutch shipping which was confiscated and has been lying idle in Java. If such ships sailing under Indonesian command are found in international waters by Dutch warships, they will be seized and forced into a Dutch or neutral port.

Both the British governor and the chief minister in Singapore are watching the situation closely for adverse public reaction. The British have economic interests in Indonesia, second to the Dutch in value, which could be a target of retaliation.

Foreign Minister Subandrio warned the British ambassador in Djakarta that continued use by Dutch warships of Singapore facilities "would benefit neither British interests in Indonesia nor trade in Singapore."

the Singapore Council of Ministers had unanimously protested to the British governor the Dutch use of Singapore as a base for naval operations.

The Dutch naval attache believes the Netherlands will seek to avoid embarrassing the British.

reluctance to take any action which might aggravate their "cold war" with Indonesia.

[PAGE 12]
8. INTERNAL STRUGGLES IN SYRIA

Comment on:

The behind-the-scenes struggle in Syria is sharpening despite the apparent belief of Baath leaders that a public showdown with local Communists should be delayed temporarily for tactical reasons. The Baathist press is now attempting to portray the Communists as opponents of Arab unity, a charge equivalent to treason in the Arab popular mind.

The Egyptian-supported scheme to oust pro-Communist Chief of Staff Bizri has reduced Syrian factions to two groups: one composed of Bizri, pro-Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Azm, and Assistant Chief of Staff Nafuri; the other consisting of Baathist leader Akram Hawrani, Army G-1 Mustafa Hamdun, and Foreign Minister Bitar. Chief of Intelligence Sarraj, generally regarded as pro-Baath, has not openly sided with either faction. The Baath is seeking to weaken Bizri by pressing for the removal of his brother Salah as commander of the armed youth groups and organized "Popular Resistance" forces.

Bitar has made statements suggesting that the next Baathist move will be toward closer Syrian-Egyptian unity, presumably as a counter to Soviet and Communist influence.

[PAGE 13]
9. ADENAUER ADVISERS URGE REJECTION OF RAPACKI PLAN

Comment on:

The West German Foreign Ministry is advising Chancellor Adenauer to reject Polish Foreign Minister Rapacki's plan for an atom-free zone in central Europe. The ministry stresses that no consideration should be given any European security arrangement except in the context of German unification. The ministry has also formulated certain questions for Adenauer's use in talks with the Soviet ambassador concerning control and inspection under the Rapacki plan.

Bonn has consistently opposed plans for neutral belts in central Europe, either political or military, which would tend to confirm the division of Germany. In addition, Bonn would probably refuse to discuss any plan which presumes government-level negotiations between East and West Germany. In public statements, however, Bonn has shown some interest in such proposals in order not to prejudice the diplomatic conversations it will propose in its answer to Bulganin's note. The government is also reluctant to appear "inflexible" in the face of increasing German public interest in East-West talks.

[PAGE 14]
10. URUGUAYAN OFFICIALS BLAME US FOR ECONOMIC PLIGHT

Comment on:

High Uruguayan Government officials are again becoming resentful of American economic policies and are claiming that these policies are responsible for the deterioration of Uruguay's economy,

the Soviet bloc has made several offers of economic assistance in contrast to what he termed the "indifference" of the United States, and expected Uruguay to accept one or more of these offers soon.

Two large American-owned meat-packing plants which supplied a major part of Uruguay's meat exports closed recently because government regulations and the lag in government subsidies had crippled their operations. As has been the case when government intervention in the economy crippled other industries, the government is being criticized for mismanagement, while the Communists blame "American policy." Facing election in the fall, government officials are also tending to blame the United States for Uruguay's difficult economic situation.

American oil companies have been pressing excessively hard for overdue payments whereas the Soviet Union had offered oil on a ten-year credit basis. Uruguayan officials may be making use of some new or past bloc economic offers or even inventing them to exact favorable consideration from the United States on loans and tariff policy.

[PAGE 15]
11. PANAMA MAY PRESS CANAL CLAIMS

Comment on:

Popular pressures are again building up in Panama for a greater financial return from operations of the Panama Canal. High Panamanian officials are discussing a proposal recently made by the vice foreign minister that Panama demand 50 percent of the gross receipts from the canal, which were approximately $50,000,000 in 1957. Foreign Minister Boyd, who renewed Panamanian claims to sovereignty in the Canal Zone during the 1956 Suez crisis, has indicated his approval of the idea and may seek to use Panama's seat on the UN Security Council to bring it to world attention.

Moderate President de la Guardia has called the proposal unrealistic, and his attitude is likely to deter serious attempts to encroach on the US position in the Canal Zone in the immediate future. The issue has been exploited by ambitious Panamanian politicians in the past, however, and may be used to weaken de la Guardia's influence.

Under the Remon-Eisenhower Treaty of 1955, the annual payment to Panama for the use of the Canal Zone was raised to $1,930,000 per year, over 50 percent of the 1957 net profit of the canal operations. In addition, Panama receives approximately $25,000,000 through zone salaries to its nationals and canal company and US employee purchases. The United States spends an estimated $50,000,000 annually to defend the zone.

[PAGE 16]
12. ITALIANS CONCERNED OVER SOVIET AID OFFERS AT CAIRO CONFERENCE

Comment on:

An Italian Foreign Ministry study maintains that the West has "sadly underestimated" the impact in Asia and Africa of the USSR's offers of unconditional economic aid to all underdeveloped countries, made at the Afro-Asian solidarity conference in Cairo. The ministry believes it would be a grave mistake for the West to respond now by trying to outbid the Communist offers, and thus fall into the "blackmail game, which was the aim of the conference organizers." As a result, Italy has suspended plans for an early presentation to the OEEC of the Pella Plan to finance Middle East development programs with repayments due in Marshall Plan aid.

Instead, the ministry proposes creation of an OEEC working party to investigate ways of neutralizing Soviet economic penetration of underdeveloped countries. The ministry study also showed irritation at the failure of other Western governments to give full support to the Pella Plan and complained that the Paris NATO meeting diverted attention from urgent Middle East problems.
