[PAGE 01]
Copy No.
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. GOMULKA REAFFIRMS INDEPENDENT POLISH ROAD TO SOCIALISM (page 3).

2. MOLLET MANEUVERS ON CANAL ISSUE (page 4).

3. AUSTRIA'S NEW PRESIDENT MAY STRESS ABOLITION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN INAUGURAL ADDRESS (page 5).

4. FRENCH TREASURY SITUATION CRITICAL (page 6).

5. HUSSAIN-SAUD RELATIONS (page 7).

6. REVOLUTIONARY ACTION IN CUBA REPORTED IMMINENT (page 8).

7. NEW OUTBREAKS THREATEN HAITI WITH ANARCHY (page 9).

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. GOMULKA REAFFIRMS INDEPENDENT POLISH ROAD TO SOCIALISM

In his key address to the ninth plenum
of the Polish party, Gomulka on 15 May
vigorously reaffirmed his "National Communist" policies, as approved by the
eighth plenum in October. He defended
his agricultural policies, which since October have been criticized by the party as causing the large-scale dissolution of
collectives. Although pitched in a conciliatory tone presumably intended to be palatable to the Kremlin, Gomulka made
clear that he intends to go ahead with three major points in
his program--development of workers' councils, greater
powers for local governments and establishment of certain
forms of peasant co-operatives termed "circles" or "teams".

Referring to the Soviet Union, Gomulka
declared that even if it had avoided the "disease" of Stalinism, the Russian road to socialism would probably not have
been acceptable to other countries and certainly would not
have been necessary. He declared further that the victory
of socialism in the Soviet Union and the progress toward
socialism of other countries had created a "historically new
situation" which permits the pursuit of different roads to socialism and enables Poland to adopt a slower speed in socialization, particularly in agriculture.

Gomulka's statements probably will give
a measure of reassurance to most Poles, since it does not
indicate any reversal of his middle-of-the-road program. At
the same time, the speech has been carefully tailored to appeal to as many elements of the party as possible in an effort
to restore party

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. MOLLET MANEUVERS ON CANAL ISSUE

Comment on:

French premier Mollet's proffered resignation on 15 May was probably intended
merely as a tactical move to improve his
position on the Suez Canal issue. Britain's
decision to use the canal on Nasr's terms faces France with the
necessity of modifying its stand on use of the canal.

Mollet may have in mind an attempt to save
face by having the decision seem to be forced on France. By
referring the canal issue to the UN Security Council, Mollet
may hope to accomplish this end.

To the French, Nasr's success has direct
bearing on the outcome of the Algerian rebellion. The possibility of French-Israeli collusion in a move against Egypt cannot be ruled out in the event that Cairo acts to block transit by
an Israeli ship of the Tiran Strait or the Suez Canal.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. AUSTRIA'S NEW PRESIDENT MAY STRESS ABOLITION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN INAUGURAL ADDRESS

Comment on:

American ambassador Thompson in
Vienna reports that President-elect
Schaerf intends to make a plea for the
abolition of nuclear weapons a prominent feature of his inaugural address on 22 May. Thompson
told Schaerf that such a course would play into the hands of
the USSR, but doubts that Schaerf can be influenced in view
of his recent successful use of the issue in the presidential
campaign.

Thompson intends to carry his appeal to
Bruno Pittermann, newly elected leader of the Socialist
Party, in the hope that he will restrain the president-elect,
but Pittermann favors a search for a common ground between
NATO and Soviet bloc powers on which nuclear abolition can
be based. Thompson thinks that this may be "even more dangerous" to Western unity than Schaerf's appeal because it
could easily develop into a mass demand in Europe for the
abolition of nuclear weapons.

Schaerf used the nuclear weapons issue
effectively against his conservative opponent in the closing
days of the presidential campaign by charging him with demanding such weapons for the Austrian army. This was an
important factor in reversing the anti-Socialist trend in
Austria and electing Schaerf. Western European Socialists,
especially in West Germany and Austria, are eager to exploit the prevailing sentiment for a ban on nuclear weapons.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. FRENCH TREASURY SITUATION CRITICAL

Both the director of the French Treasury and the governor of the Bank of
France informed the American embassy
on 14 May that the French Treasury situation is precarious and direct advances from the Bank of
France are now an urgent necessity.

They are discussing with Finance Minister Ramadier methods of obtaining National Assembly approval for such advances before President Coty leaves for
the United States at the end of this month. The government's
financial situation was aggravated when, in addition to the
drain imposed by the military costs for Algeria, and a fall
in normal Treasury income, its recent bond issue produced
less than 60 percent of the amount anticipated.

Comment
New taxes and budget economies are now
being pushed by Mollet with an eye to getting his house in order before seeking external loans when
France's credit with the International Monetary Fund is exhausted in mid-June. Requests for new taxes and for National Assembly authorization to use the gold and dollars held in the Bank of France will considerably increase right-center irritation over the government's financial policies.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. HUSSAIN-SAUD RELATIONS

Comment on:

King Hussain's decision on 14 May not
to go to Baghdad for a meeting with King
Faisal and King Saud was prompted by
Saudi intimations that such a meeting
might be "misinterpreted" by Arab public opinion. Desire to avoid public provocation of Egypt with a meeting of the
three monarchs was also indicated by a
high Iraqi Foreign Ministry official who
expressed belief that such a meeting
would excite suspicions in other parts
of the Arab world which would be out of
proportion to its possible benefits. Jordanian authorities now desire to invite Saud to Amman about
27 May. The Iraqi Foreign Ministry, however, does not rule
out a possible flight by Hussain to visit Saud at the Habbaniya
air base in Iraq on 16 May, after the official part of Saud's
state visit is concluded.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. REVOLUTIONARY ACTION IN CUBA REPORTED IMMINENT

Comment on:

New revolutionary attempts are expected
in Cuba between 15 and 22 May. The action
may be touched off by several assassination attempts. Eusebio Mujal, secretary general of the Cuban
Workers' Confederation, who has been accused by opposition
elements of "selling out" to President Batista, is considered
a likely victim.

an atmosphere of tenseness exists in Havana and that various
Cuban government officials are showing apprehension, and
anxiety. Outbreaks and assassination attempts have been expected to increase prior to 20 May, Cuban independence day.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. NEW OUTBREAKS THREATEN HAITI WITH ANARCHY

Comment on:

Pre-election tensions have erupted into
widespread violence, threatening Haiti
with anarchy. Strikers and demonstrators are demanding the resignation of
the executive council, Haiti's fourth government since last
December. The army appears to be the only remaining
stabilizing element, but popular pressures against military
rule forced army leaders to back down after attempting to assume control of the government earlier this month.

Current disturbances broke out after five
presidential candidates accused the two leading candidates who
control the executive council of attempting to rig the election, now scheduled for 16 June. The five candidates have announced that they will boycott the election, and are urging their
followers not to register.

16 May 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 9
