II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion Proposes Visit to Moscow

The Soviet chargé d'affaires in Tel Aviv has confirmed to American Embassy officials that Prime Minister Ben-Gurion proposes to visit the USSR. An Israeli newspaper has reported that Ben-Gurion has not, however, insisted upon a formal invitation and would accept the "consent" of the Soviet Union.

The Soviet chargé on 31 March said his government was considering the proposal, but gave no indication of Moscow's response. The proposed trip poses a dilemma to Soviet leaders. A visit by the Israeli leader would tend to undercut Moscow's efforts to foster an image of the Soviet Union as the big-power supporter of the Arab countries against an allegedly expansionist-minded Israel. A refusal, on the other hand, would show that Moscow favors contacts at the head-of-government level only when it feels that such contacts are in accord with Soviet policy objectives.

Ben-Gurion presumably intends to present Israel's views on Middle East issues to the Soviet Government in case the East-West summit conference should discuss problems in that area. Israel reportedly desires a declaration by the four big powers that would guarantee the territorial status quo in the Middle East and would encourage an Arab-Israeli settlement. Prospects for obtaining such a resolution, however, seem remote. Britain, France, and the US joined in a tripartite declaration in 1950 which undertook to guarantee existing Middle Eastern frontiers.

Ben-Gurion has seen Macmillan and Adenauer in addition to President Eisenhower in recent weeks, and, according to an Israeli announcement, now has been invited to make an official visit to France. The French had been cool, however, to a suggested De Gaulle - Ben-Gurion meeting, and the visit will probably not take place before the summit meeting. De Gaulle has sought to disengage France from its close relationship with Israel in the interest of better relations with the Arab states, with the immediate aim of facilitating a settlement in Algeria. New French-UAR talks are said to be in progress in Paris.

5 Apr 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
