Yemeni Officials Anxious Over American Aid

The American chargé in Taiz has recently reported growing doubt among local officials as to the genuineness of American interest in furnishing economic aid to Yemen. The chargé also noted that Yemeni opinion on the Communist bloc aid efforts there appears to be increasingly favorable.

Late last year, Yemeni officials began urging fast American action to take advantage of Yemen's "rising good will" toward the West and the Imam's reported decision to adopt a "pro-Western" policy. At that time, the Imam was reported to be deeply suspicious of Communist intentions in Yemen, and this report appeared to be borne out by the fact that no new aid agreement was announced following Yemeni negotiations with Moscow last November.

A basic aid agreement with the United States was signed during the same period. A total of $2,000,000 in American aid funds has been proposed for Yemen during fiscal 1961. The major project under the US-Yemen agreement--a highway to be constructed between Taiz and Sana--is now being negotiated. Yemeni officials contend that the planned construction period of "three to four years" must be shortened to avoid unfavorable comparisons with the Chinese Communist Hudayda-Sana road project and to illustrate the United States' "real sincerity and esteem regarding Yemen."

While Moscow did not offer any new economic credits to Yemen during the visit of the Imam's brother in November 1959, the USSR did agree to undertake additional projects within the scope of the original $25,000,000 line of credit. Since then, presumably with increased Yemeni cooperation, the USSR appears to have been able to speed up work on such projects as the port at Hudayda. In addition, activity under the Soviet military aid program seems to have been renewed. At the same time, Communist China--under its $16,000,000 interest-free credit--is reportedly overcoming obstacles initially encountered in the construction of the Hudayda-Sana road.

5 Apr 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
