and who are reform-minded. Cabinet changes had been expected for some time, and the dismissals are not regarded as representing any split or new uneasiness on the part of the NUC, which remains the real government. Although Foreign Minister Sarper was not among those relieved on 25 August, his ministry has come under press attack and he also may be relieved.

Mali Federation: Mali Premier Modibo Keita--who is also premier of Soudan--apparently believes his chances of nullifying Senegal's 20 August "secession" from the federation are diminishing. He is accusing France of supporting Senegal, and is moving to improve relations with the neighboring Ivory Coast, toward which Soudanese nationalists have recently been cool. Keita has also now publicized a threat to support the Algerian rebels as well as his request for a UN Security Council meeting and the dispatch of troops by the UN. UN Secretary General Hammarskjold, however, hopes the situation will cool off without UN action, and plans for the time being to take no formal action with reference either to Keita's request or to Senegal's earlier plea for UN membership. (Page 3)

Republic of the Congo: Lumumba's 26 August demand that the UN withdraw from the Congo "as soon as the Belgians have withdrawn" may reflect the view that he would have a freer hand in dealing with his opponents if the UN presence were withdrawn. Like other Lumumba statements, however, it may have been made primarily for effect. Brussels has stated that, except for technicians at its air bases, all Belgian troops will be withdrawn by 30 August. It appears doubtful, however, that this date will be met.

The agreement between Katanga President Tshombe and Kasai rebel leader Kalonji to "federate" their two dissident provinces continues recent efforts to coordinate action by Lumumba's opponents. Tshombe's reported offer to send "a few" companies of Katanga soldiers to Kasai increases the possibility of clashes in the area, Lumumba having airlifted between 600 and 1,000 soldiers to southern Kasai on 23-24 August. (Page 5)

27 Aug 60
DAILY BRIEF
