[PAGE 01]
22 February 1957

Copy No. 131

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH MAY TAKE DRASTIC STEPS TO AVERT ECONOMIC CRISIS (page 3).

2. COMMUNIST INFILTRATION OF INDONESIAN ARMY (page 5).

3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES "CONCEPT" OF NEW INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT (page 6).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]4. NEW ARMS SHIPMENT TO YEMEN (page 8).

5. RENEWED OPPOSITION TO CHINA DIFFERENTIAL[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 9).

6. INDIA MAY ENCOURAGE MORE PRIVATE FOREIGN INVESTMENT (page 10).

7. HANOI ADMITS CONTINUED POPULAR DISCONTENT (page 11).

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence Advisory Committee (page 12).
[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH MAY TAKE DRASTIC STEPS TO AVERT ECONOMIC CRISIS

Comment on:

French finance minister Paul Ramadier's plan to cut the 1957 budget by $744,300,000 may be the beginning of a serious effort to stave off an economic crisis. Ramadier is reported to have proposed that $286,000,000 be cut from military expenses by an immediate demobilization of 100,000 troops from the forces now in Algeria. Such a cut, however, would be strongly opposed by the minister of defense and Resident Minister in Algeria Lacoste on the grounds that it would endanger France's pacification effort in Algeria.

The Mollet government has attempted to cope with inflation by substantial increases in imports, but at the cost of bringing France's gold and dollar reserves down to a minimum working level. France's trade deficit for January was about $174,000,000 and the director of the Treasury believes the French economy faces a "complete collapse" if this rate of loss continues. A reduction of imports, which might rectify this situation, would at the same time be contrary to the proposed liberalization of trade under the Common Market.

Stringent economies in expenditures would also force a cutback in proposed plans for revamping the army and development of North Africa. Moreover, an airing of France's financial difficulties may offer the right center an opportunity to launch an attack on the Mollet government.

While the French disclaim any intention of launching aid discussions during Mollet's visit to Washington
[PAGE 05]
on 26-27 February, Ramadier may be trying to underline France's problem and to dramatize its willingness to economize in the hope that serious aid discussions will arise in the course of talks on European defense, the Middle East and Eurafrican investments.
[PAGE 06]
2. COMMUNIST INFILTRATION OF INDONESIAN ARMY

Comment on:

Indonesian Communists appear to be making progress in penetrating army units in Java, particularly in the highly strategic Djakarta and West Java commands. the chief of staff in the Djakarta command is pro-Communist, and a Communist regimental commander in West Java is said to be exerting considerable influence on the territorial commander. Although right-wing officers in West Java still outnumber the Communists, the daily arrest or reassignment of anti-Communist officers for involvement in the "Lubis plot" is giving the Communists additional opportunities.

Control of the army has been a priority Communist goal in Indonesia having equal importance with the subversion of the peasant and laboring classes. Until 1956, the army--and particularly the West Java and North Sumatra commands--provided the principal brake on Communist influence in Indonesia.
[PAGE 07]
3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES "CONCEPT" OF NEW INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT

Comment on:

President Sukarno's 21 February announcement of his "concept" for more effective government in Indonesia is a blow to parliamentary government and an important gain for the Communists. Sukarno, calling for an entirely new system of government, said that Indonesia's problems were the result of its adherence to Western-style democracy and its toleration of opposition.

He proposed the establishment of an "advisory council" to direct the activities of a "mutual aid" cabinet, and participation by the Communist Party in both organizations. According to Sukarno, the council is to be a "reflection of the community," representing such groups as labor, women, youth and the armed forces, while the cabinet would be composed of representatives of all parties in parliament. This system, Sukarno claims, would create conditions in which all Indonesians could live as "one big family" in an "atmosphere of national peace."

The successful implementation of Sukarno's "concept" rests largely on the reaction of the army, the political parties, and the non-Javanese areas. Chances of general army support--at least in Java--seem good. Recent changes in army leadership have rendered major elements more amenable to Sukarno's policies, and his offer of army representation on the council may meet the objections of anti-Communist elements. The adherence of several important political parties,
[PAGE 08]
particularly the two largest Moslem parties, the Masjumi and the Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), is in doubt. The Masjumi has consistently refused to participate in a regime that included Communists, and the NU is reportedly divided on the issue of Communist participation in government. Unless it develops that former vice president Hatta is given an important position and greater autonomy is guaranteed to the provinces, the presently disaffected areas are not likely to accept the president's proposals.
[PAGE 09]
4. NEW ARMS SHIPMENT TO YEMEN

Comment on:

Difficulties in moving other than small quantities of Arab and Soviet bloc arms to Yemen following closure of the Suez Canal appear to have been overcome, and arms deliveries to Yemen will soon increase.

the new Yemeni ship Muizz had left Egypt, probably from Suez, for Yemen with 5,590 cases of "goods"--presumably arms--from Egypt and the Soviet bloc.

Syrian government would send "weapons, grenades and explosives in Syrian vehicles" to Tebuk in northwest Saudi Arabia for transshipment to Yemen. Saudi crown prince Faisal agreed to transship the materiel in Saudi vehicles, but instructed that the matter be kept secret.

Syrian Airways would "soon" have scheduled flights for delivery of Czech arms from Damascus to Yemen.

The increasing flow of arms will give Yemen an effective bargaining asset in its expanding program of subversion among the sheiks of Aden Protectorate. Yemeni arms offers have attracted increasing numbers of protectorate tribesmen, and the sheik of the Alawi tribe has defected to Yemen with many of his tribesmen--the third such defection in as many months.
[PAGE 10]
5. RENEWED OPPOSITION TO CHINA DIFFERENTIAL

Comment on:

Statements made to the Japanese CHINCOM representative in Paris by the representatives of Britain, France, and Norway indicate that these powers plan to give strongly negative replies to the American proposal of 27 December for maintaining the China trade control differential and for further restricting strategic trade with East Europe.

Britain's representative is quoted as saying London will strongly oppose measures for implementing the US recommendation. The French representative stated that "France will insist that there is no reason to impose stricter control on trade with China than with Russia and that the levels of controls should be equalized." The Norwegian representative likewise indicated opposition.

Parallel intimations of growing opposition from other countries include consideration of trade missions by West Germany and Japan, which have in the past been relatively co-operative in supporting the China differential.
[PAGE 11]
6. INDIA MAY ENCOURAGE MORE PRIVATE FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Comment on:

Indian finance minister Krishnamachari has admitted that the Second Five-Year Plan (1956-61) may have to be extended to seven years. Rather than extend the period of the plan, India may modify its policies in favor of private foreign investment.

Krishnamachari recently told Sir Jehangir Ghandy, director of Tata Iron and Steel Co., that the Five-Year Plan could be met only if approximately $2 billion were made available from foreign sources in the next four years, and added that he doubted such funds would be made available by foreign governments. Krishnamachari had tentatively agreed that after the elections Tata and the Kaiser interests would be permitted to construct a large jointly owned shipyard despite the fact that shipbuilding is reserved for the public sector of the economy.

While Prime Minister Nehru and the Congress Party have committed their prestige to developing a socialistic pattern of society as well as to the successful fulfillment of the plan in five years, they might be willing to reduce the emphasis on socialization if convinced that such a policy would attract the foreign capital needed to fulfill the plan goals.
[PAGE 12]
7. HANOI ADMITS CONTINUED POPULAR DISCONTENT

Comment on:

Although there have apparently been no outbreaks in North Vietnam on a scale comparable to last November's uprisings, which were suppressed by the army, the population continues restive in certain areas. The party organ Nhan Dan in late January admitted new demonstrations against the authorities in some villages of Ha Tinh Province, not far from the scene of the 1956 disorders. The article states that dissatisfied peasants, demanding return of their property confiscated during land reform, rioted and surrounded the homes of Communist cadres.

Hanoi has sought to conciliate the population by pushing a "mistake-correction" campaign. Many landlords have been "reclassified" and some of their property has been restored. Hanoi is also reinstating party personnel who had been purged and reorganizing party cells which had been "wrongly dissolved."

The populace is impatient of delays in implementing "mistake-correction," and the Communists are finding it necessary to appeal for calm and understanding. Concurrently, the regime is giving notice of its determination to act forcefully against any new demonstrations. The Nhan Dan article warns that "energetic measures" must be taken against those "who aim to rise up against the party and government."
[PAGE 13]
ANNEX

Watch Report 342, 20 February
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee the Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against US forces abroad, US allies or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is improbable in the immediate future. The crucial issues of Israeli withdrawal and Suez Canal control, as well as continuing tensions in the area, constitute possibilities for violence.
