7. Ceylon may recognize Bao Dai government:
A Ceylon diplomat who has been in Indochina on a rice purchasing mission hinted at the time of his departure that Ceylon might extend diplomatic recognition to the Bao Dai government. US Minister Heath in Saigon had assumed that Ceylon would follow the lead of India in continuing to refuse recognition, and speculates that the Ceylon envoy's remarks may reflect an evolution of his government's attitude, or may simply be a device for promoting a rice deal.

Comment: It is known that Ceylon has been considering recognition for some time and has generally aligned itself more closely with UK policy (the UK recognized Bao Dai in February 1950) than has India. Ceylon is a rice deficit area and may feel that it might be in a preferred position to obtain some Vietnamese rice if it opened diplomatic relations with Bao Dai. Thus far, Thailand has been the only southern Asian nation to recognize the Bao Dai government; the Western nations have been endeavoring to persuade other Asian countries to take similar action in order to bolster its prestige.

NEAR EAST

8. Nehru recently subject to strong anti-American influences:
US Ambassador Henderson reports that during the last few weeks Prime Minister Nehru has been in close association with V. K. Krishna Menon, Indian High Commissioner in London, and with Lady Mountbatten, wife of India's last Viceroy and Governor-General. Several responsible Indian officials have told Ambassador Henderson Menon tried to persuade Nehru not to accept US favors, and Lady Mountbatten's anti-American influence over Nehru is a subject of almost common gossip in India. One prominent Indian who dined with Nehru, Menon, and Lady Mountbatten later told Ambassador Henderson that he was shocked at the anti-Americanism which dominated their dinner conversation.

Comment: Nehru is known to be susceptible to the influence of Lady Mountbatten and Krishna Menon, both of whom are violently anti-American and the latter of whom is probably a Communist. These two
