EASTERN EUROPE

8. Albanian Cabinet shift does not indicate purge:

The release of Mehmet Shehu as interim Minister of State Control was announced on September 7, along with the replacement of the Minister of Agriculture and the acting Minister of Justice.

Comment: There is no reason to believe that the shuffle of Albanian Cabinet posts is an indication of a purge in the government. Mehmet Shehu still retains his more important position of Minister of Interior, and the acting Minister of Justice apparently retains his post as Vice Premier. The appointment of Hysni Kapo, a Politburo member with long experience in political leadership, to the Ministry of Agriculture indicates that the socialization of Albanian agriculture will advance at an increased tempo.

9. Reorganization of Czech Communist Party increases Gottwald's powers:

Secretary General of the Czech Communist Party Rudolf Slansky has been relieved of his duties, and will not be replaced. His former duties will be turned over to the Chairman of the party, currently Klement Gottwald. At the same time, a Politburo and an Orgbruro (organizational secretariat) have been set up. The seven members of the Politburo include Slansky and Gottwald, as well as other leading Communists. The Orgbruro consists of Gottwald and the secretaries of the Central Committee.

Comment: There is no evidence that the transfer of power from Slansky to Gottwald stems from "nationalist deviation"; in fact, evidence indicates that both men have been loyal adherents to Moscow. The decentralization of power in the party's leadership follows Soviet expressions of dissatisfaction with conditions in Czechoslovakia, where economic difficulties have been mounting. While Gottwald's power has increased at Slansky's expense, the establishment of a Politburo may preclude any such centralization of power as that previously held by Slansky. Before the war the Communist Party was organized along traditional lines with a Politburo and an Orgbruro, but these two bodies are not known to have existed since the war.
