WESTERN EUROPE

10. Italy ready to negotiate on Trieste issue:

The Italian Government has informed the British that it is disposed to enter into negotiations with Yugoslavia over Trieste, provided the Yugoslavs are also so inclined. The Government pointed out that for some time the adamant stand of the Yugoslavs on this issue has made negotiations impossible.

Comment: According to Prime Minister De Gasperi the Italians and Yugoslavs were recently engaged in pourparlers over a solution on Trieste. No progress is believed to have been made.

11. Allies map countermeasures in Berlin:

Meeting in Berlin on 6 September, the Allied Deputy High Commissioners and Berlin Commandants discussed means of combatting the latest Soviet squeeze on West Berlin.

They decided to dispatch a letter to Soviet authorities protesting interferences with free Allied access to Berlin, and to instruct German officials to submit proposals on the imposition of a tax both on East German barges traveling in West Berlin canals and on East German vehicles traveling in Western Germany. These countermeasures will be implemented by 17 September at the latest if the USSR fails to remove its restrictions as requested. They further decided that the West should provide all possible assistance to alleviate Berlin transport difficulties, particularly with respect to such perishable shipments as milk.

The meeting was characterized by French reluctance to adopt firm retaliatory measures. France even suggested that the Allies permit the signing of an interzonal trade agreement between East and West Germany, but the US and UK representatives, rejecting the proposal, emphasized that yielding to Russian pressure would represent "a horrible loss of face for the West." German officials from the Federal Republic and West Berlin who were called in to discuss the situation with the Allies showed little enthusiasm for firm countermeasures.

Comment: In applying its recent series of harassing measures in Berlin, the USSR has succeeded in creating a situation where discussion of countermeasures in each case inevitably produces division and haggling among Allied and German officials, therefore reducing the chances for effective retaliation.

12. Austrian Chancellor reported threatened by party revolt:

Socialist Vice-Chancellor Schaerf has informed US Commissioner Donnelly that rightist elements in the conservative People's Party, spear-headed by governors of the Western provinces and by several Cabinet ministers including Foreign Minister Gruber, are seeking to replace Chancellor Figl with someone more sympathetic to their views. Characterizing the maneuvering as the beginning of a "fascist" movement, Schaerf asserts that Figl may survive until the next general election in 1953, but adds that the opposition is strong. The Socialists, Schaerf contends, fear the coalition may break down; he asserts that they will never participate in a government that includes both the People's Party and the near-reactionary Union of Independents.

In a subsequent conversation with Donnelly, Figl denied that either the coalition or his own position was in danger. He described the opposition leaders within his party as "provincial almgitties" who criticize but are unwilling to accept responsibilities outside their own provinces.

Comment: The Chancellor's dismissal of opposition to this party leadership as "provincial" is scarcely supported by the facts. Defeated presidential candidate Heinrich Gleissner, as governor of Upper Austria, has openly flouted government policies in the meat crisis. While supporting the Chancellor, the Socialists themselves have not been averse to encouraging defection of People's Party members to splinter groups on the extreme right. Any coalescence of these dissident groups in some rightist bloc aligned with the Union of Independents will make it extremely difficult for the coalition to continue in its present form.
