North Korea Stages Reunification Rallies

North Korea's propaganda bombardment on North-South reunification continues, with worker rallies shouting support for Pyongyang's offers to aid the South Korean economy. In one North Korean city, laborers pledged themselves to send 400,000 bags of grain, 50,000 suits of clothes, and "various necessities to the hunger-stricken peasants" in four nearby South Korean communities. This gesture is typical of the specific North Korean aid offers being given unprecedented publicity by Pyongyang in an attempt to stir Southern dissatisfaction, stimulate interest in North-South contacts, and ultimately focus popular pressure on the South Korean Government.

All the items offered by North Korea are advertised as a preview of the affluence South Koreans could expect if they should support reunification under Pyongyang's terms. These terms include withdrawal of US and UN forces and general elections without supervision by the United Nations. The North Koreans are not making the aid offers contingent on acceptance of their demands.

UN General Assembly discussion of the Korean issue may provide the bloc with an opportunity to draw Afro-Asian attention to Pyongyang's campaign. The USSR issued an official statement on 7 December giving vigorous support to North Korean proposals to reunify North and South or, if that is impossible, to form a loose North-South federation for economic and cultural exchange. The Soviet statement attacked US refusal to withdraw its troops from South Korea as "the main obstacle to Korean unification," and called on the UN to allow both North and South Koreans to participate in the discussion.

North Korean agents in the South to back up the propaganda and "win over the masses." Activities in this area may not be too rewarding for the North Koreans, however, for Seoul is attempting to improve the effectiveness of its counterintelligence services, which were drastically reorganized after the April revolution.

Despite growing public concern with the problem of a divided Korea, the majority of South Koreans remain unsympathetic to Pyongyang.
