The Situation in Laos

Captain Kong Le, with elements from the Second Paratroop Battalion and some armored support, apparently regained control of the town of Vientiane in the evening of 8 December. Some hours after Col. Kouprasith's early morning coup, Kong Le is reliable reported to have fled Vientiane in the company of a ranking Pathet Lao military leader, which may suggest that Pathet Lao elements were in his force when he retook the town that evening. Kong Le is reported to have placed Kouprasith under arrest; however, the units which supported Kouprasith in his coup apparently remain at Camp Chinaimo, a Lao army base a few miles south of Vientiane.

A company of paratroopers taken from the pro-Phoumi Luang Prabang garrison was dropped near Chinaimo in mid-afternoon on 8 December; they have presumably joined forces with the units at Chinaimo. With Kouprasith's arrest, leadership of these units may have passed to officers more reliably loyal to General Phoumi and his Savannakhet group. Phoumi reportedly plans to drop another company of paratroopers and to bring a battalion of infantry overland from Pak Sane, which was captured on 18 December by Phoumi elements advancing from Pak Ca Dinh. When these units arrive, a showdown struggle between the opposing forces is probable, with the Pathet Lao possibly interceding on Kong Le's behalf.

Just prior to the Kouprasith coup, some twenty deputies from the National Assembly gathered at Camp Chinaimo, from where it would be an easy matter for them to slip across the river into Thailand. Combined with an approximately equal number already out of Vientiane, more than enough deputies necessary for an assembly quorum would now appear to be available for a session either in Luang Prabang or Savannakhet for the purpose of registering a no-confidence vote against Souvanna Phouma.

Throughout the confusion of 8 December, Souvanna showed no sign of being ready to resign, and with characteristic adeptness chose to consider both the Kouprasith coup and the
