Interim President of Turkey Critically Ill

General Gursel's absence from the government for an extended period could have an unsettling effect in Turkey and delay restoration of a civilian regime unless active leadership is passed to another member of the Committee of National Union (CNU). The interim President, who remains in critical condition as a result of a serious circulatory ailment which he developed in late November, faces a long recovery period and may have to withdraw completely from the affairs of state. Gursel, who has successfully projected a "father image" to many Turks, had emerged as a prime contender for the presidency of the "second republic"--to be established after the ratification of a new constitution and following national elections which have been promised prior to November 1961.

Deputy Premier Fahri Ozdilek, former chief of the Army General Staff, apparently is unofficially the acting chief of state, with General Madanoglu, apparently the dominating figure on the Committee of National Union, in close support. Ozdilek was commanding general of the First Army and martial law commander in Istanbul at the time of the 27 May coup. He is credited with having prevented major disturbances and loss of life in Istanbul during the uneasy pre-coup period.

Ozdilek reportedly knew of the intended coup but was not a participant, although he is credited with expeditiously delivering Turkey's largest city to the insurgents. In early June he was named minister of defense and on 22 October became deputy premier and minister of state. The 62-year-old general is regarded as competent but not particularly dynamic. His age and army experience probably make him Gursel's closest associate in the CNU.

Official news releases regarding Gursel's illness have been designed primarily to minimize popular apprehension regarding his health. Plans for the early convocation of a representative constituent assembly will be postponed pending Gursel's full recovery or abdication.
