[PAGE 01]
1 December 1951
Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. British worried about Near Eastern reaction to Soviet notes on Middle East Command (page 3).

USSR

FAR EAST

SOUTH ASIA

4. Pro-Communist Indian Ambassador to Peiping may be assigned to Cairo (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. British official hints review of Chinese recognition policy (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. British worried about Near Eastern reaction to Soviet notes on Middle East Command:

The British Foreign Office is concerned over the probable effects of the Soviet notes on the establishment of a Middle East Command and is

The Foreign Office sees no indication that the USSR actually thinks it is being threatened by the Middle East Command, although Britain regards the Near East as the area where establishment of military bases is most likely to be viewed as provocative.

USSR

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Pro-Communist Indian Ambassador to Peiping may be assigned to Cairo:

K. M. Panikkar, Indian Ambassador to Communist China and member of the Indian delegation to the current UN General Assembly, has stated that he hopes within a few months to be assigned as Ambassador to Egypt.

Panikkar expects to arrive in Cairo about the end of March 1951.

Comment: Panikkar, an opportunist, is a close personal friend of Indian Prime Minister Nehru and reportedly exerts a considerable influence over him. Panikkar has a strong predilection toward Communism and is believed to be largely responsible for Nehru's current views regarding Communist China. Regardless of where Panikkar stands ideologically, his assignment to Cairo would present him with an opportunity to encourage among the Egyptians both anti-Western attitudes and collaboration with Communism.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. British official hints review of Chinese recognition policy:

The British Foreign Office states that a remark credited to Colonial Secretary Lyttelton in Singapore to the effect that the Conservative government might review the question of the continued recognition of Communist China was made without prior Cabinet clearance. Foreign Office sources thought the matter would have to be referred to Prime Minister Churchill.

[PAGE 06]
Comment: A general review of the elements of British Far Eastern policy would be normal procedure for a new government in Britain. Although there is some evidence that the Churchill government wishes to reconsider certain aspects of British policy and tactics in the Far East, the conviction that the Communist regime in China should not be regarded as indissolubly tied to the USSR appears still dominant in official circles.
