[PAGE 01]
6 August 1960

Copy No. C 72

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

6 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Libya: A Soviet delegation arrived in Tripoli and began formal discussion on 31 July of a revised offer by Moscow to construct and equip two 91 hospitals in Libya. Earlier negotiations dating back to early 1958 were stymied by the USSR's insistence that it furnish staff personnel; according to a Libyan health official, however, the new proposal involves Soviet training of Libyan medical personnel. Such an arrangement would apparently provide a way of side-stepping the issue of a permanent Soviet staff, but presumably would require the presence in Libya of Soviet medical personnel during an extended training period.

*USSR-Britain: In his letter of 4 August to Prime Minister Macmillan, Khrushchev dropped the deferential treatment he previously has accorded the prime minister and sharply attacked British foreign and colonial policies. Khrushchev's letter, which reflects the tougher, more militant line that has come to dominate the conduct of Soviet policy since the collapse of the summit meeting, is intended to embarrass Macmillan and to advance broader

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
objectives of weakening Allied confidence in US leadership and generating opposition to American overseas bases.

Khrushchev reaffirmed his early postsummit commitment that unilateral action on Germany and Berlin would be deferred until these questions could be discussed at another summit meeting. He recognized that such a meeting could not be convened before the American election but warned that if the West should subsequently refuse a meeting and prevent agreement, the USSR would sign a separate treaty with East Germany.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Congo-UN: UN Secretary General Hammarskjold's request for an immediate meeting of the Security Council--now scheduled for 7 August--is an effort to bring all possible international pressure on Katanga Premier Tshombe to permit peaceable entry of UN forces into that province. In addition to Tshombe's threats to resist by force the UN entry, Hammarskjold was also probably influenced by reported British and Belgian advice not to push the Katanga situation "so hard." His postponement of UN troop entry pending council action will, however, subject him to increased attacks by the USSR and Congolese Prime Minister Lumumba. Meanwhile, the Belgian Government, apparently under strong pressure from both public opinion and Belgian financial interests, is hardening its support for Tshombe.

Southern Rhodesia: African nationalists plan renewed disorders in the Salisbury area on 8 August as a protest against the trial of National Democratic party president Mawema. Although the demonstrations are to be centered in the African townships adjacent to Salisbury, disorders may spread to other Rhodesian cities as happened in the rioting late in July.

6 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
South Vietnam: Communist guerrilla bands continue their widespread attacks. In the past few weeks bands of 400 or more have engaged regular Vietnamese army units, and on 30 July overran a village east of Saigon defended by Civil Guard and Self-Defense forces. The Vietnamese Government recently warned of the insecurity of certain key routes.

6 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Nationalist Demonstrations Threatened in Southern Rhodesia

African nationalist disorders are planned for 8 August in the African townships adjacent to Salisbury, On that date the president of Southern Rhodesia's leading native organization, the National Democratic party, is being brought to trial on a charge of violating the Unlawful Organizations Act. It was the arrest of this leader, Michael Mawema, and several others that triggered the disturbances in July in Salisbury and Bulawayo. The rioting at that time resulted in widespread property damage in the African townships and led to about a dozen African deaths--the first caused by racial violence in Southern Rhodesia since 1896

Nationalists are organizing a city-wide strike of African employees, and they plan that school children will play an important role in inciting disorders within the townships. Agitators are collecting riot funds by canvassing homes and stores.

The government's Native Education Department, which discovered the plans, advised the teachers on 2 August that they would be fired if the African children did not attend school on 8 August. They were also warned that the schools would be closed indefinitely. However, the teachers responded that the fear of nationalist reprisals and pressure from nationalist-minded parents made them cooperate.

African opponents of the planned disorders say that it is too late to stop the disorders; moreover, the government's ban on public meetings makes it impossible for them to address African crowds and urge moderation. The police are preparing for trouble on 8 August and intend to provide maximum security for all African townships. However, if violence breaks out in Salisbury, it is likely to spread to other areas where the National Democratic party (NDP) has branches.

On 5 August, the NDP asked London to send British troops to Southern Rhodesia to ease "an explosive situation,"

6 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Security Situation in South Vietnam

The size of Communist guerrilla bands operating in South Vietnam seems to be increasing after some tapering off of large-scale assaults with the advent of the rainy season in late March. Engagements with regular army units by guerrilla bands of up to 400 men have been reported in the past few weeks. Most recently, on 30 July, three guerrilla companies totaling 300 to 400 men, together with about 100 armed mountaineers, seized a government district office in Binh Tuy Province 70 miles east of Saigon, killing a small number of the defending Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps forces and kidnapping 34 Defense Corps members and all civilians in the village. An attack on army units in an area about 40 miles north of Saigon by an estimated 100-200 guerrillas occurred on 27 July. This activity north and east of Saigon may reflect a Communist design to relieve pressure by the Vietnamese Army on the principal areas of guerrilla activity in the southwest.

Travel on main roads near Saigon continues to be uncertain. Prior to the anniversary of the Geneva accords on 20 July, Vietnamese security officials warned American motorists against travel on a major route north of Saigon, as well as in certain southwestern provinces.

6 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
