1. SOVIET CENTRAL COMMITTEE DECISIONS

Comment on:

On 25 December the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, following strong criticism of the economic planning organizations by the party central committee at its recent plenum, announced a broad revision in the composition of the State Economic Commission for Short Range Planning. In a move intended to increase its authority and efficiency M. G. Pervukhin, a member of the party presidium and first deputy premier, replaced M. Z. Saburov as chairman of the commission. Five other high-ranking officials, Kosygin, Malyshev, Khrunichev, Kucherenko and Matskevich, were named to assist Pervukhin, at the same time relinquishing their duties as deputy chairmen of the Council of Ministers.

The communique issued by the central committee following its plenary meeting was confined almost entirely to a report on the domestic economy. The reports on state planning indicated that the over-all 1956 economic plan for industrial production would be overfulfilled and that the output of consumer goods would be more than nine percent greater than in 1955. The communique emphasized the improvement of the "material well-being" of the people and lauded the advantages of a planned economy over the capitalist system. The report, however, attacked the economic planners for their "shortcomings" and specifically criticized the coal, metal, cement and timber industries for underfulfillment of production plans even though 1956 production exceeded that of 1955. It noted that the plans for housing "have been only partially fulfilled" and indicated that construction would be more tightly controlled than in the past.

The central committee decreed that the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1956-1960) be drawn up and submitted to the USSR Supreme Soviet during the first half of 1957. The decree indicated that the plan would not differ radically from that envisaged when the Sixth Five-Year Plan directives were presented

25 Dec 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
