surface attitude almost certainly has been adopted in the hope of parrying Western intervention against the regime. At the same time, the regime has formally denounced the Arab Union between Iraq and Jordan; similar action regarding Iraq's agreement with Britain and the Baghdad Pact may be delayed until the regime is more firmly in control.

There are some indications that the Iraqi rebels have not yet determined the loyalty of troops guarding the northern oil fields and the Habbaniya airfield, but intend to take over by force if necessary. The latter move would be a logical one to secure a means of receiving support from Cairo through Damascus and to deny the base to any intervening air-borne force. Iraqi troops who appeared friendly to the British training mission were still guarding Habbaniya.

In Jordan, King Husayn's government has tightened security measures and has suppressed demonstrations in West Jordan in favor of the Iraqi coup. The mood of the radical nationalist opposition in Amman is jubilant, although some opposition sympathizers have stated that the chances of a coup seem slight unless the leaders of the Baath party return to the country. The Iraqi composite brigade stationed in Jordan was allowed to return to Iraq on 15 July after its officers had threatened to shoot their way out unless permission were granted. Some sixty Iraqi staff officers in Jordan on an inspection tour are also to be released. The Jordanians apparently expect some kind of Turkish action; a Turkish aircraft arrived in Amman on 15 July, ostensibly to evacuate former Iraqi Chief of Staff Arif if he should still be there. Ankara continues to emphasize its belief that Jordan must be supported directly to the fullest extent.

Pressure in favor of the Iraqi coup has developed quickly in Kuwait. The acting ruler, who is in charge while the actual ruler is visiting in Damascus, has made a minor show of force in the face of popular parading of Iraqi flags with shouts of "long live the Iraqi Army." Reports have been received that Bahrein

16 July 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
