association with the monarchy. General Phoumi and his advisers seem to be of two minds regarding the desirability of having the National Assembly formally invest the new government through a vote of confidence. Although such action would tend to legalize the new government in the eyes of world opinion, some of Phoumi's advisers claim that it would constitute a retrogression from the "revolution" said to be represented in the actions of Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee since 10 September. It seems clear that the Phoumi group would like to rewrite the constitution immediately so as to weaken the assembly and strengthen the executive.

Steps are apparently being taken to improve the efficiency of the Sino-Soviet bloc airlift into Laos. Seven Soviet AN-12 heavy transport aircraft, six of which arrived at Canton from Peiping on 24 December and the seventh probably on 26 December, have been scheduled for flights to North Vietnam on 27 December. One is to fly to Hanoi and the remaining six are to go to Haiphong. This will be the first time bloc transports of military subordination have flown into North Vietnam.

The flight of these aircraft to bases in North Vietnam will eliminate one step in the airlift--that of offloading cargo at Canton for transshipment to Hanoi aboard IL-14s. Seven AN-12s could carry between 105 and 140 tons of cargo--six times as much as an equal number of IL-14s. Offloading at bases in North Vietnam will free the Soviet IL-14s which had been engaged in shuttle operations between Canton and Hanoi for flights directly to Laos.

Both Soviet and North Vietnamese transports continue to ferry supplies into Laos. At least five Soviet IL-14s were engaged in flights to Laos on 24 December. Five were scheduled for flights to the Vientiane area on 25 December, and four additional flights were scheduled for Sam Neua on the same day. In addition, several North Vietnamese transports were scheduled for flights to Sam Neua and Dien Bien Phu on 25 December.
