[PAGE 01]
15 March 1961

Copy No. C 76

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

DIA and DOS have no objection to declassification and release

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
15 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. Belgium: Spaak critical of Belgian Government's policies in Congo. (Page iii)

7. India-Communist China: Minor border incident likely to generate further protests in New Delhi. (Page iv)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
Belgium-Congo: Former NATO Secretary-General Spaak, in a conversation with the American chargé in Brussels, voiced strong criticism of the Congo policies of the Belgian Government and was very pessimistic regarding the role of the UN. While Spaak does not feel that all Belgian political advisers should be withdrawn from the Congo, he favors immediate removal of the military "adventurers" and the progressive removal of paramilitary and military personnel. Recent reports indicate that of the 200-230 Belgian officers and NCOs serving in the Katanga army, only 30 have so far been ordered back to Belgium. In addition, there are several hundred advisers and technicians in Katanga and elsewhere. The embassy comments that Spaak, who is running for parliament on the Socialist ticket in the 26 March national elections, will remain cautious in voicing any public criticism of Prime Minister Eyskens's government because of Socialist participation in the original Brussels round-table conference which outlined plans for the independence of the Congo. As a member of a Social Christian - Socialist coalition government that may be formed following the elections, Spaak would exercise a more stringent influence over the control of African affairs.

15 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
India - Communist China: The border incident revealed by Defense Minister Krishna Menon on 14 March, while apparently only a minor skirmish between Indian and Chinese border guards, may set off new protests in the Indian parliament and increase New Delhi's determination to remain unyielding. Menon said that a Chinese soldier had been captured by an Indian patrol four miles inside the Himalayan state of Sikkim.

In view of the deadlock in diplomatic efforts to solve the border dispute, New Delhi may feel it expedient to keep Peiping under pressure by playing up its "aggressive" activities. Peiping will probably minimize the incident.

15 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]
Next 11 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]

[PAGE 20]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 21]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
