Major Leftist Party in Ceylon Suffers Labor Setback

The Trotskyite Lanka Sama Samaj party (LSSP), Ceylon's leading leftist organization, appears to have been maneuvered into an untenable position as a result of the Bandaranaike government's firmness in dealing with strike activity.

About 9,000 LSSP-controlled dock and clerical workers in Colombo port--more than two thirds of the total harbor labor force--remain on strike, and some LSSP unions in Colombo's mercantile firms have walked out in sympathy. A group of less powerful dock unions controlled by the Communist party and a smaller Trotskyite group accepted Bandaranaike's terms two weeks ago and returned to work. The LSSP, however, realizing that it was involved in a significant test of power with the shaky Bandaranaike government, refused to modify its demands and threatened to extend the port walkout into a general strike. These tactics only strengthened the government's determination to make no further concessions.

The LSSP made much political capital out of the strike technique in 1957 and 1958. Since the leftist element in Bandaranaike's government coalition withdrew in mid-May, however, the moderates have forced the prime minister to take firm action against striking unions. Apparently the most effective measure has been the recent recruitment of an army-controlled volunteer labor force to replace striking workers in essential services. In addition, growing public resentment over the detrimental effect strikes have had on the economy has bolstered the government's position and jeopardized the LSSP's popular support.

The leftist party probably will be forced to beat a strategic retreat for the present. However, its considerable following and effective organization, coupled with the government's precarious position in Parliament, will ensure the LSSP's continuance as a potent opposition force.

The present unsettled political and economic conditions continue to cause various conservative groups to consider action to take over the government. A group including the commanders of the armed forces and police is now reported taking steps in preparation for coup action at an early date, although other sources do not indicate that such a move is imminent.

17 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
