III. THE WEST

Greece Regarded as Vulnerable to Soviet Campaign

The American ambassador in Athens regards the current Soviet effort to reduce Greek ties with the West as a serious long-range threat to that nation's position within the NATO defense chain. Greek Foreign Minister Averoff also has expressed his government's "uneasiness" regarding possible effects of the recently intensified campaign. Averoff put particular stress on Greece's increasing vulnerability to bloc initiatives in the light of worsening economic conditions caused, in part, by inability to dispose of large agricultural surpluses. The USSR and several East European countries have made attractive offers to purchase such surpluses. A protocol on commodity deliveries, calling for increased trade between Greece and the USSR, was signed on 31 October.

Moscow's campaign has proceeded on three fronts--political, economic, and cultural--and has alternated, according to Averoff, between "smile" and "snarl" techniques with the former particularly effective in view of a general desire in Greece for international peace. A major Soviet-bloc effort to improve relations, including invitations to the Greek leaders to visit Moscow and proposals that the Balkan states settle their differences at a "summit" conference, has been followed in recent days by bloc propaganda criticism of the Greek Government. Premier Karamanlis has been castigated for failure to adapt to the "Camp David spirit," refusing to attend a Balkan conference, declining the invitation to Moscow, and permitting establishment of "Honest John" missiles in Greece.

Symbolic of the return to the "snarl" technique is the issuance by the USSR of a postage stamp honoring Manolis Glezos sentenced by a Greek court last July to five years in prison for assisting Communist spies. Karamanlis has decided to reply in kind, and the Greek Government has announced its intention to issue a stamp honoring Imre Nagy, executed by the Hungarian Government in 1958.

19 Nov 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
