Iran Rejects Soviet Draft Protocol

Moscow is continuing its effort to extract concessions from Iran as the price for "normalizing" relations and halting bloc radio propaganda attacks. Acting Foreign Minister Semenov on 11 November presented Iranian Ambassador Masud-Ansari with a draft protocol by which Iran and the USSR would guarantee to exclude foreign military bases and forces and to prohibit the use of their territories in such a way as to "endanger the security" of the other party.

The substance of these Soviet proposals, an expansion of the Shah's offer of a protocol guaranteeing that no foreign missile bases would be permitted on Iranian soil, had already been rejected by the Shah as not "subject to proper definition" when outlined orally by Ambassador Pegov on 8 November. Tehran informed Ansari of the Shah's talks with Pegov and directed him to tell Khrushchev or the Soviet foreign minister that the Shah's offer is "the maximum concession that the Iranian Government can make."

Ansari recommended that the Iranian Government present the USSR with a counterproposal setting forth the Shah's terms. The Shah viewed Moscow's proposal as conflicting with what the Iranian Government was willing to give in writing and instructed him to present a counterdraft stating Iran's original position which was termed "definite and final."

The Soviet Government's handling of the current exchange, particularly its efforts to extract additional concessions and its postponement of action on the Shah's offer to exclude foreign missile bases, suggests that Soviet leaders feel Tehran is weakening in the face of the bloc's sustained propaganda attacks.

Iranian Foreign Minister Aram, on 16 November, voiced concern over recent developments. He distrusts Ambassador Ansari in Moscow and opposes signing any agreement with the USSR at this time. Ansari was instructed on 15 November to tell Soviet officials that Iran "prefers" only to agree that there will be no bases for "short- or long-range missiles."

19 Nov 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
