Watch Committee Conclusions: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist in Laos and in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq.

Laos: Dissident military activity remains at a low level. However, the insurgents retain a considerable potential for guerrilla action, and no decrease in their subversive activities is foreseen at the present time.

Middle East: The situation in Iraq remains unstable, and the possibility of further assassination attempts or coups remains.

Indonesia - Communist China: A public exchange of recriminations between the Chinese Communist Embassy in Djakarta and the Indonesian Foreign Ministry is further evidence of the growing strain in Sino-Indonesian relations. The Chinese Embassy has denounced as untrue Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio's claim that the Chinese ambassador had agreed to cooperate with the Indonesian Government's program to remove Overseas Chinese from rural areas. Djakarta has now retorted that if the ambassador persists in his denial, and in his justification of the obstructive activities of his embassy officials, this will have "grave and serious consequences."

Philippines: The administration's victory in securing five of the eight Senate seats and a majority of the local offices contested in last week's election reflects the strength of the Nacionalista party machine. At the same time, the defeat of candidates closely associated with President Garcia points up his personal unpopularity. Garcia may become increasingly preoccupied with a struggle for control of his own party as well as with a growing challenge from the opposition Liberal party to the further neglect of administrative reforms. The Liberals were strengthened by the election of three senators and various local officials. Garcia may step up emphasis on his policy of economic nationalism despite the limited campaign appeal of the Nacionalista "Filipino First" slogan. (Page 7)

19 Nov 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
