1. MACMILLAN'S CALL FOR A NON-AGGRESSION PACT

Prime Minister Macmillan's radio speech
of 4 January, advocating a non-aggression
pact with the Soviet Union and an eventual
summit meeting, reflects the sensitivity
of the Conservative government to public demands for efforts--
beyond the moves outlined in the 19 December NATO communiqué--
to achieve a reconciliation of major disputes with Moscow. Mac-
millan seems to anticipate that by such an initiative he can in-
crease public support for a defense program. Macmillan re-
stricted and hedged his proposals to reduce any alarm of fellow
NATO members over not being consulted. The British govern-
ment presumably intends to incorporate the ideas in Macmillan's
formal response to Bulganin's note of 10 December now being
prepared. The reply is to be discussed at the North Atlantic
Council meeting on 8 January.

The Soviet news agency TASS on 4 January
reported Macmillan's proposal, criticizing his "rude anti-Soviet
attacks" and his defense of British foreign policy. The Soviet
leaders probably will assert that only the United States now stands
in the way of an East-West accommodation. Moscow is also likely
to contend that an East-West heads of government conference would
be the best forum for discussing Macmillan's ideas and that favor-
able reaction in Europe and Asia has improved the prospects for
holding such a conference.

Free world reaction to the Macmillan proposal
was nearly unanimously favorable. French Foreign Ministry
sources were quoted as hailing Macmillan's "bold initiative"; in
Rome, authoritative sources welcomed the proposals for a non-
aggression pact but emphasized the need for adequate guarantees.
Bonn's favorable comment was more restrained, reflecting the
government's fear of any new steps toward an over-all settlement
not hinged on German reunification--a topic which Macmillan's
speech ignored. Enthusiastic approval came from the press in
Cairo, Tokyo, and New Delhi.
