The Situation in the Congo

President Kasavubu and Foreign Minister Bomboko, in a conversation with the American charge in Leopoldville on 6 February, expressed the belief that events are moving in their favor in the political and military fields and that a neutralization of the Congolese Army would reverse this trend. They also reportedly feel that the UN would use any additional powers to the disadvantage of their government and might eventually impose a trusteeship over the Congo. The charge comments that Kasavubu is unlikely to consent to such a program so long as he feels time is on his side.

According to Bomboko, an attempt by the UN to bring the Congolese Army under its control would thwart the Leopoldville government's plans to mount a military operation against Kivu Province within ten days. Bomboko and Kasavubu apparently believe that their chances for regaining control of eastern Congo are fairly good as a result of disaffection among Gizenga's troops. At the same time, Kasavubu stated that Congolese officials were attempting to form a "provisional" government which could be installed immediately.

Hammarskjold has scoffed at Western concern for Kasavubu's position, stating that the Congolese President "has no prestige." He continues to believe that a military solution to the Congolese situation is impossible, and he reportedly feels that Mobutu and Bomboko are too closely tied to Belgium to have any future in the Congo. Hammarskjold feels that if they are removed, Kasavubu can be persuaded to form a constitutional government.

Soviet UN representative Zorin told Ambassador Stevenson on 6 February that the UN would not be able to deal with troops which are subject to colonial domination--presumably a reference to Mobutu's and Tshombe's forces--in the same manner as those which support the "legitimate government." He questioned whether the latter would lay down their arms until Lumumba is released and parliament is reconvened. Zorin also reiterated the Soviet charge that Hammarskjold has failed to carry out previous Security Council mandates.

Colonel Roger Trinquier, the French officer who reportedly is to become the chief of Tshombe's Katanga armed forces,

8 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
