Yemen: The director general of the Yemeni Foreign Ministry told the American charge on 3 October that the Yemeni treasury is "virtually empty," and requested urgent American assistance. The charge reports the consensus of Western representatives in Taiz that Yemen is approaching bankruptcy and that the Imam's dominant position will be endangered unless the government can soon find an estimated $3,000,000 to $5,000,000 to tide it over. The Yemeni director general will be visiting Moscow this month, at which time the USSR may seek to bolster its influence in Yemen by offering economic assistance.

India: Prime Minister Nehru told Ambassador Bunker on 24 September that the immediate cause of the Sino-Indian border problem is Peiping's irritation over India's treatment of the Dalai Lama, but that eventually there would have been trouble over the border anyway. Nehru said the Chinese have always had an "aggressive nature," which manifests itself particularly when the Chinese feel powerful as a nation, and that they consider Indians to be "second class."

Indonesia: Chinese Communist pressures on the Indonesian Government to repeal a decree banning foreign retail merchants in rural areas of Indonesia have been "terrific," according to Foreign Minister Subandrio. The Chinese ambassador has argued the issue heatedly with Subandrio, and leaders of the Chinese Communist community have threatened to bring down the government by economic retaliation. Sukarno is reported to have been shocked by the unfriendly Chinese attitude.

(Page 1)

III. THE WEST

Ecuador: Expect widespread disturbances if President Ponce attends the 9 October independence celebration in Guayaquil, where rioting occurred on 1 and 4 October. Guayaquil is the stronghold of opposition elements, and a center of economic unrest, which the Communists are attempting to exploit with new aggressive tactics. The city, Ecuador's largest, displayed hostility toward Ponce during his last visit there in July. In June it was the scene of extensive violence which threatened the stability of his government. (Page 2)

Panama: Chronic dissatisfaction with the traditional ruling oligarchy in Panama resulted in a "hunger march" on the capital on 5 October. Hundreds of unemployed workers and other disgruntled groups took part in a demonstration to demand enactment of economic relief measures by the newly convened National Assembly. (Page 3)
