[PAGE 01]
22 February 1960  
Copy No. C 67

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR and Israeli military forces strengthened; Cairo anticipates army coup in Iraq in near future

Indonesia--Lack of rapport between Khrushchev and Sukarno may obviate any "deal" between the two.

Indian high official believes India may be compelled to recognize East Germany by end of 1960 despite Nehru's avowed intention not to do so in near future.

III. THE WEST

Initial series of French nuclear tests to involve three additional shots of lighter, smaller devices; weapon device not expected for a year.

Peruvian Communist congressman's request to Moscow for disaster relief brings reported offer of $7,100,000 loan.

Cuban Government reportedly to procure bloc arms and ammunition and British-built aircraft from UAR.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  
22 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel-Iraq: While no new UAR troop movements into Sinai have been noted, some reserve units reportedly have been called up in both Syria and Egypt. Units deployed in Sinai have been issued extra artillery ammunition. Some additional Syrian troops have been ordered to the Israeli frontier. Nasir was informed that Lebanese Army intelligence had information that certain Israeli Army units had been strengthened along the Syrian border, but that these measures appeared to be precautionary and that no attack against Syria was expected.

Indonesia: Indonesian Army leaders and civilian non-communist government elements are hopeful that the lack of rapport between President Sukarno and Khrushchev and the latter's casual attitude and behavior, apparently irritating to Sukarno, will obviate a "deal" between the two. Dependable sources earlier told American officials they believed Sukarno was willing to include Communists in the Indonesian cabinet and further reduce the army's power in return for major economic and military assistance from the USSR.

[PAGE 05]
India - East Germany: Indian Foreign Ministry Secretary Dutt believes India may be compelled to recognize East Germany by the end of 1960. Although Nehru has made it clear to East German representatives that he has no intention of extending such recognition in the near future, Dutt currently believes trade and political considerations may force Nehru to change his position.

III. THE WEST

France: The initial series of French nuclear tests is expected to involve three additional explosions of lighter, smaller devices. The next shot is planned before May and possibly within a month. The third and fourth shots in the series are planned for the fall of 1960, presumably after September, when the summer heat abates. A version of the device suitable for use as a weapon is not expected, however, for about a year. The extent of adverse foreign reaction to the first test has reportedly annoyed President De Gaulle and will probably stimulate France to study means for underground testing. One of the three remaining shots may be an underground test, although the site has not yet been selected.

Peru: A Peruvian Communist congressman has requested Moscow to grant a loan for reconstruction in the area of southern Peru affected by the earthquake on 15 January and is said to have received an encouraging response. The reported reply offered a loan of $7,100,000--not a usual form of Soviet disaster relief--conditioned on official government acceptance from Lima. While the conservative Peruvian Government would prefer not to accept this offer, Prime Minister Beltran informed the US Embassy in Lima that he was on the spot, intimating that he might feel obliged to accept.

Cuba: The Castro government's growing rapport with the UAR may be used to facilitate purchase of arms and the aircraft Castro has been seeking in many countries.

22 Feb 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 06]
Czech arms and ammunition will be sent to Cuba under cover of a recent UAR-Cuban barter transaction. Cuba is purchasing obsolescent British-built aircraft from the Egyptian Air Force.

22 Feb 60     DAILY BRIEF     iii

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT  
The Vice President  
Executive Offices of the White House  
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs  
Scientific Adviser to the President  
Director of the Budget  
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization  
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination  
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities  
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy  
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department  
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State  
The Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State  
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration  
The Counselor  
Director, International Cooperation Administration  
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense  
The Secretary of Defense  
The Deputy Secretary of Defense  
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs  
The Secretary of the Army  
The Secretary of the Navy  
The Secretary of the Air Force  
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff  
Commandant, United States Marine Corps  
The Director, The Joint Staff  
Chief of Staff, United States Army  
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy  
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force  
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations  
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff  
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army  
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy  
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force  
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe  
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce  
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation  
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission  
The Chairman

National Security Agency  
The Director

National Indications Center  
The Director

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 08]
