France-Algeria: Disturbances in Algeria have assumed critical proportions with thousands of Moslems participating for the first time. French Army troops have been forced to act against the Moslems. The French troops had adopted a "passive" defense against European demonstrators, leaving the active burden to security police. The European group, who will be angered by the Moslem action, has appeared poorly organized but might gain cohesion if either or both of the rightist leaders Pierre Lagaillarde and General Salan reach Algeria from Spain.

Laos: Military reinforcements for a possible attack on Vientiane by General Phoumi apparently are continuing to arrive in that area. In the capital itself, an extreme leftist cabinet minister, Quinim Pholsena, reportedly has taken charge of the government in the absence of Souvanna and the remainder of his cabinet. Souvanna, now in Phnom Penh, is said by his associates to be planning to send some cabinet members to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping to seek active support for the neutralization of Laos as formerly proposed by Cambodian chief of state Prince Sihanouk. Meanwhile, observed four howitzers, approximately equivalent to US 105-mm. howitzers, being unloaded from two Soviet aircraft at Vientiane airfield; this materiel, probably the forerunner of other supplies, may have been arranged for during Quinim Pholsena's recent trip to Hanoi. (Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Ecuador: Anti-US sentiment is increasing in Ecuador and pressure is building up for the establishment of relations with the USSR and Communist China as a result of the 7 December declaration by the guarantor powers of the Rio Protocol. The guarantors are the United States, Brazil, Chile, and Argentina. The declaration upheld the validity of the Rio Protocol of 1942, which provides for a definitive settlement of the border dispute between Ecuador and Peru, and denied the right of either country to renounce the protocol unilaterally. Anti-US fervor has been whipped up by speeches of the

12 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
