Portuguese Defense Minister Pressing President to Install
New Cabinet

President Thomaz, who had been informed by Salazar of the latter's meeting with Moniz on 28-29 March, reportedly has not reacted to the demands put to him by Moniz on 5 April for extensive policy changes.
Moniz' next step will be to send a trusted emissary to inform Thomaz that the army means business and that he must use his presidential authority to replace the prime minister, after explaining to Salazar that a military takeover is the alternative to retirement. There is some reason to believe that this emissary has already talked with Thomaz without result.

Moniz and the military would reportedly back a new cabinet named by Thomaz. It would have to be broadly based to include various factions within the government. Marcello Caetano, former minister of the presidency, is mentioned as a successor to Salazar, as is Finance Minister Antonio Pinto Barbosa. Moniz, however, is not optimistic of action from Thomaz, who was hand-picked by Salazar as party candidate for the presidency in June 1958.

Moniz has on previous occasions failed to follow through on demands for policy changes. In mid-February he is said to have given Salazar a virtual ultimatum that if the government did not undertake the socio-economic reforms in the African provinces before the UN General Assembly reconvened on 7 March, the Defense Ministry would "take the matter into its own hands."

It is possible that Salazar may try to forestall further moves on the part of Moniz by a cabinet reshuffle. A "remodeling" reportedly was under consideration in mid-March for the latter part of the month and was then postponed until after French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville's visit to Lisbon on 8 April.
the National Union, which is the only legal political party, the international security police (PIDE), and the rightist National Front, considered as a backer of former Defense Minister Santos Costa, expect to profit by changes and might react unfavorably if their interests suffered significantly.

11 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
