Ghana recognized Gizenga, and other bloc and some neutralist states will probably follow suit. The controlled UAR press has reported that Nasir "will fully recognize" Gizenga's regime as "a lawful and national government."

Laos: the proposal for a neutral nations commission in Laos had been "almost completely accepted" by the cabinet and would be considered shortly by the King and the council of ministers. If a favorable decision is reached, either the government or the King will make a declaration of neutrality and issue an invitation to the commission. Phoumi would go to Phnom Penh after the meeting to offer Souvanna Phouma a high post in a broadened government.

While Laotian officials thus appear to appreciate the need for political steps to ease the Laotian crisis, there is as yet no assurance that they will carry through, or that Souvanna would receive their overtures favorably.
(Backup, Page 5) (Map)

Indonesia: A territorial army commander has publicly admitted Indonesia's infiltration attempts in New Guinea and has described them as legal, claiming that the territory is part of Indonesia. Foreign Minister Subandrio subsequently charged the Dutch with aiding antigovernment guerrillas in East Indonesia and reiterated that Indonesia cannot ignore Dutch reinforcements in New Guinea.
(Backup, Page 6)

Austria: Chancellor Julius Raab has sent a letter to the People's party conference in session this week at Semmering in which, according to a reliable source of the US Embassy in Vienna, he announced his intention to resign "in the near future," probably around the first of April. Raab, who assumed office in April 1953, has recommended as his successor Alfons Gorbach, present chairman of the party and a strong right-winger. The source foresees no serious controversy within the party over the selection of Gorbach and infers that it will be satisfactory to the USSR, which apparently anticipates no change in Raab's policy of maintaining friendly relations with Moscow and opposing Austrian membership in the European Economic Community (Common Market), both of which the USSR considers essential to the maintenance of Austrian neutrality. (Backup, Page 8)

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS
A. (No change from last week)
B. (No change from last week)
C. The Communist forces in Laos continue their delaying tactics along the approaches to the Plaine des Jarres,
