II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Situation

The movement of government troops into the strategic area of Tapanuli, which lies immediately north of the dissident centers of Padang and Bukittinggi, apparently is coordinated with the continuing westward drive of Djakarta troops through Central Sumatra. The two drives probably are intended to meet the scheduled deadline for the final assault in mid-April on the strongholds of the revolutionary government.

The Tapanuli commander has been permitting dissident forces free access into his territory and has refused orders from Djakarta to disarm them. The government has refrained from entering Tapanuli heretofore, apparently fearing such action would widen the area of revolt. As yet, however, the Tapanuli commander has made no military move against government troops.

Prime Minister Djuanda told the American ambassador on 9 April that when Padang and Bukittinggi were occupied, Djakarta would declare the revolt over and the revolutionary government dissolved. He said this should happen very soon, probably by 15 April. President Sukarno also reiterated Djakarta's determination for a quick military defeat of the Central Sumatran regime in a speech on 8 April in Central Java.

Both Djakarta and the dissidents are reported renewing pressure on the commander in South Sumatra, Lt. Col. Barlian, to abandon his neutral position. So far, however, no significant change in his attitude is apparent.

Djuanda undercut earlier statements by Foreign Minister Subandrio when he told the American ambassador there was little likelihood of any positive immediate anti-Communist action unless the Communists gave the army an excuse to crack down on them. The prime minister thought overt militant action by the Communists was an extremely remote possibility.

The government has relieved the Indonesian ambassador in Rome because of his sympathetic attitude toward the dissidents. Apparently, however, he has taken sizable embassy funds with him.
