[PAGE 01]
6 June 1953

Copy No. 61

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Malenkov associate reportedly appointed to All-Union Secretariat (page 3).
2. Unusual communications change in Eastern Europe (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Thai military leaders favor early appeal to UN on Laos (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Terrorists believed responsible for recent Israeli attacks on Jordan (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Leftward swing in French Assembly seen closer (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA
6. Argentine-Soviet trade talks to resume in Buenos Aires (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Malenkov associate reportedly appointed to All-Union Secretariat:

P. K. Ponomarenko has been appointed to the All-Union Secretariat in place of S. D. Ignatiev, who was dismissed on 7 April for his connection with the incident of the doctors' plot.

Comment: This reported appointment would support the thesis that Malenkov retains control over the appointments of top-level personnel.

Ponomarenko was a member of the secretariat and minister of agricultural procurement until the reorganization after Stalin's death in March. He was then appointed head of the newly created Ministry of Culture, which controls all propaganda media, and an alternate member of the party presidium. He was associated with Malenkov in the 1943 committee charged with re-establishing Soviet control in the areas liberated from the German occupation, and his appointment to the secretariat following Zhdanov's death in August 1948 was the first of several apparently sponsored by Malenkov.

2. Unusual communications change in Eastern Europe:

Comment: No disciplinary action or severe security measures apparently resulted from the defection of the first Polish pilot, although pilots at a base in northern Poland were subsequently not allowed within twenty miles of the Baltic coast.

[PAGE 04]
As a result of the 20 May defection, however, it is probable that more stringent security measures will be adopted and the political reliability of Polish air force personnel re-evaluated.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Thai military leaders favor early appeal to UN on Laos:

Thai military leaders in late May unanimously opposed Premier Phibun's proposal to postpone indefinitely presentation of the Laos situation to the UN, according to the British charge in Bangkok. They reportedly feared that such action would result in suspension of American arms shipments.

Police Director General Phao took the position, moreover, that it would be better to appeal to the UN now, before more active Chinese Communist intervention in Southeast Asia would cause Peiping to consider such an appeal as provocative.

Comment: It is believed that the Thai may postpone presenting the Laotian problem to the UN until the French government crisis has been resolved.

The extent of American military support has always been a paramount consideration of Thai military leaders in formulating their policies in the cold war. Phao's reported attitude is a clear indication of how the Thai would waver in the face of serious Chinese Communist pressure.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Terrorists believed responsible for recent Israeli attacks on Jordan:

The British ambassador in Amman believes 26 May attacks on Jordanian frontier villages were committed by members of the outlawed

[PAGE 05]
Israeli terrorist Stern gang. His belief is based on conclusions reached by Glubb Pasha, British head of the Arab Legion, who conducted a thorough investigation in Jordan and talked with the British service attaches stationed in Tel Aviv.

Comment: American consul general Tyler in Jerusalem previously reported an official Israeli investigation indicated that Israeli terrorists might be trying to precipitate war between Israel and Jordan. These elements, not amenable to government control, have long pressed for an expansion of Israeli territory and have been aided in their activities by Tel Aviv's tendency to blame border incidents on the Arabs.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Leftward swing in French Assembly seen closer:

The American embassy in Paris believes that the failure of Mendes-France to win the premiership indicates that further search during the present crisis will again have to be directed toward the right center, probably enlarged to include a substantial number of Gaullists.

Nevertheless, the embassy concludes, the time of fundamental change in orientation to a left-center majority in the assembly is closer than had been thought. A program capable of attracting the rank and file of the Socialists and center party deputies now exists for the first time. Its salient elements would include austerity, redistribution of the economic burden, and emphasis on investment.

Foreign affairs were a prominent factor but EDC played only a minor role. Special consideration was given to Indochina, which will remain in the forefront of assembly discussions at least until the current crisis is resolved.

Comment: Should the assembly reject Bidault, who is Auriol's current choice, as seems more likely now because of Radical Socialist pique over his refusal to support Mendes-France, ex-Premier Edgar Faure has a good chance to be invested. He favors much the same domestic economic program as Mendes-France, and while likewise

[PAGE 06]
"soft" on the Indochina question, escapes the liability of the latter's earlier outspoken stand on withdrawal.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Argentine-Soviet trade talks to resume in Buenos Aires:

Foreign Minister Remorino has informed Ambassador Nufer in Buenos Aires that a Soviet mission to complete details on Argentine-USSR trade talks is expected shortly. The proposed agreement calls for Argentina to export $100,000,000 worth of hides, wool and fats in exchange for Soviet railroad wheels, rails and other manufactures.

Remorino asked Nufer to assure Washington that no political provision will be included and no materials considered strategic by the United States will be exported by Argentina.

Comment: Remorino's assurances are especially significant since President Peron is believed to be considering renewing overtures to improve relations with Washington.

Argentina and the USSR, which have had no direct trade since 1947, began talks in Buenos Aires last October, according to communications intelligence. Argentina, however, does have trade agreements with the Satellites.

If this agreement is on an annual basis, Argentina would probably find it difficult to export such large quantities. The Soviet Union could supply the categories it has agreed to export by drawing on Satellite sources.
