Situation in Ceylon

Prime Minister Bandaranaike's government has been further weakened as a result of parliamentary developments and continuing leftist-led strike activity. Reaction in Ceylon to the government's throne speech opening Parliament on 30 June has been unusually critical. The lack of constructive new proposals to alleviate the country's worsening economic and political problems--in effect an admission by the government that it can remain in office only by avoiding controversial issues--has further damaged Bandaranaike's prestige.

Despite its bare majority, however, the government probably will survive a parliamentary vote following debate on the speech on 8 or 9 July, as some members of the opposition apparently are reluctant to force national elections at this time.

Leftist political and labor leaders continue their effort to discredit the government and increase their support through recurrent strike activity. While five small Colombo port unions have accepted Bandaranaike's concessions and returned to work, the most powerful group--led by the Trotskyite Lanka Sama Samaja party (LSSP)--has decided to remain on strike despite a government ultimatum. LSSP leaders also threaten to call out workers in commercial firms on 6 July and may attempt to stage a general strike.

Army troops ordered into the port on 25 June are still trying to handle some cargo, raising the possibility of clashes with those workers who have returned. Mobilization of "volunteer" groups by the government to act as strike breakers may lead to additional violence.

Deteriorating political and economic conditions are encouraging various conservative groups to consider "direct action" to replace the present parliamentary government with authoritarian rule. While the Governor General's order of 26 June mobilizing the armed-forces reserves increases opportunities for such action, there is no indication that any group plans a move in the immediate future.

6 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
