II. ASIA-AFRICA

The Situation in Kerala

The campaign led by anti-Communist political and religious
groups to bring about the fall of the Communist government of
India's Kerala State appears to be approaching a point of crisis.
Demonstrations are occurring almost daily, with some 3,000
persons arrested to date, and two deaths were reported over the
past week end. Prime Minister Nehru apparently is not strongly
supporting the Congress party units in Kerala, however, and his
doubts concerning the constitutionality of the agitation may cause
the campaign to lose much momentum. This could result in the
Communists' continuing to stand firm, as they have to date. It
could also discredit the Congress and Praja Socialist parties,
which have led the political agitation, and make it difficult for
them to initiate another "all-out" effort against the Communists
in the future.

The state elements of the Congress party and the younger
national party leaders are still firmly convinced of the need to
oust the Communists by all possible means while feeling is run-
ning high. Nehru, however, arrived in Kerala for a three-day
visit the day before a new round of agitation was to have begun.
His publicized plans to talk to members of the Communist admin-
istration, as well as rumors that he may ask the Congress party
to call off its agitation in favor of a round-table discussion, may
delay further agitation while people wait to see what his visit pro-
duces. National leaders of the Praja Socialist party--the Congress'
major ally in Kerala--apparently fear that the Congress may let
them down; they plan to meet in Coimbatore, Mysore State, on
25 June to discuss the situation. PSP leader Thanu Pillai said on
18 June that if the Congress party withdrew from the direct-action
movement, it would only help to perpetuate Communist "misrule"
in Kerala.

If further violence does not occur, and if the anti-Communist
campaign loses additional momentum, Nehru would find it diffi-
cult to institute President's Rule--direct rule from New Delhi--
in Kerala on grounds of a breakdown of law and order.
