Sino-Indian Border Dispute Remains Deadlocked

The meeting between Nehru and Chou En-lai in April 1960 in New Delhi was a major attempt to repair the damage to their relations caused by the border incidents of 1959. Although the meeting was almost totally unproductive, the leaders did agree, primarily as a means of buying time and forestalling further incidents, to a series of meetings by Foreign Ministry experts to "compare" and "examine" the documentation upon which each side bases its border claims in the Indo-Tibetan region. The reports which Nehru has laid before Parliament comprise the findings of those experts.

The major points of difference which emerged from the technical talks were: (1) China's refusal to discuss with India the borders of Sikkim and Bhutan--Himalayan border states over which India exercises protectorate powers--thereby denying India's "special" relationship with these states; and (2) China's reported refusal to discuss the Ladakh area except on the basis of New Delhi's acknowledgment that Indian sovereignty over Kashmir is still in question.

Peiping will probably counter Indian charges that China's support for its border claims is "weak and sketchy" in contrast to the "wealth" of Indian evidence by alleging that India's claims involve territory taken from China by British "imperialists" at a time when India was under British rule. The Chinese will persist in their attempts to blame the border stalemate on New Delhi. Peiping's propaganda continues to describe the Chinese border accords with Burma and Nepal as evidence that only India's recalcitrance prevents the adoption of a compromise settlement in the Sino-Indian dispute. The Chinese are now said to be interested in opening negotiations with Pakistan for a demarcation of the Sino-Pakistani border--at least in the Hunza area. As part of its pressure tactics, Peiping may also bring increased pressure on Bhutan for bilateral discussion of the border.

Nehru faces an increasingly difficult problem. His efforts over the past year to pave the way for a peaceful solution have proved futile, a fact which critics inside and outside the Congress party will use with increasing vigor as the 1962 elections

15 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
