Moroccan Crown Prince Seems to Be Gaining Strength

Crown Prince Moulay Hassan, who is deputy premier of the government of King Mohamed V, seems to be steadily strengthening his position even though he continues to antagonize the democratic and liberal elements in Morocco. Several cabinet ministers who have disagreed with the prince or have become disgusted with what they consider his overbearing mien are rumored to have attempted to resign. The ministers apparently were dissuaded by the King's assurances that the prince would not get wholly out of hand. The minister of public works feels the King's patience with the prince and "his clique," who openly seek to "establish a dictatorship," is not unlimited.

The American Embassy in Rabat believes the King is becoming less and less a curb on the prince. Moulay Hassan's recent public and private remarks and his acceptance of invitations to visit Moscow and Peiping suggest that he is increasingly inclined to pursue a policy of nondependence. In his view this would have the advantage of permitting Morocco and himself to play the role of leader among newly independent states of Africa, of gaining the maximum benefits from playing the East against the West, and of gaining personal prestige by obtaining objectives of the leftist opposition, such as securing the evacuation of foreign troops.

The prince, who conducts governmental affairs with initiative and vigor, is further isolating the King by the removal of personal advisers such as former Director of National Security Mohamed Laghzaoui and the former director of the royal cabinet, Mohamed Hamiani. Moreover, he apparently has reorganized the military and internal security services so that they are more responsive to his control. The embassy believes the prince may increasingly mold the Moroccan Government to his purposes, eliminating those ministers who refuse to collaborate with him. The prince shows every sign of dominating both foreign and domestic policy in Morocco, but he may yet overreach himself with his father and conservative political parties.
