Congo Situation Eases

The continued arrival of United Nations troops and their dispersal throughout the Congo except in Katanga Province appear to have contributed to the easing of the tension in the Republic of the Congo. The withdrawal of Belgian forces from Leopoldville to the Belgian base at Kitona was effected on 23 July apparently without incident. Essential port, pipeline, and other transportation facilities are gradually being returned to operation, and some Belgian and other refugees are returning to the Congo.

Unemployment and food scarcities remain urgent problems, and UN authorities seek to enlist the services of trained administrators from other African states. Two members of the Belgian Communist party claim to have been approached by the Congo Government to accept positions as technical advisers,

The formal proposal of Katangan Premier Moise Tshombé that all six Congo provinces join in a federation of autonomous states may offer the possibility of a new approach for settling the problem of Katangan secession. Tshombe, who has failed to secure international recognition for an independent Katanga, now is attempting to enlist support for a loose confederation less likely to require rich Katanga to support the other provinces.

Premier Patrice Lumumba appears to have great hopes for a 50-year financial and management agreement which he signed with the Congo International Development Corporation, a newly created private organization. This agreement, which provides for the financing and developing of all natural resources and a technical assistance program, must be ratified by the Congo Parliament. The agreement may cause serious repercussions, however. The American ambassador in Leopoldville anticipates "trouble" when, as in the past, grandiose plans of the firm's president, Edgar Detwiler, fail to materialize.

Lumumba arrived in New York on 24 July for a ten-day visit to the United States and Canada in search of economic and technical assistance.

the Congolese UN delegate as saying Lumumba would travel to Moscow immediately thereafter. This is unconfirmed.
