Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma suggests that negotiations between representatives of the opposing sides in Laos should be held at Xieng Khouang, the location of his rump government. Vientiane is unlikely to accept this site, since acceptance would probably be portrayed by Communist propaganda as surrender to the "lawful government of Laos."

Souvanna left Moscow for Peiping on 21 April and is scheduled to arrive in Hanoi on 25 April. Presumably he will visit Xieng Khouang from there and then go to Luang Prabang for the late King's funeral. He hopes to be able to visit the US in early May before a conference on Laos is held.

The US Mission at Geneva has learned that a representative of the USSR's permanent delegation there has requested reservations for a 50-man delegation to participate in a conference on Laos at the "beginning of May." The Soviet official, in response to an inquiry regarding the level of Soviet representation, replied that it would be "the same as at the disarmament conference." Although the Soviet Union, in its 16 April aide-memoire, said that it assumed the conference would be conducted at the foreign ministers' level, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin had indicated to the UK ambassador on 5 April that the continuous presence of foreign ministers at the conference would be unnecessary. He said, however, that they should attend the opening of the conference to mark its importance.

Meanwhile, a proposal by Prince Sihanouk that the conference on Laos be postponed to 12 May appears to be meeting with general East-West approval.

North of Luang Prabang, a Pathet Lao company skirmished with government troops near Muong Sai on 20 April. According to the American army attaché, who visited Muong Sai on 18 April, the local Lao army commanders appeared dispirited and were convinced that an enemy attack was imminent. There were small scale clashes at several other points in Luang Prabang Province on 21 April, government forces on Route 13 north of the Phou Khoun road junction were under "heavy attack" earlier today. In central Laos,

22 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
