The Situation in Laos

A reliable American observer with Vang Pao's troops estimates that from five to seven days will be required to reorganize and resupply these units following their withdrawal on 7 June from Pa Dong. The Meos were described as being somewhat disorganized but not panicky; some were observed carrying crew-served weapons up to 81-mm. mortars during the withdrawal. Four 75-mm. howitzers and four 4.2-inch mortars were left in position at Pa Dong. The observer believes that Vang Pao's estimate of casualties--10 killed and 30 wounded--is conservative.

The royal government in early June arrested five Buddhist monks who claimed they were going to Xieng Khouang to study. One had been promised a study tour in Moscow, one a tour in Communist China, and another a tour in North Vietnam. Other recent reports indicate the establishment in Xieng Khouang of a religious study institute and extensive Pathet Lao proselytization among the monks. The Pathet Lao have long recognized the pivotal role of the religious orders, coining the slogan, "Who rules the pagodas, rules Laos." Pagodas are the functional center of Lao villages, and the village abbot is often a more effective and respected figure than the headmen or remote royal government officials. Pathet Lao leader Phoumi Vongvichit, during his tenure as minister of religion in the short-lived coalition government following the 1957 unification accords, was instrumental in spreading Pathet Lao influence in key monasteries.

In a 7 June conversation with Ambassador Harriman which centered on the situation in Pa Dong, Soviet delegate Pushkin disclaimed any Soviet responsibility for the Pathet Lao attack on the Meo units. He reiterated Souvanna Phouma's assertion that FAL forces were dropped into this Pathet Lao area after the cease-fire was established and thus provoked Communist retaliation. While he stressed that the USSR adheres to the statement on Laos in the Vienna communique, Pushkin maintained that the question of the cease-fire was a two-sided matter, and that if a cease-fire were to be effective, Phoumi's forces

9 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
