[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
30 April 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Iranian religious leader threatens anti-American campaign if aid is withheld (page 3).
3. Turkish Prime Minister interested in Greek-Yugoslav rapprochement (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Soviet officials in Austria interrupt telephone communications (page 6).
5. Contractual agreement threatened by new West German Senate line-up (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Iranian religious leader threatens anti-American campaign if aid is withheld:

Mullah Kashani, influential Iranian religious leader and supporter of Prime Minister Mossadeq, threatened on 25 April to start an extensive anti-American campaign throughout Asia if the United States did not immediately give Iran substantial financial and economic aid.

Kashani claimed that the United States was backing France and Britain against Iran and was being exploited by these nations. He insisted that unless Iran received United States aid, it would have to turn to the Soviet Union. He made these threats in the course of a lengthy conversation which he had requested with the American Ambassador.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
3. Turkish Prime Minister interested in Greek-Yugoslav rapprochement:

The Turkish Prime Minister, now visiting Athens, left the impression with Ambassador Purifoy that Turkey was "intensely interested and keenly anxious" that the Greeks make a real effort to engage in talks with Yugoslavia. The Prime Minister thought the Greeks were deterred from reaching a basic military understanding with the Yugoslavs because they thought that their NATO role precluded bilateral agreements. Greek leaders also were dubious about close relations with their Yugoslav neighbors because they did not know what would happen in the event of Tito's overthrow.

Comment: The Turks, genuinely interested in consolidating defense arrangements in the eastern Mediterranean, are attempting in various ways to put pressure on Greece to achieve more cordial relations with its northern neighbor.

There are indications that Yugoslavia now also favors closer military ties with both Greece and Turkey. Talks have already been held by officials of Turkey and Yugoslavia with the aim of improving political and economic relations between the two countries. The Turkish Foreign Minister reportedly will visit Belgrade in May.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Soviet officials in Austria interrupt telephone communications:

Austrian Minister of Interior Helmer reports that Soviet officials have insisted on changes in the Austrian communications net, and that on 28 April telephone connections in the area between Felixdorf and Wiener-Neustadt airfield were interrupted.

Simultaneous Soviet demands to establish direct telephone connections between two barracks in the Klosterneuberg area and between Vienna and Strasshof air base appear to confirm the suspicions of Austrian officials that the interruption of service is due to Soviet military requirements.

The Austrian cabinet is now considering a public statement and a protest to Soviet officials.

Comment: Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber recently reported that he had the impression that the Soviet officials in Austria are "planning some kind of move" and are awaiting instructions from Moscow.

Soviet forces are currently rotating into summer maneuver areas, but there is no indication of a buildup of Soviet military strength in Austria.

5. Contractual agreement threatened by new West German Senate line-up:

Chancellor Adenauer fears that instructions from the Social Democratic coalition government in Germany's new southwest state may block ratification of the contractual agreement by the Federal Senate. He has therefore urged the Allied High Commissioners to frame the related conventions to the agreement in such a way that Senate approval will not be required.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Although the Christian Democrats won a plurality in the 9 March election in the new state, now called Baden-Wuerttemburg, they were excluded from the state cabinet by a coalition of Free Democrats, Social Democrats, and representatives of a refugee bloc. This coalition will name the five representatives to the Federal Senate, where Adenauer's government now holds a precarious majority.

Should the new delegation to the Senate join the opposition, Adenauer's programs could be defeated or at least blocked in part.

- 7 -
