[PAGE 01]
SEC INFORMATION
30 April 1952
COPY FR 52
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
TOP SECRET SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
SOVIET UNION
1. High level of air activity continues in Chukotsk area (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. Iranian religious leader threatens anti-American campaign if aid is withheld (page 3).
3. Turkish Prime Minister interested in Greek-Yugoslav rapprochement (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Soviet officials in Austria interrupt telephone communications (page 6).
5. Contractual agreement threatened by new West German Senate line-up (page 6).
6. Italians consider American attitude at London talks on Trieste unfriendly (page 7).

****
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. High level of air activity continues in Chukotsk area:
the high number of air transport flights
from the Khabarovsk-Nikolayevsk area to
Povarny Krestik, unprecedented along this
route, continued through 26 April. Between
21 and 26 April, a total of 281 flights was noted. (See Map)

Comment: Although the purpose and significance of this activity cannot as yet be determined, the number of flights and pattern of activity suggest a shuttle-type operation, possibly intended to provide logistical support for a redeployment of Soviet air units to the Chukotsk area. It is also possible that the aircraft may have been transporting supplies for some unidentified military or economic activity in the area.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

Iranian religious leader threatens anti-American campaign if aid is withheld:
Mullah Kashani, influential Iranian religious leader and supporter of Prime Minister Mossadeq, threatened on 25 April to start an extensive anti-American campaign throughout Asia if the United States did not immediately give Iran substantial financial and economic aid.

Kashani claimed that the United States was backing France and Britain against Iran and was being exploited by these nations. He insisted that unless Iran received United States aid, it would have to turn to the Soviet Union. He made these threats in the course of a lengthy conversation which he had requested with the American Ambassador.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Comment: Kashani's remarks appear to be part of the government's effort to stimulate American aid by arousing United States alarm. The government itself, however, is unlikely to initiate an anti-American campaign as long as it has hopes of procuring financial assistance from the United States.

Iranian officials are currently promoting the belief that the recent exchange of notes on American military aid foreshadows increased United States aid of all kinds.

Turkish Prime Minister interested in Greek-Yugoslav rapprochement:
The Turkish Prime Minister, now visiting Athens, left the impression with Ambassador Peurifoy that Turkey was "intensely interested and keenly anxious" that the Greeks make a real effort to engage in talks with Yugoslavia. The Prime Minister thought the Greeks were deterred from reaching a basic military understanding with the Yugoslavs because they thought that their NATO role precluded bilateral agreements. Greek leaders also were dubious about close relations with their Yugoslav neighbors because they did not know what would happen in the event of Tito's overthrow.

Comment: The Turks, genuinely interested in consolidating defense arrangements in the eastern Mediterranean, are attempting in various ways to put pressure on Greece to achieve more cordial relations with its northern neighbor.

There are indications that Yugoslavia now also favors closer military ties with both Greece and Turkey. Talks have already been held by officials of Turkey and Yugoslavia with the aim of improving political and economic relations between the two countries. The Turkish Foreign Minister reportedly will visit Belgrade in May.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

Soviet officials in Austria interrupt telephone communications:
Austrian Minister of Interior Helmer reports that Soviet officials have insisted on changes in the Austrian communications net, and that on 28 April telephone connections in the area between Felixdorf and Wiener-Neustadt airfield were interrupted.

Simultaneous Soviet demands to establish direct telephone connections between two barracks in the Klosterneuberg area and between Vienna and Strasshof air base appear to confirm the suspicions of Austrian officials that the interruption of service is due to Soviet military requirements.

The Austrian cabinet is now considering a public statement and a protest to Soviet officials.

Comment: Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber recently reported that he had the impression that the Soviet officials in Austria are "planning some kind of move" and are awaiting instructions from Moscow.

Soviet forces are currently rotating into summer maneuver areas, but there is no indication of a buildup of Soviet military strength in Austria.

Contractual agreement threatened by new West German Senate line-up:
Chancellor Adenauer fears that instructions from the Social Democratic coalition government in Germany's new southwest state may block ratification of the contractual agreement by the Federal Senate. He has therefore urged the Allied High Commissioners to frame the related conventions to the agreement in such a way that Senate approval will not be required.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Although the Christian Democrats won a plurality in the 9 March election in the new state, now called Baden-Wuerttemburg, they were excluded from the state cabinet by a coalition of Free Democrats, Social Democrats, and representatives of a refugee bloc. This coalition will name the five representatives to the Federal Senate, where Adenauer's government now holds a precarious majority.

Should the new delegation to the Senate join the opposition, Adenauer's programs could be defeated or at least blocked in part.

Italians consider American attitude at London talks on Trieste unfriendly:
Premier de Gasperi considers that the American delegation to the London talks on Trieste is showing an unfriendly attitude toward Italian desires and exercising "a negative influence on the better disposed British," the serious reaction in Italy and "repercussions to the detriment of European integration itself" that would result unless the United States and Britain agreed to greater Italian participation in the administration of Zone A of Trieste.

Comment: This is the first official expression of Italian bitterness toward the United States over the Trieste issue. The Italians have heretofore consistently accused Britain of disregarding their interests in the area and have shown particular hostility toward the British military commander of Zone A.
