Indonesia-Netherlands: The recent arrival of Dutch naval
units, including the aircraft carrier Karel Doorman, in West
New Guinea--an area claimed by Indonesia--poses the possibil-
ity of an armed clash between Indonesian and Dutch forces. In-
donesian public concern over the Dutch naval movements has
been deliberately revived by the Djakarta government, and the
likelihood of a highly emotional speech on the subject by Pres-
ident Sukarno on 17 August, Indonesian independence day, will
further increase tension. The most critical period will be from
24 to 26 August when the Dutch ships are scheduled to be exercis-
ing north of New Guinea. Danger would appear to stem, not from
deliberate provocation by either side, but from chance encounters
between Indonesian air patrols and the Dutch ships, which could
lead to an unpremeditated incident.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel and Raul Castro's week-end harangues expressed
confidence and determination that neither the US, which Fidel
called "militarily second best," nor the "lackey foreign ministers
of the OAS," can stop the Cuban revolution and Latin America's
"liberation from the Yankee colonial yoke." The Castros' uncom-
promising vehemence and the decree in effect ordering confisca-
tion of most remaining American properties in Cuba came ten days
before the opening of the OAS foreign ministers' meetings. They
suggest that the Cuban leaders are convinced that US military inter-
vention in Cuba, which they might even be trying to provoke, would
enhance the prospects for Latin America's "revolution of libera-
tion."

Germany-UK-France: Adenauer, increasingly fearful that
Khrushchev may take advantage of the US election campaign to pre-
cipitate a crisis over Berlin and Germany, wants the top European
leaders to maintain frequent contact and a firm front during this
period. He apparently stressed these views to De Gaulle in Paris
on 29 July, and will probably do the same in his talks in Bonn with
Macmillan on 10 August. Direct consultations among the three
leaders are expected frequently in coming months. (Page 3)
