[PAGE 01]
3 November 1960
Copy No. C 74
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 NOVEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Moscow apparently has accepted Iranian proposal for "good-will mission" to USSR headed by Premier Sharif-Emami.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Gursel regime in Turkey, its prestige damaged by political trials and university dismissals, faces prospect of increasing organized opposition.
Situation in the Congo.

III. THE WEST
Leftists in El Salvador launch bid for power; situation appears heading for open clash between military and mobs stirred up by leftist agitation.
Possible threat to Panama's newly installed Chiari administration seen in activities of country's powerful Arias Madrid family.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Iran: The Soviet Union apparently has accepted an Iranian proposal for the dispatch of a "good-will mission" to the USSR headed by Prime Minister Sharif-Emami.

Soviet officials have renewed an invitation for a visit by the Shah's sister. Although the timing of the visits does not appear to have been worked out, Soviet policy makers probably hope such exchanges will bring about a more favorable climate for eventual Iranian willingness to make concessions to Soviet demands for a guarantee against foreign military bases of all types on Iranian soil. Sharif-Emami has claimed to an American official that he is firmly resolved to refuse to discuss "political" matters in Moscow[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: The Committee of National Union (CNU) which has ruled Turkey for over five months now faces the prospect of increasing organized opposition. The prestige of the Gursel regime has been somewhat damaged by its handling of the current mass political trial of former Menderes government officials, as well as by the widely criticized recent dismissal by the CNU of nearly 150 faculty members from Turkey's five universities. As long as the bulk of the military establishment remains loyal, however, the CNU should have little difficulty in controlling the country, although force may be necessary. (Page 3)
[PAGE 05]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Republic of the Congo: The projected trip to New York by UN representative Dayal--who is expected to leave Leopoldville shortly--appears designed in part to permit him to lend support to UN charges that Belgium and "independent" Katanga are obstructing the UN mission in the Congo.

Dayal is bringing pressure for a negotiated political settlement on all factions, but especially on anti-Lumumba elements. Dayal stated he had sent enemies of President Tshombe on a "conciliation" mission among warring Katangan tribesmen "in order to weaken Tshombe's position." Criticism by UN officials of the influx of Belgian returnees to the Congo stems in part from their belief that Belgian technicians are a major prop for the Tshombe regime and therefore an obstacle to Congo unity[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

III. THE WEST

El Salvador: Communists and other leftist elements launched a strong bid for power on 1 November, less than a week after the military coup that ousted the Lemus administration. Their demands, circulated in street manifestoes and radiobroadcasts, include the elimination of the military from the government. Ex-President Osorio, the military figure who masterminded the 26 October coup and sought to win backing from the leftists by having them included in the provisional government, now is reliably reported to be uneasy and not in full control. The situation appears moving rapidly toward an open clash between the military--which, according to sources of the US Embassy, is rent by internal dissension--and civilian mobs stirred up by leftist agitation. (Page 4)

Panama: Activities of the powerful Arias Madrid family are causing political uncertainty which could split President Chiari's weak coalition and threaten his month-old

3 NOV 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
administration. Influential ex-Presidents Arnulfo and Harmodio Arias and Harmodio's sons are exploiting the deep-seated social discontent in the country to arouse students and the restless lower classes and to obtain the ouster of National Guard Commandant Col. Bolivar Vallarino, who, despite his general unpopularity, has for some time been one of the major forces for stability in Panama. (Page 5)

3 Nov 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
USSR Apparently Agrees to Iranian Good-Will Mission

The Soviet Union has apparently accepted an Iranian proposal, first made to the Soviet ambassador in Tehran in early October, to send a "good-will mission" headed by Prime Minister Sharif-Emami to the USSR.

Soviet officials have also renewed an invitation for a visit by Princess Shams, sister of the Shah and honorary head of Iran's public aid organization. No date has been set for the visits.

Since the breakdown of Soviet-Iranian negotiations for a nonaggression pact and the conclusion of the US-Iranian bilateral defense pact in early 1959, relations between the USSR and Iran have been strained over the issue of Iranian participation in defense arrangements with Western countries. The Shah has offered on a number of occasions to give the USSR a guarantee to ban foreign missile bases from Iranian soil, while Khrushchev has demanded--as the price of "normal" relations--that the guarantee be extended to exclude foreign military bases of all types. Last April, Moscow rejected Iranian proposals for a similar goodwill mission to be headed by ex-Foreign Minister Aram and for a meeting between the Shah and Khrushchev, unless the Iranian Government would first agree to make concessions on the issue of banning foreign military bases.

When Sharif-Emami replaced the stanchly anti-Communist Eqbal as prime minister late in August, the USSR relaxed its propaganda attacks on the Shah and the regime's policies and the Soviet ambassador returned to Tehran. Moscow may also have decided to drop its demand for concessions prior to any good-will visit in the hope that a more favorable political climate would eventually result in Iranian willingness to yield on the issue of foreign military bases. Khrushchev told the Iranian foreign minister in a talk in New York that an Iranian concession on this point is necessary for "normal" relations.

Sharif-Emami has told Western officials that he considers improving relations with the USSR one of the most important tasks
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]facing his government, but that he is not willing to impair Iran's ties with the West. The prime minister, who has displayed reluctance to head the mission, told an American official that he intends to avoid any discussion of political issues[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 09]
Turkey's Military Regime Losing Popular Support

The Committee of National Union (CNU) is being widely criticized in Turkey and faces the prospect of increasing organized resistance. Popular criticism currently ranges from expressions of general disenchantment to organized conspiracy. The most recent plot, reported to include retired army officers, air force noncommissioned officers, and civilians, led to several arrests and prompted special security measures throughout the military establishment. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]The plotters reportedly had planned to overthrow the CNU between 28 October and 1 November[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].

Discontent has also apparently increased among the peasants and in intellectual circles, contributing to the general atmosphere of uneasiness. There is no indication to date that the regime's conduct of the mass political trial of former Menderes government officials has succeeded in dispelling any of Menderes' popularity. In fact, the CNU's attempt to propagandize the trial has caused more damage to the prestige of the interim regime than to that of its predecessor. Nearly 50 of the accused face possible death sentences, and concern over the fate of ex-Premier Menderes is common to most expressions of discontent. General Gursel and Foreign Minister Sarper, fully aware of the foreign as well as domestic impact of political executions, are working discreetly to avoid death sentences. The final decision will rest with a majority vote of the entire membership of the CNU, among which there appears to be considerable support for the proposed executions.

The CNU is also being strongly criticized for the recent dismissal of nearly 150 faculty members from Turkey's five universities. The dismissals were followed by numerous faculty resignations and student boycotts in protest of the government's action. In the face of the strong protest, the CNU is apparently reconsidering its action.

If the regime continues to lose prestige, support for the CNU may also diminish among the military, enhancing the possibility of further instability. As long as the bulk of the army remains loyal, however, the CNU should be able to maintain control, although force and further repression may be necessary.
[PAGE 10]
Salvadoran Communists Join in Strong Leftist Bid for Power

Communists and other leftist elements in El Salvador launched a strong bid for power on 1 November, less than a week after the military coup that ousted the Lemus administration. Leftist demands, circulated in street manifestoes and in Communist-prepared radiobroadcasts, call for the immediate elimination from the governing junta and the cabinet of the "tools" of ex-President Osorio, who, they charge, is responsible for "all the political, moral, and administrative ills" of the country. The three military members of the six-man junta and the three military cabinet members are all known supporters of Osorio, who is probably the most influential military figure in the country. The demands, therefore, are in effect a call for the removal of all military officers from leading positions in the civil government. Under present circumstances, this would mean turning the regime over to the highly articulate leftists, who are strongly influenced by the Communists.

Osorio, who as president from 1950 to 1956 inaugurated moderate reforms designed to alleviate the country's deep-seated socio-economic problems, masterminded the coup against Lemus. He retains wide popularity among lower income groups and sought to win leftist backing for the junta by having leftists included in the provisional government. Osorio apparently intended to play a dominant role in the provisional government from behind the scenes. Now, however, he is reported to be very uneasy and worried, and his friends fear he may lose control.

The situation appears to be moving rapidly toward an open clash between the military and the civilian mobs stirred up by Communist agitation. Although the military is still the major force in the country, sources of the American Embassy claim that the army is split with internal dissension and may be seriously weakened. Unless Osorio or another popular military figure shows decisive leadership in meeting the leftist challenge, the Salvadoran Government could soon become completely dominated by pro-Communist elements. Such a development would have very serious implications for the stability of other Central American governments, particularly Guatemala and Nicaragua.
[PAGE 11]
Political Agitation in Panama

Activities of the powerful Arias Madrid family are causing political uncertainty and instability in Panama which could split President Chiari's weak coalition and threaten his month-old administration.

Through Finance Minister Gilberto Arias, who represents the family's strong influence in the coalition, many strategic government posts have been filled by known leftists and seditious elements. Although he denied on 28 October that he was advocating revolutionary overthrow of the government, Roberto Arias has been ranting about the inevitability of social revolution to Panama's restless students and lower classes since his return from political exile a few weeks ago. Roberto led an abortive revolt against former President de la Guardia--whose ambassador in London he had been--which coincided with a Cuban-sponsored expedition against Panama in the spring of 1959. He is closely associated with irresponsible pro-Cuban revolutionaries, boasts of his friendship with Fidel Castro, and is known to be in contact with the Cuban Embassy in Panama.

Behind his sons is powerful lawyer, publisher, and businessman Harmodio Arias, himself a former president who for 40 years has plotted with and used any group he considers useful to his determination to dominate the country.

Also recently returned to political activity is Harmodio's half brother Arnulfo, a demagogic political strong man who retains strong popular appeal despite having twice been ousted from the presidency. Although Arnulfo usually operates as a lone wolf, he has worked with Harmodio when it suited their purposes.

The activities of the Arias group are strengthened by ownership of three newspapers and some radio stations which they use for all-out campaigns such as the current one to oust National Guard Commandant Bolivar Vallarino, who has in recent years used his power to maintain Panamanian political stability.

President Chiari may soon be forced to break with the Arias forces, although such action might bring down his government. He will probably postpone his plan to reorganize the unpopular Guard and to transfer Vallarino, for fear of losing his strongest support.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
