East Germany Bars Churchmen From East Berlin
The religious services were held in connection with
the all-German Evangelical Church synod now meeting in
West Berlin. Past synod sessions in both East and West
Berlin have been attended by large numbers of ecclesias-
tics and laymen from both parts of the country. Prior to
scheduling this year's synod, East German churchmen
sounded out the regime on its attitude toward permitting
synod sessions in East Berlin. The chairman of the State
Office for Church Affairs indicated that the regime might
tolerate a "purely religious service" but under no circum-
stances would it permit a business meeting.
In a speech on 9 February East German party boss
Ulbricht made clear that his regime intended to use the
church meeting to drive a wedge between church members
in East and West Germany. He said that Bishop Dibelius
of Berlin-Brandenburg and other prominent churchmen
"have no business in the GDR or its capital." Nevertheless,
on 12 February Dibelius was permitted to attend the reli-
gious service in East Berlin, perhaps because he is a West
Berliner, rather than a West German, and the regime does
not see its way clear to bar West Berliners from the Soviet
sector at this time.
This is the second recent step to undercut the ties be-
tween the church in East and West Germany. On 12 January,
the Ulbricht regime announced that the Evangelical Church
would not be permitted to hold its congress (Kirchentag) in
East Berlin in July, on grounds that the selection of Berlin
for the meeting was intended as "provocation" and an occa-
sion for "revanchist outbursts." The regime offered to per-
mit the meeting in some East German city, such as Leipzig,
but flatly refused to guarantee that anyone desiring to attend
would be allowed to do so.
Earlier, East German officials sharply reduced the
financial aid which the church in West Germany is allowed
to transmit to East German congregations. The East Ger-
man people give lip service to the regime's objectives
but continue to adhere to the church as one of the few
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
