I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Malayan Proposals for Southeast Asian Friendship And Economic Treaty

Malayan Prime Minister Abdul Rahman is going ahead with his plans to call an early meeting of Southeast Asia's political leaders in an effort to organize formally his proposal for a Southeast Asian Friendship and Economic Treaty (SEAFET).

Malaya's interest in the new grouping stems in part from its marked distrust of the larger Afro-Asian schemes which it sees being exploited by both Communists and Arab extremists. Malayan leaders hope that SEAFET can become an effective counter by limiting its membership strictly to Southeast Asia and by restricting itself to practical economic and cultural activity. The proposals carefully avoid any hint of political and military entanglements and stress instead consultations to promote interregional trade and economic development, including common facilities for transportation and for commodity distribution, educational and technical exchanges, and similar relatively noncontroversial matters.

Rahman apparently anticipates close cooperation from President Garcia of the Philippines and Premier Sarit of Thailand, who have themselves voiced similar ideas. South Vietnam, Laos, and Burma also have unofficially indicated considerable interest in the Malayan proposals, but Burma's position may be altered by general elections now scheduled for 6 February. Rahman, who is reportedly very anxious to encourage Burmese membership, may postpone proposing a firm date for the first SEAFET meeting until after the new government is formed and can be consulted. Cambodia and Indonesia have apparently rejected the proposals, although Rahman is hopeful the Indonesians will join once the organization is established.

Rahman originally proposed SEAFET during a visit to the Philippines in January 1959. Malayan action on the proposal dragged, however, during the extended state and federal election campaigns and the subsequent governmental reorganization.

20 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
