Israeli Chartered Ship to Attempt Transit of Suez Canal

A new incident in the dispute over Israeli shipping via the Suez Canal could develop when the West German merchant ship Klostertor, now believed under Israeli charter, leaves Haifa on 10 August and attempts to pass through the canal en route to Japan. The ship may carry some cargo from Haifa which would be subject to confiscation by the UAR.

The Klostertor has been on the Arab blacklist of ships which trade with Israel since 9 March, but such blacklisting, which deprives affected ships of services and facilities at Arab ports, would not necessarily bar it from the canal. If, however, the UAR believes the ship is chartered by an Israeli firm or by any firm in which Israelis own an interest, the ship almost certainly will be prohibited from the canal, in accordance with previous UAR policy. The ship most recently involved in this dispute, the Greek-owned Astypalea, was released on 10 April after nearly five months of detention at Port Said for attempting to carry cement through the canal under Israeli charter.

UAR sensitivity on the issue has recently increased as a result of platform statements by American political parties urging free navigation of the canal. Nasir responded in a speech on 26 July by asserting that the UAR's canal policy will be determined by the UAR alone.

Cairo's press and radio also charged last week that a "new plot" was revealed at the International Transport Workers' Federation conference in Bern, where a resolution was adopted calling for joint measures against the UAR if it does not refrain from interfering with freedom of navigation in the Suez Canal. A Cairo newspaper attributes the resolution to American sponsorship, although Swiss sources in Bern say the initiative for it came from the Danish delegation. The Danes apparently are still upset over UAR treatment of the Inge Toft, a Danish ship which was held at Port Said from May 1959 until 9 February 1960, when its Israeli cargo was unloaded and the ship released.

10 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
