France Makes New Settlement Offer to Morocco

The French ambassador in Morocco has resumed "serious discussions" with King Mohamed V on outstanding French-Moroccan problems, according to a senior French Embassy official. On 13 June he made a preliminary offer providing for France to give up its military bases in Morocco, not excepting its major naval and naval air installations at Kenitra (Port Lyautey) and Agadir, when evacuation of American Air Force bases is completed in 1963. Paris probably will concentrate on obtaining a "reasonable settlement" of the extensive property claims of French nationals in Morocco. It would prefer to let the frontier questions wait, pending Mauritania's anticipated accession to independence and clarification of Algeria's future status.

This new French move appears consistent with De Gaulle's general policy of physical French withdrawal from Africa in exchange for good relations with the new states there. In Tunisia, France has already withdrawn from all military installations except the base at Bizerte, which it maintains is essential for the defense of French interests in the Mediterranean. There have been intermittent negotiations on French property in Tunisia, but no settlement has yet been reached, although the French holdings there are smaller and less complex than those in Morocco.

Although French officials expect the King's government to be more tractable than that of former left-wing Premier Abdullah Ibrahim, the King will seek maximum French concessions in line with his proclaimed policies of obtaining commitments during 1960 for the evacuation of all foreign troops, Moroccanizing the administration and economy, and "regaining lost territories." The King will be especially wary of giving the nationalists a chance to charge him with having sold out to France. A French official in Rabat claims that the King asked that talks not proceed too rapidly "lest the opposition be encouraged to attack the results solely on the grounds of undue haste," and anticipates that several months will pass before results become apparent.

17 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
