Japanese Government May Concede to North Korean Terms
On Repatriation Issue

The repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to North Korea is rapidly becoming a major issue in the campaign for the forthcoming Japanese elections. The present Japanese - North Korean agreement expires on 12 November--about a week before elections are expected--and Pyongyang wants an unconditional one-year extension. Tokyo up to now has opposed this, but Foreign Minister Kosaka has become isolated in the cabinet in his efforts to maintain that stand. He wants to accelerate the departure of repatriates--about 43,000 have left since last December--and to set a deadline, possibly of six months, for completion of the program. His objective has been to improve chances for a general settlement of differences with South Korea.

The top leaders of the ruling Liberal-Democratic party (LDP), the press, and LDP election candidates under pressure from prefectural and municipal assemblies throughout Japan are insisting that the government change its position. Intense popular resentment against the 600,000 Koreans in Japan stems from racial considerations, their high rate of crime, and the cost of public assistance to them.

Prime Minister Ikeda apparently believes that a convincing LDP victory in the elections is more important than improved relations with South Korea, and he will probably undertake to modify the government's current stand. Such a move would antagonize South Korea and counter the recent trend toward friendlier relations between Seoul and Tokyo and jeopardize their negotiations--to be resumed on 25 October--for an over-all settlement.

North Korea hopes to destroy any chance for improved Japanese - South Korean relations and is therefore not likely to compromise. To give the appearance of flexibility, however, the North Koreans have intimated they would be willing to speed up the pace of repatriation, but a North Korean representative stated on 20 October that such a speed-up would be discussed only if Japan accepted North Korea's position on extension.

22 Oct 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
