[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Highlights of Tito-Churchill discussions (page 3).
2. Japan proposes quadripartite consultations to wean China from
Russia (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Semiofficial Rangoon newspaper denounces the United States (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Highlights of Tito-Churchill discussions:

Marshal Tito and Prime Minister Churchill agreed during their London talks that Yugoslav-Western military planning should proceed on the assumption that an attack on Yugoslavia would be part of a general attack in Europe.

Tito was categoric in stating he had no desire to join NATO. He made no mention of a bilateral treaty with the British, and made no specific requests for additional military aid.

The Yugoslav leader reacted strongly against suggestions of a temporary solution to the Trieste issue, and showed no signs of being willing to give up any substantial part of Zone B to the Italians. He agreed to leave the Albanian situation undisturbed.

The British consider that the discussions dispelled Yugoslav suspicions of British policy toward the Balkans, and expect as a result that Yugoslavia may be more cooperative in future military talks.

2. Japan proposes quadripartite consultations to wean China from Russia:

The French Embassy in London has informed the British Foreign Office that Japan had approached France with a proposal for quadripartite consultations on measures to wean China away from Russia, according to Ambassador Aldrich. The ambassador notes that a Japanese proposal for similar talks was presented to the British Foreign Office on 19 March.

Comment: The Japanese Foreign Minister approached Ambassador Murphy in early March for tripartite discussions.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
Japan's leaders believe that Communist China's ties with the Soviet Union can be weakened by increasing free world trade relations with China, within the limitations imposed by the Korean war. Britain and France are concerned over Japan's commercial competition in Southeast Asia and the Japanese probably feel they can count on British and French support for this approach.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Semiofficial Rangoon newspaper denounces the United States:

In a virulent editorial on 26 March, the semiofficial New Times of Burma charged that the United States was primarily responsible for the "growing strength" of the Chinese Nationalists in Burma and suggested that the government should seriously consider the offer of the Communist insurgents to aid in the fight against the Chinese "aggressors." Two references were made to Burma's "friendly neighbor," Communist China.

The American Embassy comments that this editorial reflects the views of high government officials who favor a stronger statement on American involvement than Premier Nu has permitted. The Embassy also fears that internal pressures may actually force the government to accept the Communists' offer, should the current military campaign against the Nationalists prove unsuccessful.

[PAGE 06]
Comment: Burmese leaders have occasionally spoken of Americans being with the Nationalists, but have not linked them with the United States Government.

The editorial indicates that the Burmese Government may soon publicly assert that the United States is involved.

[PAGE 07]
