[PAGE 01]
5 June 1953
Copy No. 67
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Orbit railroad conference set for Moscow in July (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Limited combat activity to be extended to central Korean front (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Heavy Viet Minh pressure in Tonkin delta indicated (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. British negotiator attempting to modify London's position in Suez dispute (page 5).

6. (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Austrians press West for early move on treaty impasse (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Orbit railroad conference set for Moscow in July:

Members of Soviet and Satellite railroad directorates will meet in Moscow on 1 July to consider the problems of transportation by rail of baggage, freight and passengers throughout the Orbit. One item to be considered at the conference will be the adoption of a single direct-shipment freight rate.

Time limitations caused the cancellation of a preliminary three-week meeting originally scheduled to be held in Berlin during April and May to prepare material for the Moscow conference.

Comment: Standardization of rail procedures and through-freight traffic rates is part of the increasing integration of the bloc economy and parallels recent steps toward greater coordination of economic planning, trade, and financial procedures.
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Limited combat activity to be extended to central Korean front:

Comment: A previously postponed action is now imminent on the central front. This area has been relatively quiet during the recent attacks in the eastern and western sectors.

The use of a tank regiment, normally 40 tanks, presumably for artillery support, suggests that the action will be on a wider scale than recent attacks. There is no evidence that it would have more than limited objectives.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Heavy Viet Minh pressure in Tonkin delta indicated:

The bulk of one Viet Minh division has infiltrated the Tonkin delta.
[PAGE 05]
major enemy pressure in the southwest sector of the delta appears to be indicated by the reported disposition of the units of this division.

Comment: There have been other indications that the division referred to is planning expanded operations. The American consul in Hanoi on 3 June noted the threat it posed to Dong Quan, a resettlement project planned to set a security pattern for delta villages. Dong Quan already has been under limited attack and is believed to have a high priority among Viet Minh objectives.

In addition to the one division in the southern delta area, two others are moving into positions northwest of the delta where they will be able to exert pressure on French-held territory.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. British negotiator attempting to modify London's position in Suez dispute:

General Robertson, who with Ambassador Stevenson has been participating in the Anglo-Egyptian defense talks, will offer Prime Minister Churchill some ideas for meeting the Egyptian point of view on technical management of the Suez Canal base. Meanwhile, the Australian minister in Cairo has urged Prime Minister Menzies to discuss the matter first with Robertson, who is now in London, and then with Churchill, in the hope of strengthening Robertson's hand.

In Cairo, Stevenson has suggested that if the United States could find some way to "underwrite" an Anglo-Egyptian settlement, Churchill would feel more justified in modifying his stand. Ambassador Caffrey believes this might mean an American commitment to stand by Britain if Egypt should break any agreement.
[PAGE 06]
6.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Austrians press West for early move on treaty impasse:

Foreign Minister Gruber, now visiting in London, has urged the Western powers to capitalize on the present exceptional opportunity to fix the blame on the Soviet Union for the current impasse in the Austrian treaty negotiations. He recommends an early Western note to Moscow, but advises against an attempt to discuss the substance of the treaty through diplomatic channels.
[PAGE 07]
According to Gruber, Soviet ambassador Malik in London recently evaded a direct reply to his question as to the possibility that an exchange of notes would advance the treaty. Malik reportedly remarked, "Why not try it and see?"

Comment: Disputes among the Western powers over the text have held up both official statements and a new note to Moscow on the treaty since 27 May, when the Russians failed to attend the scheduled four-power meeting. At that time, the Soviet Union invited the West to examine the treaty question via "diplomatic means."
