Pakistan-UAR: Nasir's six-day official visit to Pakistan ended on 16 April with a bland joint communique announcing a cultural agreement and trade discussions. Although the visit produced a show of amity on some issues such as Algeria and South Africa, Pakistan's alignment with the West will probably limit the extent of its cooperation with the neutralist UAR. Nasir's public offer on 15 April of his good offices in the Kashmir dispute will please the Pakistanis but annoy the Indians, who claim that Kashmir is already an integral part of India and that this is no longer a live issue.

UAR-Lebanon: UAR and Lebanese dockworkers have declared a boycott of all US shipping in retaliation for the picketing of the UAR freighter Cleopatra in New York by the International Longshoremen's Association and the Seafarers' International Union protesting the UAR boycott of ships which have traded with Israel. American vessels may be denied supplies and other facilities in UAR and Lebanese ports, but there is no indication of any plans for restrictions on their use of the Suez Canal. The UAR is urging other Arab states to join in the boycott. (Page 4)

North Africa: The Moroccan and Tunisian governments are concerned over the possibility that anticipated stepped-up hostilities between the French Army and the Algerian rebels will lead to new incidents within Moroccan and Tunisian boundaries. The Moroccan Foreign Ministry has formally protested an alleged French "bombardment" of Moroccan soil on 14 April. Tunisia's President Bourguiba has publicly warned that his country will resist any French incursions; he said Tunisia had rejected a French request that Tunisian residents be evacuated from frontier areas. (Page 5)

Belgian Congo: The growing belligerency of leading Congolese nationalists toward Belgium's economic role in the Congo suggests that the economic round-table conference scheduled to begin in Brussels on 25 April will be acrimonious and probably inconclusive. The Congolese plan in particular to attack as inadequate

19 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
