Dissident Guatemalan Officers May Attempt Another Coup

The dissatisfactions which led to the abortive military revolt of 13 November persist in the Guatemalan Army, and a new coup may be attempted shortly. A number of officers who were originally in on the November plot but subsequently backed out are being pressured to act against the regime now or face exposure by the participants in the revolt.

The officers being blackmailed are said to number over 100 and to include some in key posts. Two Guatemalan colonels told an American Embassy officer on 2 December that the army will oust the Ydigoras regime and assured him that their movement is not Communist inspired. Another officer reportedly said that the army intends to establish a three-man military junta and then hold elections "as soon as possible."

The extent of army dissidence is unclear, but if it is as widespread as claimed by the dissidents, it constitutes a clear threat to the President. The replacement of the unpopular defense minister, who resigned on 23 November with the entire cabinet, would, however, tend to ameliorate army grievances and might forestall a revolt. However, the scheduled trials of officers involved in the revolt may prove embarrassing to the President, and his repeated public references to the 13 November revolt as "Communist inspired" have undoubtedly aroused resentment in some army circles.

Meanwhile, leaders of the three most important opposition political parties, sensing the regime's weakness, signed a unity pact on 2 December agreeing to support a new regime in which they would participate. These parties—the strong moderate leftist Revolutionary party, the dissident wing of the late President Castillo Armas' party, and a church-oriented group—also rejected dealing with "anyone associated with international Communism."

Although the Communists are apparently not directly involved in the current coup plans, they are aware of army unrest and

6 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
