Reactions to De Gaulle Speech on Algeria

The initial reaction in France to De Gaulle's 4 November speech on Algeria has followed established patterns, with a slight tempering of leftist impatience and a definite deepening of rightist apprehension. George Bidault summed up the rightist reaction: "Unacceptable." On the left, the most noteworthy reaction is Guy Mollet's basically favorable comment. Parliamentary spokesmen have expressed alarm over De Gaulle's reference to wider presidential powers, but the American Embassy in Paris expects the clear relationship he established between the need for national unity and the solution of the Algerian problem to calm most of the deputies.

There is some speculation that De Gaulle's reference to a possible unilateral cease-fire by France means he may tacitly accede to discussions of political guarantees with the rebels. He continues to insist that hostilities must cease before political negotiations can begin, but he probably hopes the rebels will respond. The Algerian provisional government will probably insist on some concrete evidence of good faith before accepting French assurances of political concessions. French rightist extremists will be alert to any cease-fire initiative, and any coup now in prospect might follow such an initiative.

While the French military found comfort in De Gaulle's renewed assurance that the army would remain in Algeria for a referendum on self-determination, "activist" officers can be expected to take an increasingly antagonistic attitude toward De Gaulle.

The hostility of the majority of the European community in Algeria has been reinforced, but Moslems, who were reluctant to comment, seemed generally satisfied. No official reaction to De Gaulle's speech is expected from the rebels before the plenary session which the provisional government has scheduled opens in Tunis on 7 November. The rebels are expected to stick to the hard line they have adopted, in view of the more favorable international position promises of bloc support have provided. They will be under some pressure from Morocco and Tunisia to explore any French overtures, however, because of the apprehension of all North African states over the threat of Communist influence in the area.

7 Nov 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
