Military Plans for Countercoup
In El Salvador

The Salvadoran Army is becoming increasingly apprehensive over the failure of ex-President Oscar Osorio, who masterminded the coup that ousted the Lemus regime on 26 October, to head off a strong bid for power by Communists and other pro-Castro leftists in the new provisional government. Osorio has lost control over the situation and that the growing number of leftists in government jobs will make it difficult "to clean house" without strong military measures. A group of officers claiming widespread support from army units is preparing a countercoup, which may be attempted immediately.

Several leftist cabinet members and the three civilians on the six-man junta moved quickly to consolidate their positions by appointing numerous pro-Communists and suspected Communists to key subordinate posts. A military member of the junta told a US Embassy officer on 3 November that most of the initiative in political matters had been conceded to the civilians, who are probably not responsive to Osorio's direction.

Osorio said restrictive measures against the extreme left--he denies there are Communists in the government--cannot be considered at this time, since such action would disrupt the unity the provisional government must have in order to implement urgently needed social and economic changes.

The new government already has been recognized by Spain, Ecuador, Panama, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Guatemala. However, President Villeda Morales of Honduras, where Fidel Castro has a small but vocal following, indicated his concern on 4 November to the US Embassy at Tegucigalpa. A pro-Communist takeover in El Salvador would also have very serious implication for the stability of Guatemala--where Communists reportedly are plotting a coup with other leftist groups against President Ydigoras--as well as for the Somoza regime in Nicaragua. Most other Latin American countries appear to be delaying recognition pending further developments.

7 Nov 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
