Comment: Mossadeq did not attend the opening of the seventeenth Majlis on 27 April, presumably because of his earlier expressed fears of an assassination attempt. The Fedayan Islam boasts of its record of assassinations. Mossadeq, along with other National Front leaders, has long been threatened by the organization.

6. Soviet Ambassador absent from inauguration of Iranian Majlis:
The absence of Soviet Ambassador Sadchikov at the inauguration ceremony of the new Majlis has aroused speculation in diplomatic circles in Tehran.

Sadchikov reportedly had criticized Mossadeq's agreement to resume US military aid, and his absence may have been intended as a warning to Iran against this step. The possibility of sharp propaganda attacks on Mossadeq and a change in relations between the two countries were suggested by the Soviet Embassy allegedly stated that Ambassador Sadchikov's absence was caused by illness, responsible sources assert that he was "furious" over the resumption of American military aid to Iran. The Russians are reportedly making their strong displeasure known to "every Iranian circle with which they are in contact."

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French threaten to suspend Defense Community negotiations:
A new French-German impasse has arisen in the European Defense Community conference, creating a situation which the chief of the French delegation has declared is "of the utmost seriousness" and forces his country to insist that initialing of the treaty be postponed. The head of the German delegation has suddenly refused to accept a limitation of 18 months on the transitional period during which each of the Defense Community's territorial military organizations will cover the area of a member country and be under the command of a national of that country.

While members of the German delegation have told American Embassy officials in Paris that their chief is prepared to modify his position, the Embassy advises that, should the French not be satisfied, "there is no predicting" what drastic action they might take to allay parliamentary fears of a revived German general staff.

Comment: The German Government is seeking additional treaty concessions in order to overcome the Bundestag's growing opposition to restrictions of German sovereignty in the nearly completed texts on contractual relations with the Allies.
