[PAGE 01]
22 April 1961
Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

The situation in Algeria as of 0630 EST remains unclear beyond the fact that a military revolt against De Gaulle's liberal Algerian policy was launched in Algiers last night. The Paris government admits the insurrection, but insists this morning that the "coup" is confined to the city of Algiers. The insurrectionists, in a communiqué signed by four well-known French generals, claim they control all Algeria and the Sahara. However, the only military units publicly identified as supporting the revolt are the First Foreign Legion Parachute Regiment and the predominantly Moslem Seventh Regiment.

The timing of this move against De Gaulle by military partisans of "French Algeria" is connected with the widespread belief that a negotiated settlement involving Algerian independence was about to be achieved. Although the rebel Provisional Algerian Government (PAG) refused to initiate public negotiations with the French government as scheduled at Evian on 7 April--because of De Gaulle's refusal to recognize the PAG's claim to represent all Algeria--the fact that behind-the-scenes PAG-French talks have continued has been an open secret. Moreover, De Gaulle's 11 April press conference--in which he emphasized more clearly than ever before his intention to negotiate Algerian independence--appeared to have dispelled PAG doubts as to his intentions and it was expected that negotiations would soon be announced. The PAG has not yet commented on the situation, and will probably take a cautious attitude until the picture becomes clearer.

The outcome of the insurrection will depend largely on the reaction of the European settlers, Moslems, and other military units in Algeria, but also on the reactions in France itself. The settlers and their rightist sympathizers in France are expected to welcome the coup as a blow to the "abandonment" of Algeria by De Gaulle. The Moslem population of Algeria, which was reportedly discouraged by De Gaulle's 11 April press conference because of fear that it had reduced chances for an early end of hostilities, could react violently--with or without PAG incitement--to any indications that the French army intends to prolong the war.

De Gaulle's skillful management of military sensibilities and his firm stand during the January 1960 insurrection in Algiers,
[PAGE 04]
in which some army paratroop units wavered in their loyalty, had for some time apparently discouraged active military plotting against him. The four generals heading the new insurrection--retired Army generals Henri Zeller and Raoul Salan (a former French commander in Algeria), retired Air Force General Edmond Jouhaud, and Air Force General Maurice Challe (who resigned early this year from the position as NATO commander for Central Europe)--are prominent largely because of their anti-Gaullist sentiments and activities. They are not believed to enjoy widespread support in the armed services, although much of the French military have sympathized with their "French Algeria" views. The current insurrection appears more serious than the settlers' revolt of 1960 in that this time some army units are overtly opposed to the government, and thus openly pose the problem of "unity of the army". The new French Chief of Staff of National Defense, General Jean Olie, who took office on 1 March, lacks the prestige of his predecessor, General Paul Ely, who had played a major role in maintaining the armed services' loyalty to De Gaulle.
[PAGE 05]
22 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Angola: Economic breakdown seen if withdrawal of Europeans from rural areas continues. (Page 3)

4. Congo: Tshombé's control in Katanga apparently weakens. (Page 4)
[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Republic of the Congo

Approximate area nominally controlled by:
Kasavubu-Mobutu
Gizenga
Kalondji
Tshombe
United Nations Forces (Service Forces not included)
Selected road
Selected railroad
Selected airfield

STATUTE MILES

22 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page
[PAGE 09]
Angola: Rebels in northern Angola are able to move at will through large areas of the countryside. The Portuguese are continuing their military build-up. The American consul in Luanda believes that the government's repressive measures are driving increasing numbers of Africans into rebellion. He feels that unless terrorist activity in the area can be contained in the next few weeks, most of the European-operated coffee plantations will be abandoned and almost all of this year's coffee crop will be lost. Withdrawal of Europeans from rural areas could lead to an economic breakdown, which would cause increased unrest among Europeans as well as among elements of the African population at present still loyal.

Congo: President Tshombé's control of Katanga appears more precarious than at any time since the Congo's independence. The American consul in Elisabethville reports that anti-Tshombé sentiment is rising among the local population, and that demonstrations--stemming from economic grievances as well as resentment against Tshombé's Belgian advisers--may take place at any time. Tshombé has in large measure rescinded his boycott against UN troops, but animosity between the UN and the Katanga government remains strong.

22 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
Situation in Angola

The area of the current disturbances is the source of most of the coffee crop, which accounted for more than a third of Angola's export earnings in 1960 and is the principal dollar earner for Portugal. Considerable coffee is still on hand from previous crops as a result of Portugal's commitments to the International Coffee Agreement, but an American official--whose company recently shut down all its oil exploration activities in the Cabinda exclave as a result of the unrest--believes the economy will run down as soon as these stocks are exhausted.

The uncertainty over Angola's future is causing concern in Lisbon over the stability of the escudo. Serious economic deterioration in Angola might threaten the stability of the Salazar regime.

Nationalists, most of them Communist oriented, from Portuguese territories in Asia and Africa have been meeting in Casablanca. The final resolution, adopted on 20 April, announced that an organization will be set up in Morocco to coordinate the activities of the various anti-Portuguese groups. This organization apparently will supersede the Conakry-based Revolutionary Front for the Independence of the Portuguese Territories (FRAIN), which recently has been weakened by factionalism and by an inability to obtain international publicity. Holden Roberto's Angola People's Union (UPA), which reportedly triggered the current outbreak, is not affiliated with the new Morocco-based organization.

The movement of additional troops from Portugal to Angola is continuing, both by air and by sea. More than 12,000 troops, of whom more than 4,000 are white, are now stationed in the province. Approximately 35,000 army troops remain in metropolitan Portugal. In addition, about 8,000 troops, the bulk of them native, are stationed in Mozambique.

22 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
[PAGE 14]
Tshombé's Position Deteriorating in Katanga

Tshombé's regime is threatened by a combination of UN hostility and fading popular support. He has rejected demands of his recalcitrant legislature that he share his executive power with a premier, but it is doubtful that he can continue his one-man rule indefinitely, aided only by Belgian advisers.

Tshombé's rule in northern Katanga has long been threatened by hostile Baluba tribesmen, but until recently he appeared to enjoy the support of most non-Baluba groups in the south. Lately, however, there has been an increasing reaction to Tshombé's extensive reliance on Belgians and his employment of South African mercenaries in the Katangan armed forces. Popular dissatisfaction with prevailing low wage levels has stimulated resentment against the Belgians, who are felt to have monopolized highly paid positions.

Tshombé's difficulties are compounded by his bad relations with the UN, which recently airlifted Indian troops into Katanga. One UN official predicted on 20 April that a "showdown" between the UN and Tshombé was rapidly approaching.

A Belgian adviser to the Leopoldville government has opined that Tshombé has become a liability for the Belgians and that Brussels would take a "hard line" with him. Belgians in Elisabethville reportedly are apprehensive concerning their future there in view of renewed UN efforts to secure the withdrawal of foreign advisers.

22 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 18]
TOP SECRET
