Venezuelan Policy Toward Cuba and the Dominican Republic

Venezuelan President Betancourt has told Ambassador
Sparks that he is completely disenchanted with Fidel Castro
and that he would play a leading role in bringing hemisphere
attention to bear on the Cuban problem if Dominican dicta-
tor Trujillo were ousted beforehand. Betancourt insists, how-
ever, that any effort to present the Cuban problem to the Or-
ganization of American States (OAS) before Trujillo's ouster
would not have the support of more than three other Latin Ameri-
can countries--Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Honduras. He evi-
dently is aware of the charges of Cuban intervention presented
to the OAS on 25 April by Guatemala, which has now broken diplo-
matic relations with Havana. Honduras may also take this action
soon for similar reasons.

The question of policy toward Cuba is a potential threat
to the viability of the three-party coalition of Betancourt, who
has admitted that Castro supporters in Venezuela are causing
difficulties for the Caracas government. Among the strong po-
litical groups seeking closer Venezuelan-Cuban ties are the
dissident leftist wing which recently broke away from Betan-
court's own Democratic Action party, the principal Venezuelan
labor organization, the Communists, and the Democratic Re-
publican Union, which is a dissatisfied member of the govern-
ment coalition.

Betancourt is a long-standing enemy of Trujillo, and his
hatred has been intensified by Dominican support of the 20-21
April uprising of Venezuelan military dissidents and the pos-
sibility that Trujillo will soon assist another group of Venezuelan
plotters. Trujillo has also alienated Colombia, which is con-
sidering breaking diplomatic relations and lodging a formal
complaint against Trujillo in the OAS. The complaint would
be based on Dominican documentation used by the Venezuelan
dissident leaders to enter Colombia before the revolt. Betan-
court's regime, which has already lodged charges in the OAS
against the Dominican Republic for flagrant violation of human
rights, would support Colombia in this move.

According to the Venezuelan foreign minister, Ecuador is
on the verge of breaking relations with the Dominican Repub-
lic and will probably be followed by Peru and later Panama.
