the present constitution dealing with civil rights and the National
Assembly and "legalize" the assumption of power by the Supreme
Council. The leadership is concerned that unless legal continu-
ity is maintained with the Rhee and Chang Myon governments,
Seoul's claim to be the only legitimate Korean government will
be regarded as no more valid than that of Pyongyang. The for-
eign minister has announced that special missions will visit
various noncommitted nations to win greater support in the UN
for South Korea.

USSR - Somali Republic: Moscow, continuing to broaden
its ties with African states through the extension of long-term
economic aid, announced on 2 June that it will provide the Somali
Republic with $44,400,000 in long-term credits for industrial and
agricultural development and with a $7,800,000 credit to finance
commodity deliveries. The Soviet Union will also build two hos-
pitals, a printing plant, a school, and a radio station as gifts.
The announcement was contained in the communique marking
the end of a ten-day visit to the USSR by Somali Prime Minister
Abdirascid. The economic agreement is in line with the an-
nounced intention of the moderate Somali Government to accept
aid from all sources; it has been pending since last April when a
Soviet good-will mission visited the East African nation. Moga-
discio appears to be headed toward early conclusion of similar aid
programs with Czechoslovakia and possibly Communist China.

Iran: Following a conversation with the Shah on 31 May,
Prime Minister Amini was reported "greatly encouraged" by
the Shah's reaffirmation of support for the government and for
Amini's reform program. The Shah demonstrated this support
by not countermanding Amini's order canceling the appointment
of former Prime Minister Eqbal as ambassador to Spain. This
appointment apparently had been ordered by the Shah about the
middle of May without consultation with Amini and was regarded
by many Iranians as evidence of the Shah's intention to undercut

5 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  iv
