action to deal with the crisis, the Soviet leaders are seizing upon Lumumba's death as a pretext for reviving their charges against Hammarskjold. Since Khrushchev's sharp attacks on the secretary general's conduct of the UN operation, it has been apparent that Hammarskjold has been selected to serve as the scapegoat for Soviet setbacks in the Congo last fall. Moscow's latest demand for his dismissal and its declared refusal to recognize his authority as secretary general probably do not foreshadow a Soviet-led bloc withdrawal from the UN. This latest statement only makes more explicit the position Khrushchev took last fall in his pronouncements before the General Assembly. He warned at that time that Hammarskjold's failure to resign would lead the USSR to draw the "necessary conclusions" and threatened to withhold Soviet cooperation with any of his decisions. At one point, Khrushchev hinted that if Soviet demands for revamping the UN executive machinery were not accepted, the bloc might withdraw and form a separate international organization. However, he stopped short of making any specific threats or commitments on this point.

As long as he believes he has the support of the smaller UN members, Hammarskjold is unlikely to resign. However, the USSR's refusal to recognize his authority will make the conduct of UN operations more difficult.

Hammarskjold has already ordered the UN force to occupy airfields and other communication centers and to set up military control points in areas of Congolese military action. The UN Command reportedly has been ordered to stop all forces engaged in offensive action but to use force only if force is used against it. However, the small size of the UN units, coupled with the equivocal nature of the directives themselves, will render effective UN control difficult. Neutralist nations reportedly believe that the Security Council should pass an emergency resolution urging that all possible measures be taken to avoid civil war and calling for the cessation of Belgian and other foreign interference. Representatives of Nigeria, a leader of moderate Afro-Asian opinion, have stated that if Hammarskjold moves rapidly to take over temporary control of the Congo,

15 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
