Cuban Communists Explain Their Successes to Foreign Comrades

Leaders of the Cuban Communists' Popular Socialist party (PSP) appear to derive considerable satisfaction from explaining the successes of their party over the past two years to representatives of foreign Communist parties. They boast that theirs is the first case of the "victory of the workers and peasants" in a country so far from the centers of Communist power and that their victory disproves the "theory of geographical fatalism," i.e., that a Communist regime cannot come to power in a country in close proximity to the United States.

The Cuban Communists' claim that they prepared the way for and provided decisive support to the Castro revolution in its fight for power is not true. The Communists' real road to power came from adroit manipulation of Fidel Castro's revolutionary victory directly and through crypto-Communists and sympathizers. By posing as the "most revolutionary of the revolutionaries," the Communists became, in Castro's eyes, the most dependable defenders of his revolution against the "plots of imperialism" and the counterrevolutionaries. They also proved willing work horses for the regime, which has faced a shortage of skilled personnel in many fields. By causing Castro to react to US and counterrevolutionary "aggressions" by "retaliations" such as the confiscation of most large and medium private enterprises, the Communists have, in effect, taken the basic steps toward "building socialism" in Cuba without doing it in the name of Communism, which would have been politically impossible before now.

The Communists invariably refer to Castro as Cuba's leader and appear careful never to appear to challenge his authority openly. At the same time, their references to Castro clearly imply that they do not regard him as one of themselves.

The Cuban Communists' claim to be in control of all "mass organizations" in the country is substantially true. They also exert considerable control over the regular armed forces and--especially--the militia. These Communist claims, however, ignore the fact that virtually the entire upper and middle classes

15 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 14
