UAR Views on Congo and UAR-US Relations

In an interview with Ambassador Reinhardt, Ali Sabri gave an involved explanation of the UAR "recognition" of the Gizenga regime. According to Sabri, Gizenga's representatives in Cairo will be accorded diplomatic status, but it has not been decided to give diplomatic titles to the representatives or their offices. The ambassador feels the UAR does not consider this recognition definitive, but the "best thing Cairo can do to compensate its friends and save its own face."

Sabri reaffirmed Nasir's 5 February remarks to the ambassador to the effect that the UAR realizes no one contender in the Congo can hope to achieve complete control. Reinhardt believes this suggests that the recognition of Gizenga is a maneuver to help maintain the Stanleyville regime's claim for participation in any future settlement on a Congolese government and appears consistent with the UAR-Ceylonese-Liberian Security Council resolution.

Sabri also claimed that the US exaggerates the Communist danger in the Congo and the effectiveness of Soviet support of Gizenga. He added that although the UAR insists on the right to criticize UN Secretary General Hammarskjold's "mistakes" in the Congo, it does not go along with the extreme Soviet view. Sabri voiced concern over what he called the lack of progress in the UN and said his government believes the West intends to "stall" until the Stanleyville regime has been destroyed.

UAR propaganda organs have given full play to the incident of 18 February involving a USIS information officer in Cairo, whom the UAR has charged with unauthorized distribution of leaflets on the Congo situation. The officer was detained almost 11 hours and was handled somewhat roughly. The US Embassy reports that the leaflets contained only extracts of speeches by President Kennedy, Ambassador Stevenson, and Hammarskjold, which are not subject to censorship and do not require UAR government clearance. Nevertheless, Cairo's news media have called the incident a violation of UAR sovereignty and presented it as a clandestine anti-Lumumba effort by the US.

21 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
