EASTERN EUROPE
4. US Embassy in Prague recommends retaliation in plane incident:
US Ambassador Briggs in Prague notes that repeated Embassy efforts have failed to obtain information from the Czechoslovak Government regarding the two US planes that presumably landed in Czechoslovakia last week, and recommends early retaliatory action. Briggs fears that the pilots are being subjected to pressure tactics and may even be tried for espionage. In order to demonstrate the seriousness with which the US views this incident, he recommends that (a) US authorities in Germany intercept and impound two Czechoslovak commercial planes overflying the US Zone, or (b) the US immediately cancel Czechoslovak civil overflights of the American Zone.
5. Yugoslav opposition to Balkan Peace Observation Commission continues:
In a recent conversation with a member of the US UN delegation, Yugoslav delegate Bebler reiterated his government's present opposition to the establishment of a Peace Observation Commission limited to the Balkans. He stated that such action might alarm the Yugoslav people and would seem unnecessary since Satellite pressures on Yugoslavia have not increased significantly during recent months. Bebler expressed interest, however, in a US suggestion to expedite rapid UN action in case a menacing situation should develop. He will seek instructions on this from Belgrade and also will inquire into Belgrade's latest views on a Peace Observation Commission limited to the Balkans. During the conversation, Bebler indicated that Yugoslavia, in the event of Satellite aggression, intends immediately to: (a) call upon foreign military attaches in Belgrade to conduct an inquiry into the cause and nature of the Satellite aggression, and (b) request UN action in accordance with the procedure established by the General Assembly resolution of 17 November 1950.
Comment: Bebler's views indicate that there has been no change in Yugoslav plans in the past two months and that the Yugoslav Government has no intention of bringing its case before the UN prior to the autumn session of the General Assembly
