Situation in the Congo

(Hammarskjold recently sent a conciliatory letter to
Kasavubu, who is attending the Tananarive conference of
Congolese leaders, in an attempt to lessen the likelihood of
a conflict between Indian and Congolese troops. He tried
to reassure Kasavubu that the arrival of these troops was not
part of a planned military build-up to be used against the
Congolese Army, explaining that the Security Council had not
authorized such action in connection with the proposed reor-
ganization of the army.)

(In a discussion with an American official, Hammarskjold
indicated a belief that "some kind of political game was going
on in Leopoldville" between two rival acting prime ministers
in the absence of Ileo, who accompanied Kasavubu to Tananarive.
He noted that acting Prime Minister Delvaux modified his earlier
hostile attitude toward the UN and became willing to negotiate
after Massa suddenly "took over" that office. Hammarskjold
remarked that "there are too many untutored people with guns
who become involved in political moves" in the Congo.)

Tshombe's apparent success in dominating the proceedings
at Tananarive has been complemented by another success in
Katanga. Before leaving for the conference, Tshombé--appar-
ently fearing that his deputy Kibwe and French Colonel Trinquier
were plotting to oust him--ordered Trinquier to leave the coun-
try by 10 March. The American Consul in Elisabethville reported
that Trinquier, under pressure from Katangan authorities and
possibly the UN, departed for Brussels on 11 March.

When informed that Brussels intended to remove some 30
Belgian military technicians from Katanga, Tshombe indicated
he would oppose this action by all means possible and that he
might close the Belgian Consulate General in Elisabethville.

(In his conversation with Ambassador Thompson, Khrushchev
said it was clear that the US and the Soviet Union were in com-
plete disagreement on the Congo. Khrushchev failed to respond
to Ambassador Thompson's remark that there was nothing in the)

13 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
