Khrushchev Spells Out Soviet Position on Germany,
Disarmament, and the UN

(At the end of his conversation with Ambassador Thompson,
Khrushchev spelled out the Soviet position on Germany and
Berlin along the lines of the recent memorandum to Bonn. He
stressed the necessity of a peace settlement with both Germanys
in order to confirm postwar developments and provide a legal
foundation for the postwar borders. He denied that the bloc had
any desire to expand to the West and offered to make a state-
ment to this effect if the US was prepared to begin peace treaty
negotiations.)

(In connection with his threat to sign a separate treaty with
East Germany, Khrushchev was careful to evade any response
to the ambassador's question on how a separate treaty would
affect the Allied position in West Berlin. Khrushchev reaf-
firmed that a peace treaty would include a clause providing
creation of a free city for West Berlin, but urged that the US
and USSR join in working out a new status for West Berlin.)

(Khrushchev showed some flexibility in his discussion of
the Berlin problem in asserting that the USSR would provide
any guarantees necessary to preserve the internal situation in
West Berlin and to assure the United States that its prestige
would not suffer. As examples of guarantees, he mentioned
a joint police force, presumably composed of the four powers,
and he repeated a previous Soviet proposal to permit stationing
of symbolic forces of the four powers in West Berlin. He made
it clear that East Berlin was excludedfrom a settlement on the
grounds that it was the capital of East Germany, but he com-
mitted Ulbricht to sign any guarantees for West Berlin.)

(The Soviet leader concluded his remarks by repeating that
if the US and USSR could sign a treaty on Germany, it would
mark great progress in their relations and establish an atmos-
phere of trust. He added that a treaty could be implemented by
installments and provide for a gradual withdrawal of Soviet and
American troops from Germany, which would aid in negotiations
and disarmament.)

(The most notable aspect of Khrushchev's statements was his
failure to stress the urgency of early negotiations on Berlin, as)

13 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
