Rightist Plotting Against De Gaulle

Rising apprehensions in France over the continuing stalemate on Algeria are encouraging extreme rightists to plan for early action against the Fifth Republic. French public opinion on Algeria is becoming increasingly polarized between leftists, who are pressing De Gaulle to negotiate with the Algerian rebels, and rightists, who are determined to keep Algeria French. Both the elements are angered by De Gaulle's refusal to abandon his policy of self-determination for Algeria, and general opposition to some of his major economic and foreign policies is mounting.

The most serious recently reported plot links Jacques Soustelle to a number of military officers--including Generals Salan and Jouhaud and Colonels Godard and Trinquier--who were prominent in the May 1958 coup in Algiers. Until his break with De Gaulle at the time of the January insurrection, Soustelle was regarded with suspicion by such officers. The Soustelle-military group claims to have a 40-man ex-paratrooper commando force ready to rush the Elysee Palace, official residence of the French President, and seize De Gaulle. The plotters also have a committee, including officers with extensive security experience, working out plans to seize key government ministries. The timing of any such moves would depend on when liaison between metropolitan France and Algeria has sufficiently organized army and rightist groups.

police and administrative centers in Paris are so located and staffed that a take-over would be possible with relatively small effort, if skillfully timed and coordinated. The existence of current plotting against the regime is known to French security officials, but even some of these have been reported involved.

Ex-Premier Antoine Pinay, ousted as finance minister by De Gaulle in January and regarded by some plotters as the possible head of a successor regime, is playing down the likelihood of a military seizure of power. However, he has warned US officials that France has reached an impasse over Algeria and that the political situation in France has "deteriorated rapidly."
