4. Egyptian government party leaders reportedly favor immediate abrogation of 1936 treaty:

The British Ambassador in Cairo was informed on 16 September that a majority of the government party leaders, who met the preceding day, favored immediate abrogation of the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty, but that the Minister of Interior had succeeded in postponing any action for ten days.

The ambassador is suggesting to London that the UK reply to the Egyptian Prime Minister's latest communication by indicating that new "interesting" proposals will be forthcoming. The US Ambassador warns the abrogation of the treaty will be difficult to prevent if some hope of new proposals is not offered Egypt in the immediate future.

Comment: While party leaders have been gradually pushing the government toward definite action in regard to the long-threatened abrogation of the 1936 treaty, King Farouk, who has long opposed such action, probably will succeed in preventing any immediate steps.

The "interesting" proposals presumably will be an invitation to Egypt to participate in a joint Middle East Command. The present Egyptian mood, however, probably will not permit acceptance of membership in such an arrangement as a substitute for complete British evacuation of the Suez Canal area and of the Sudan.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. East and West Germans continue discussions on Berlin and interzonal trade:

West German authorities, reporting to the Allies on the progress of their current talks with East German officials on resumption of interzonal trade in return for cessation of current Soviet-East German restrictions in Berlin, are optimistic that various "conditions" will be met by the East Germans if the interzonal trade agreement is signed. The West Germans assert that both delegations are now prepared to sign the trade pact, with the verbal statement to be made by the West Germans that the trade agreement will be suspended if any impediments to trade are imposed.

Before considering whether the West Germans should be permitted to sign the interzonal trade pact, the Allies have insisted that the West German delegation obtain assurances from the East Germans that, in the event of the establishment of the proposed committee to review Berlin exports, the West German unit would have the final determination as to the legality of each shipment.

Comment: Despite a willingness to make certain concessions, the East Germans have left so many of the details unsettled, that the Allies cannot be sure of any appreciable improvement in the situation.
