[PAGE 01]
13 January 1961
Copy No. C 75
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
13 JANUARY 1961

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in the Congo. (1)

Situation in Laos. (2)

Turkey--Government may face new crisis. (3)

III. THE WEST

Bolivia--Czech official reported author-
ized to make aid offer during coming
visit. (4)

Guatemalan President breaks up con-
spiracy among senior army officers. (5)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo: Seven planeloads of Congolese Army soldiers
reportedly have been flown to an unspecified location in
Equateur Province following reports that Gizenga troops
have entered the province. A UN spokesman in Leopold-
ville has confirmed that concentrations of these troops have
been observed near the border between Orientale and Equa-
teur provinces. Mobutu's attempted airlift could lead to
clashes with the UAR battalion of the UN contingent, which
controls several of the airfields in Equateur Province.
Ambassador Timberlake states that he is skeptical con-
cerning Mobutu's ability to arrest the present military trend
in favor of the Gizenga forces. The American Consulate in
Elisabethville has characterized Europeans there as despond-
ent and Africans as tense; rumors of increasing anti-white
and anti-Tshombe sentiment are prevalent. (Page 1) (Map)

Laos: Flights by bloc IL-14s into Laos continue. Most
of these flights now appear to be going to the Xieng Khouang
area, where several IL-14s recently have been observed on
the ground. Laotian T-6 aircraft have now flown several mis-
sions, apparently without spotting bloc aircraft. They are re-
ported, however, to have attacked ground targets.
The bloc has no fighter aircraft in North Vietnam, but
there are perhaps five YAK-18 trainers in North Vietnam which
might be used if the bloc decides to counter the T-6 threat to
its IL-14 supply sorties into Laos. Recently, they have been re-
flected in flight schedules for training flights.
Souvanna Phouma planned to seek Prince Sihanouk's permission to invite
[PAGE 05]
Pathet Lao leader Phoumi Vongvichit to Phnom Penh for con-
sultations. The purpose of this invitation is undisclosed, but
other reports indicate Souvanna feels that he still retains
enough influence to mediate the conflict between the right and
the left in Laos.

Turkey: A new crisis may be developing within the Turk-
ish Government. Turkey's top military commanders are re-
ported to feel that the popularity of the military has decreased
alarmingly during recent weeks because of the lack of reforms,
high prices, and the political trials of leaders of the old regime.
If conditions do not improve, the military commanders report-
edly intend to dissolve the Committee of National Union (CNU)
and arrest all members except General Gursel. Awareness of
this potential threat may explain the urgency with which the
CNU organized the new Constituent Assembly, as well as the
appointment of the former ground forces chief as minister of
defense and the selection of a former chief of the General Staff
as president of the House of Representatives.

III. THE WEST

Bolivia-Czechoslovakia: Czech Vice Minister of Foreign
Affairs Hajek is to visit Bolivia at the invitation of President
Paz for a six-day period beginning next week. According to a
Bolivian Government spokesman, Hajek is authorized to make
a definitive offer of Czech installation of an antimony smelter
in Bolivia. The Bolivian Government has been under heavy
pressure since last fall to respond to Soviet overtures relat-
ing to a tin smelter. (Page 2)

Guatemala: President Ydigoras told the American am-
bassador on 10 January that he has discovered a conspiracy
among senior army officers and is sending a number of them
[PAGE 06]
to posts abroad. The ambassador comments that he has
never seen Ydigoras appear so harassed. Such dissension
is known to exist among the military forces, and the oppo-
sition parties are actively seeking to exploit it. Leaders
are reported to be planning "an intense effort" to take over a post-
Ydigoras government, "as the Communists did in Cuba." Although the threat to
Ydigoras is serious, he is a skillful manipulator and has
already coaxed and bribed one party out of the three-party
opposition coalition formed last month. (Page 3)

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE
REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Main Elements in the Congo Situation: Shifting For-
tunes of Mobutu-Kasavubu and Lumumba Forces; Basic
Problems Including Role of the Army; Relations with
African States, Belgium, the Bloc, and UN; and Pros-
pects.
[PAGE 07]
Republic of the Congo

12 JANUARY 1961
UNCLASSIFIED
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in the Congo

Reports from Leopoldville indicate that Gizenga troops,
following their push into Katanga, have entered Equateur
Province as well. Seven planeloads of Congolese Army sol-
diers reportedly have been flown by Mobutu to an undisclosed
location in Equateur to meet the new threat. Ambassador
Timberlake, however, is skeptical concerning Mobutu's abil-
ity to arrest the present military trend in favor of the dis-
sidents.

could invade Equateur Province
if provided with large-scale UAR aid. Previously, he had
indicated that massive outside
aid would be a prerequisite for any invasion of Katanga. In
view of his supporters' recent military successes--achieved
despite severe logistical obstacles and with comparatively
little outside assistance--Gizenga probably will exploit to the maximum his present psychological momentum. In Equateur
the dissidents will be able to count on at least the tacit sup-
port of the UAR battalion--the only UN force in the north-
ern part of the province--which controls at least three air-
fields there.

In Katanga, the UN has moved a 600-man Moroccan bat-
talion to the northern part of the province in a move to try to
prevent large-scale fighting between the dissidents and Katan-
gan forces. According to the American Consulate in Elisabeth-
ville, Europeans there are despondent and Africans tense; there
continue to be rumors of increasing anti-white as well as anti-
Tshombe sentiment in the area.

President Toure of Guinea, following a visit to Yugoslavia,
on 11 January requested the UN to withdraw Guinea's 750-man
contingent from the Congo by 20 January.
Toure and President Tito called upon the UN to disarm
Mobutu's army, to release ex-Premier Lumumba, and to re-
store normal governmental operations in the Congo. Toure's
move appears designed to emphasize his solidarity with his host
--who earlier withdrew Yugoslavia's token UN contingent--as
well as to place Guinea in the forefront of those African states
supporting Gizenga. The UN appears unlikely to oppose a
Guinean withdrawal.

13 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
Bolivian President Invites Official Czech Visitors

Czech Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hajek, accom-
panied by representatives of the foreign and commerce min-
istries, is to make a six-day visit to Bolivia beginning next
week. President Paz invited Hajek, who is reportedly en
route to the Brazilian presidential inauguration on 31 Jan-
uary. A government spokesman is quoted in the press as
stating that Hajek is authorized to make a definitive offer of
Czech installation of an antimony smelter in Bolivia. Bolivia's
annual antimony production is five to six thousand metric tons.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may have been prompted in part by
an interest in dramatizing Bolivia's interest in foreign economic
help. Paz is seeking an emergency increase in American aid.
Vice President Juan Lechin recently interrupted a trip to the
United States, Europe, and Asia after a stop in Washington and
returned to Bolivia in order, as a close associate of Lechin's
described it, "to urge the government to make the United States
implement its aid promise" before the Eisenhower administra-
tion goes out of office.

The Bolivian Government has been under heavy domestic
pressure since last fall to accept bloc economic aid first sug-
gested to a Bolivian parliamentary delegation in Moscow last
July. A Soviet parliamentary delegation which visited La Paz
in late December tentatively offered a credit of $150,000,000
with details of the offer to be worked out during a visit to Mos-
cow probably in February or March of a Bolivian economic del-
egation.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may alternatively be designed to
tighten the pressure of extremist agitation for acceptance of bloc
aid by presenting an appearance of new Bolivian-bloc economic
negotiations. The Paz administration appears to be close to the
final stages in its negotiations for substantial economic and tech-
nical aid from sources which include the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank, the US Government, and a private West German
company which has secured a federal government guarantee in
Bonn. The aid is for the virtually bankrupt Bolivian Mining Cor-
poration (Comibol). Paz believes that the rehabilitation of
Comibol will provide him with a significant increase in support
from the politically important miners.

13 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Plotting Resumes in Guatemala

Plotting against the government of President Miguel
Ydigoras Fuentes has resumed. Dissension in the army,
which led to an abortive revolt on 13 November, continues,
and opposition political parties are seeking to exploit it.
The President disclosed to the American ambassador on 10
January that he had discovered a conspiracy among senior
army officers and that he is sending a number of them to
diplomatic and consular posts abroad. In his conversation
with the ambassador, Ydigoras was vitriolic against the
Guatemalan congress, which has stymied his program in re-
cent sessions, despite the fact that a majority of the deputies
were Ydigoras supporters at the time of the December 1959
congressional elections. The ambassador commented that
he has never seen Ydigoras so emotional and showing such
visible signs of harassment.

Although the threat to the President is serious, he is
a skillful political manipulator and has already coaxed
and bribed one party to leave the three-party opposition
"unity pact" concluded early last month. He now is applying
his divide-and-rule tactics against the leftist, non-Commu-
nist Revolutionary party, the only party in Guatemala with
a degree of mass support and the President's most potent
civilian adversary.

Meanwhile, members of the underground Communist
party are predicting a coup attempt sometime this month,
the Communists will lend only token aid to the plotters, but that
once Ydigoras is overthrown the Communists will make "an
intense effort" to take over the new government, "as the Com-
munists did in Cuba."

13 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
