More Political Arrests Expected in Turkey

The arrest of at least 65 persons, including military personnel and civil servants, in Ankara on 24-25 December may have been the beginning of a widespread campaign to uproot suspected nuclei of opposition. As many as 150 persons may have been arrested in Ankara and 100 others may soon be arrested in Istanbul. A campaign of arrests in the major cities of Turkey is reported to be imminent for the alleged purpose of creating a "stabilizing mood" throughout the country prior to the convocation of the Constituent Assembly. According to the Turkish Press Liaison Bureau, "certain unfortunate and greedy persons with a reactionary mentality and extreme partisan interest" have engaged in activities contrary to the interests of the nation. Some of those arrested were charged with distributing anti-regime leaflets and other disruptive propaganda.

The Committee of National Union (CNU) has denied rumors of a counterrevolutionary movement in Turkey, but the activities and expressions of concern by some members of the CNU suggest that antiregime sentiment may be increasing. Some reports indicate that military officers who were forced to retire last August are also organizing and preparing for political action.

Widespread arrests at this time may actually help promote and consolidate any incipient opposition movement. Indiscriminate repression of suspected resistance could backfire, especially in a situation where the complete loyalty of the armed forces may be questioned.

Meanwhile representatives of various political and social groups are being chosen to serve in a 272-man chamber of representatives which, with the 23-member CNU sitting as a senate, will convene on 6 January 1961. While it will have legislative powers, its primary mission will be to approve a new constitution and lay the groundwork for national elections. The CNU will retain its power position, however, through a formula which in effect amounts to a legislative veto.
