Nepal: The Communist party in Nepal is reportedly divided in its interpretation of King Mahendra's 15 December takeover of the government. One wing views the King's move as a swing to the right, while the other argues that the King's ouster of the Nepali Congress government will actually help the Communist party. Mahendra is reportedly withholding action against the Communists at least for the time being. Several of the party's top leaders, en route home from the Moscow conference, are in India; those in Nepal were not arrested in the King's roundup of politicians. The moderate composition of the King's caretaker council of ministers, announced on 26 December, may strengthen the Communist faction which is urging opposition to the King's "rightist" actions.

Laos: The Soviet ambassador in Cambodia apparently is encouraging Souvanna Phouma to resist Western pressures for his formal resignation as prime minister of Laos; his resignation would undercut the bloc's efforts to justify support for Kong Le and the Pathet Lao on grounds that Souvanna heads the legal government. Souvanna reportedly has met privately with Soviet officials, including Ambassador Abramov, in Phnom Penh on at least two occasions within the past few days. These diplomats also may be seeking to convince Souvanna that he should reconsider his rejection of a Neo Lao Hak Sat invitation to come to Sam Neua.

Seven Soviet AN-12s flew to North Vietnam from Canton on 27 December--the first military cargo planes to do so. Six of these aircraft landed at Haiphong and one at Hanoi; at least two of these large transports have left North Vietnam.

In Laos an unarmed American diplomatic aircraft, conducting an observation flight about 70 miles north of Vientiane with the concurrence of the Laotian Government, was damaged by small-caliber fire on 27 December. A Soviet IL-14 directly beneath the American plane was in the process of making airdrops to rebel ground forces in the area and may have fired at least some of the shots.
(Page 3)
