II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indian Congress Party Continues to Lose Popular Support

Prime Minister Nehru's ruling Congress party recently received two dramatic illustrations of loss of popular support when its candidates were repudiated in municipal elections in Madras and Punjab states. The party lost its majority in Madras city, the seat of the state government, and in most other large towns in the state, despite the strong showing it had made in the national elections of 1957. The major gainer was the Dravidian Progressive Federation, which won 45 out of 101 seats in Madras city against the Congress' 37. The federation is a regional south Indian party of the lower classes, which opposes domination of south India by the "Aryan" north, attacks rule by the Brahmin class, and resents adoption of Hindi as the national language. The middle and upper classes in Madras apparently were apathetic toward the elections. In Punjab state, where the Congress party had also done well in 1957, it recently won less than a third of 391 seats at stake in municipal elections.

This trend away from the Congress party at the municipal level is reflected in other parts of India. Despite strenuous efforts by the party leadership since 1956 to improve organizational contacts at the grass roots, the party now has lost control of three of the four largest cities in the country--New Delhi, Bombay, and Madras--and controls Calcutta by only a bare majority. Awareness of this problem is shown by the fact that party president Indira Gandhi has just postponed a trip to Mexico, previously scheduled for May, and has declined an invitation to London in order to tour India on party business. Factionalism and apathy presumably will be her major targets.

The recent voting trend also indicates that the major achievements of the Nehru government in economic development are not being translated into political support. Madras state, for instance, has the best record of any state in India in implementing its plans for economic development, and its capable, active Congress party government had been preparing detailed long-range political and economic plans for the 1962 elections.
