[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOS REVIEW COMPLETED
USAF review(s) completed.

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Unusually high vehicle activity in North Korea reported (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ceylon asked to buy Southeast Asian rubber for delivery to China (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Jordan fears Israel plans military aggression (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Decisive measures against Catholic Church in Poland foreseen (page 4).

LATIN AMERICA

5. Cuban opposition groups reportedly plan demonstrations (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Unusually high vehicle activity in North Korea reported:

Communist vehicle sightings in North Korea rose to an all-time high of more than 34,000 during the week of 16 to 22 January, according to the Far East Air Force. Traffic was concentrated on the principal west coast arteries leading from the Sino-Korean border south through Pyongyang to the battleline and was more than double the amount sighted during the previous week.

Far East Air Force concludes that this heavy traffic denotes a major supply build-up in the Haeju-Kaesong area and indicates "unusual enemy operations normally associated with a pending offensive."

Comment: have also indicated a decided increase in enemy military activity in the area of the western front. Much of this activity is undoubtedly associated with supply activity.

Despite these preparations, the bulk of indications still points to enemy defensive intentions.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ceylon asked to buy Southeast Asian rubber for delivery to China:

The Indonesian and Burmese Governments have unsuccessfully approached with proposals to sell rubber for resale and reshipment to Communist China,
[PAGE 04]
Comment: Although contracts to sell Indonesian and Burmese rubber to the Chinese Communists have reportedly been concluded, Indonesia and Burma are reluctant to permit overt rubber shipments to China because of the UN-sponsored embargo. This report indicates that the two countries are considering contravention of the embargo by means of shipments through third parties.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Jordan fears Israel plans military aggression:

According to Ambassador Green in Amman, Jordanian officials fear that recent border incidents along the Israeli armistice line are the forerunner of serious Israeli military aggression. The Amman government believes that the border disturbances were carefully planned by the Israelis.

The Ambassador further reports "on unimpeachable authority" that the Arab Legion had taken steps to avoid the possibility of clashes along the armistice line.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Decisive measures against Catholic Church in Poland foreseen:

The nature of the accusations at the Krakow trial of Catholic priests, together with the government's propaganda
[PAGE 05]
campaign against the church hierarchy, leads American Embassy officials in Warsaw to believe that a new phase of the utmost seriousness has been reached in the church-state conflict. The "revelations" at the trial may be used by the government to justify the replacement of high church officials in order to undermine the independent position of the Catholic Church in Poland.

Comment: After almost three years of quiescence in church-state relations, the government in late October resumed its campaign of terror and propaganda, leading to the current trial and violent press attacks on the church hierarchy and the local church organization in Krakow, traditional religious and cultural center.

LATIN AMERICA

5. Cuban opposition groups reportedly plan demonstrations:

Student and Communist youth groups are reportedly planning demonstrations throughout Cuba during the Jose Marti centennial celebration which begins on 27 January. They intend to denounce the present government and also to interfere with government acts of homage to the patriot Marti.

The Communist-led Democratic Federation of Cuban Women is also said to be planning a street demonstration for 28 January.

Comment: Since the coup of 10 March 1952, Cuban students have held rallies and demonstrated their bitter opposition to the Batista regime on official anniversaries. The Communists have been making strenuous efforts to make these demonstrations as large as possible.

The government, which has in the past alerted its security forces on such anniversaries, should be able to maintain control.
