[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. GAZA STRIP SITUATION (page 3).

2. KING SAUD SEEKS SYRIAN AND EGYPTIAN VIEWS ON
RECEPTION FOR RICHARDS MISSION (page 4).

3. EXTENSIVE UNDERGROUND ACTIVITY REPORTED IN
HUNGARY (page 5).

4. REVOLUTIONARY ATTEMPT IN CUBA (page 6).

5. STATE OF EMERGENCY ENDED IN THAILAND (page 7).

6. COMMUNIST POLICY ON ECONOMIC AID TO LAOS (page 8).

7. SUKARNO'S REVISED CONCEPT (page 9).

8. U NU SUGGESTS SINO-BURMESE BORDER AGREEMENT
BE SIGNED DURING VISIT TO KUNMING (page 11).

* * * *

THE TAIWAN STRAIT (page 12)

14 Mar 57
[PAGE 04]
1. GAZA STRIP SITUATION

Comment on:

Prime Minister Ben-Gurion's statement
in the Israeli parliament on 13 March
that "for the present" his government
is taking "political measures" to oppose
Egyptian attempts to regain control of
the Gaza strip indicates that the Israelis
are awaiting the outcome of Foreign Minister Meir's urgent appeal for American
intervention before deciding on further
steps. Ben-Gurion told the parliament
that if military action became "appropriate and necessary,"
it would be taken without any prior notice.

In making her appeal to Ambassador Lawson
on 12 March, Mrs. Meir accused UN secretary general Hammarskjold of serious bias against Israel and said she believed
the Egyptian appointment of an "administrative governor" for
Gaza had been made with Hammarskjold's knowledge, if not
with his consent. If it became necessary to send "our boys"
back to Gaza, Mrs. Meir said, "it would be with full knowledge that the UNEF would still be there."

In Gaza, the situation was
to have been "very calm" on 11 March, owing
principally to the Danish UNEF contingent's forceful handling
of crowds. had appeared in uniforms early during the UNEF take-over, but apparently had
been withdrawn or gone underground. On 13 March a large
demonstration denouncing US policy reportedly was dispersed peacefully.

Colonel Harkabi, the chief of Israeli military intelligence, has stated that the situation on the perimeter of the Gaza strip is very difficult since the border is not
clearly marked. Harkabi said he feared that UNEF patrols
might run into Israeli ambushes placed along the border, and
implied that his troops might be "trigger-happy" though they
had no intentions against the UNEF.
[PAGE 05]
2. KING SAUD SEEKS SYRIAN AND EGYPTIAN VIEWS ON
RECEPTION FOR RICHARDS MISSION

Comment

This appears to be a form of
pressure by Saud on Nasr, who probably
does not want to define his attitude toward the United States
at this time but does not want to antagonize Saud. Nasr may
well try to temporize further, possibly by asserting that such
definition should now await a settlement of the status of the
UNEF.
[PAGE 06]
3. EXTENSIVE UNDERGROUND ACTIVITY REPORTED
IN HUNGARY

Three main centers of organized resistance in Hungary have become increasingly active during the past month and
are in communication with one another,
the underground groups exist among workers on
Csepel Island (south of Budapest), miners in Pecs (southwest Hungary), and military personnel in Debrecen (southeast Hungary). The Csepel group allegedly has liaison with
less well-organized university students in Budapest.

the main purpose of the underground groups is to organize strikes as
economic and moral pressures against the regime. Peaceful demonstrations--the form not yet agreed upon--are
planned for "a day in March."

if
the regime uses arms against the demonstrators the country will be summoned to open revolt.

Comment

This information appears to confirm reports received in January by the US legation in Budapest concerning a workers' underground movement
on Csepel, which claimed to be a successor to the outlawed
Budapest Central Workers' Council. The legation believed
that this group was attempting to establish reliable contacts
throughout the industrial areas of the country and was having
some success.

Other reports have indicated that resistance groups in Hungary have been unable to agree upon a form
of protest for 15 March, the traditional national independence
holiday, and have also stated that most groups hope to avoid
bloodshed.
[PAGE 07]
4. REVOLUTIONARY ATTEMPT IN CUBA

Comment on:

The armed civilian attack on the presidential palace and a radio station in
Havana on 13 March was probably intended to spark a full-fledged revolution
to oust President Batista. Participants
were primarily students and included
Jose Echeverria, leader of the Communist-infiltrated Federation of University
Students, who was reported killed. The government appears
to have the situation under control. The prompt military action against the rebels will discourage new outbreaks in
Havana. Rebel forces may attack government installations
in Oriente Province, however, where there is strong public opposition to Batista, who seized power five years ago
this week.

On 12 March a revolutionary group whose main force was led by Echeverria was ready to act, convinced that any uprising begun in Havana
would succeed. Last summer the student leader signed a
pact with rebel leader Fidel Castro, who
has called for an island-wide general strike for
15 March.

While the military appears again to have
supported Batista, there have been indications of continuing
unrest in the military. Prolongation of serious political unrest may reduce army support of Batista.
[PAGE 08]
5. STATE OF EMERGENCY ENDED IN THAILAND

Comment on:

Marshal Sarit's relinquishment of his
temporary command of all the armed
forces and police and the announcement
ending the state of emergency indicate
that a new modus vivendi has been negotiated between the factions led by Sarit and police director
general Phao. Sarit has gained in prestige, but his opportunity for carrying out his reported objective of removing
Phao and his followers from all positions of influence appears to have passed.

The composition of the new government,
to be announced when the new legislature convenes on 14
March, will shed light on the degree to which Sarit's power
has increased and Phao's has declined. Sarit may become
minister of defense. There are indications that Phao may be
dropped from the cabinet. although retaining his post as police director general.
[PAGE 09]
6. COMMUNIST POLICY ON ECONOMIC AID TO LAOS

Comment on:

any Chinese Communist aid program for
Laos is to be limited to economic development and is not intended to replace
American aid. the aid would
not be used for the support of the Laotian army and police.
The Pathets, who have hitherto made a request for Chinese
aid a condition for settlement of their dispute with the Laotian government, were cautioned that the loss of American
aid would result in the overthrow of Souvanna Phouma, on
whom the Communists feel the success of their negotiations
depends.

Hanoi's sensitivity to Souvanna Phouma's
possible overthrow indicates that the internal political situation in Laos is the primary factor determining the nature of
the proposed Chinese Communist aid program. Although
Souvanna Phouma had indicated his own willingness to accept
Chinese aid, the cabinet and crown prince are apparently opposed to it at this time, and negotiations are now deadlocked on
this issue.
[PAGE 10]
7. SUKARNO'S REVISED CONCEPT

President Sukarno will announce a revised version of his proposed concept
for Indonesia's government by 18 March.
A new cabinet replacing that of Ali Sastroamidjojo
will also be announced prior to the 18th.
although the National Party and Nahdlatul Ulama will
hold the key positions in the cabinet, the Masjumi will feel
compelled to accept an offer of a minor role in order to avoid
being linked with the Communists, who will be excluded.

Sukarno plans to proceed with the formation of an advisory council which would include Communist
representation. A new feature has been added to his concept,
however, in the form of a proposal to set up a Reconstruction
Planning Board under former vice president Hatta. In tentatively accepting this position, Hatta reportedly has laid down
conditions that no Communists be on the board and that the
cabinet be committed to carry out the board's recommendations.

Comment

The relationship between the advisory
council and the planning board is unclear.
Sukarno's reported concessions may be a ruse to give the impression of meeting the chief demands of the various dissident movements in Indonesia. The Ali government would be
removed, Hatta restored to office, and the promise held out--
through the person of Hatta--for greater local autonomy and
economic development, with the Communists still excluded
from the cabinet.

This would, however, be only a temporary
solution to Indonesia's problems. The various provinces will
[PAGE 11]
continue to demand a greater share of the national wealth,
and Sukarno--with his Communist and nationalist supporters--will continue to resist the trend toward federalism.

The army remains the key as to whether
such a settlement will be implemented, and there have been
suggestions that it may seek to establish a military junta.
The army's position is likely to be decided at a 15 March meeting of the general staff in Djakarta to which all ranking officers,
including those who have been leading the autonomy movements
in the outer islands, have been invited.
[PAGE 12]
8. U NU SUGGESTS SINO-BURMESE BORDER AGREEMENT
BE SIGNED DURING VISIT TO KUNMING

Burmese prime minister U Nu has suggested to Chou En-lai that Nu's visit to
Kunming, beginning on 26 March, would
be an appropriate occasion for the signing of the Sino-Burmese border agreement.

Comment

Now that Burma has succeeded in overcoming the objections of the Kachin
minority to the cession of three small villages to China,
Rangoon is anxious to get early signature of an agreement
which is essentially favorable to Burma.

Chou En-lai may well offer some pretext for further delay at this time.
[PAGE 13]
SUMMARY
13 February - 13 March 1957

THE TAIWAN STRAIT

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Taiwan Strait Problem

1. There were no significant combat operations in the area
during the period.

2. Small vehicular-type revetments have been completed at
Lungtien, Lungchi, Chingyang, Hluian and Nantai airfields. This
construction may be an indication that a more advanced degree of
readiness has been established at these airfields. There continue
to be no aircraft, however, at any of the Communist airfields along
the Taiwan Strait.

3. Aerial photography confirms a minimum of 100 Chinese
Communist artillery pieces on Amoy Island, an increase of 29 over
the total observed last July. Signs of activity around a number of
covered emplacements suggest that the actual number of such weapons on Amoy is perhaps in the neighborhood of 150. This probably
does not represent a recent build-up, since artillery organic to the
Chinese Communist army units accepted as being on Amoy would
total about 150 pieces.

4. Indications are that the Chinese Nationalists intend to increase the number of 155-mm. artillery pieces in the Quemoys
and Matsu group from some 40 to 70 in the near future. These additions would enhance Nationalist capabilities to harass ships attempting to enter Amoy and Foochow harbors.

5. In their propaganda on Taiwan in recent weeks, the Chinese Communists have intensified appeals for "Nationalist defections
in order to bring about a "peaceful liberation." Portraying the
United States as an unreliable ally, the Communists charge that
Americans are supporting elements on Taiwan critical of the Nationalist government.
