[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
10 August 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

3. Comment on MacDonald's statement emphasizing Vietnamese independence (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian note to Great Britain indicates no desire to compromise (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Czech Communists step up production and socialization campaign (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Austro-Polish trade talks broken off (page 5).
7. Dutch Foreign Minister disgusted with Schuman Plan meeting (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Comment on MacDonald's statement emphasizing Vietnamese independence:

British Commissioner General for Southeast Asia MacDonald may have been intending to force the French to clarify their relationship with the Associated States when he called attention to Letourneau's June statement in Washington that Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia enjoy what amounts to dominion status within the French Union. At a press conference MacDonald praised Letourneau's sincerity which has "proved beyond doubt that France's purpose is the complete national freedom of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia on a basis of fraternal equality with France and other free nations."

MacDonald was in effect outlining the aims of Vietnamese nationalism, not current French policy. Letourneau's remark elicited a rebuke by President Auriol and was censored in Saigon and apparently in Paris.

NEAR EAST- AFRICA

4. Iranian note to Great Britain indicates no desire to compromise:

Ambassador Henderson reports that the 7 August Iranian note to Great Britain which offered to reopen oil negotiations was ill-timed and appeared to nullify current American and British efforts to prepare a joint approach to Iran.

Comment: The intemperate Iranian note demands several million pounds allegedly owed to Iran by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. It shows that Mossadeq has no intention of compromising with the British despite Iran's desperate need for funds.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Czech Communists step up production and socialization campaign:

The US Embassy in Prague believes that the Czech Communist regime now feels itself strong enough to take vigorous measures to increase industrial production and liquidate "class enemies." The Ministry of State Control and the newly created Ministry of Railroads have been given extraordinary powers to deal with production lags and labor problems. The drive against the kulaks is being intensified, and the Embassy anticipates that the deportations of "politically unreliables" from Prague, Bratislava and Brno will spread.

Comment: An intensified socialization drive has been apparent in both Czechoslovakia and Hungary since June. The Czech campaign points up the fact that the party has recovered from the effects of last winter's major purges.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Austro-Polish trade talks broken off:

The Polish delegate at the Austro-Polish trade negotiations in Vienna has "temporarily" suspended discussions and returned to Warsaw. Prior to his departure, he proposed an interim three-month extension of the existing agreement with a 25 percent increase in selected quotas.

The Austrians are reportedly receptive to this proposal; they believe, however, that the possibility of concluding a new agreement in November will depend on the urgency of Poland's need to sell coal at a time when Austria is faced with a winter coal shortage.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
Comment: The probability that Poland is counting on a weakening of Austria's bargaining position emphasizes Austria's need to use its favorable coal credit with Poland immediately to increase its stockpiles of coal.

7. Dutch Foreign Minister disgusted with Schuman Plan meeting:

Dutch Foreign Minister Stikker has informed the American Embassy in The Hague that at the recent meeting in Paris he told the Schuman Plan ministers of his disgust at their "pettiness, indecision and nationalism."

In an effort to put an end to the "scheming" of France, Italy, Belgium and Luxembourg for individual advantage in the organization, he offered to forego such advantages for the Netherlands provided the other countries would "get together, organize, and get something done." Monnet, the real author of the Schuman Plan, twice offered to resign and accused French Foreign Minister Schuman of having "sunk the cause of European unity."

Stikker does not expect any concrete results from the current meeting in Luxembourg.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
