Situation in Nepal

The final procedural steps necessary for the establishment of a popularly elected government in Nepal are now being taken. The constitution promulgated by the King in February took effect on 30 June and the members of Nepal's first elected lower house of parliament were sworn in on 1 July. Prime Minister B. P. Koirala's temporary cabinet formally resigned at the same time and was immediately reconstituted, apparently with the same personnel--three of whom were promoted from deputy minister to minister. The final step of establishing the senate will soon be completed and both houses of parliament may convene by 15 July.

Koirala's new government, which is expected to pursue moderate socialist, neutralist policies, is apparently prepared to undertake its tasks with vigor and is already reported drawing up an economic development program stressing "impact" projects designed to gain it mass support. Indian Prime Minister Nehru's visit to Nepal from 11 to 14 June is said to have cleared the air between New Delhi and Katmandu, and Koirala has indicated his intention of "cooperating with both" India and the West. Though his government is committed to accept Soviet economic aid, Koirala has intimated that he intends to go slow in utilizing it. He will be under increasingly heavy pressure from the Communist world, however, as a Soviet embassy is to open in Katmandu soon and the Chinese Communists may press for the same privilege. The United States will also open a mission shortly.

Koirala's main difficulty is likely to be not with his cabinet but with the King, who dislikes Koirala and will probably attempt to curb him if his popularity appears to threaten royal prerogatives. This could lead to considerable friction and create further instability in the country. The King has well-entrenched conservative elements supporting him, while Koirala has the mandate of the people as expressed in the recent national elections.

9 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
