Situation in the Congo

The UN Command, which recently reinforced several
garrisons in northern Katanga, hopes to arrange a cease-fire
between the contending forces there. Clashes are reported
to have occurred recently between the Katanga gendarmerie
and Baluba tribesmen near Kabalo, about 100 miles north of
Manono. A UN official stated that UN troops will attempt to
prevent further advances by either side, but will use force
only as a last resort.

Tshombé is particularly incensed over UN intervention
in Katanga at this time; the presence of additional UN troops,
besides posing a threat to future operations by his forces,
might also adversely affect the already questionable loyalty
of some of the tribal chiefs in the area. Concerned that some
of these chiefs might be planning to withdraw from the Katanga
"state" and form separate provinces, Tshombé is said to be
planning a visit to the troubled areas in an attempt to dissuade
them from taking this action.

Mobutu apparently feels that if the Lisala meeting is suc-
cessful, he will be able to cope with any opposition to his plan.
He is said to believe that if he moves troops into northern Ka-
tanga, he could pressure Tshombé--his principal opponent--
into accepting a federal form of government. Mobutu report-
edly is convinced that the UN Command would welcome his aid
in "bringing Tshombé to heel" and that Tshombé's "Belgian
mercenaries" would not oppose a unified army. In addition to
the pressure Mobutu could exert on the Leopoldville politicians
with a unified army, he believes he can also count on the sup-
port of Foreign Minister Bomboko and Interior Minister Adoula,
who are known to share his opposition to a Congo confederacy.

Mobutu is less optimistic regarding a military arrangement
with the Stanleyville faction. Although willing to compromise
with General Lundula, Mobutu distrusts Gizenga, whom he con-
siders "more dangerous than Lumumba." Nevertheless, he be-
lieves a unified army can be realized by removing Gizenga from
power.

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7
