Prime Minister Mossadeq is planning to use the opening of trade negotiations with Poland and prospective oil negotiations with Czechoslovakia "to strengthen the position of the government and to refute the accusation that the government is following an anti-national and pro-American policy." "According to our friends," the Polish Minister reported, "the situation should be exploited and the agreement signed."

Comment: Rumors of Polish negotiations for Iranian oil have been circulating for several months. Considerable interest and coordination exists within the Soviet Orbit on the Iranian situation. There is no indication, however, that the Soviet bloc actually will purchase Iranian oil or that it intends to help the Mossadeq government to survive. Mossadeq is interested in securing an economic agreement to bolster his own position and to indicate that his government is following a neutral policy.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on Belgium's intransigence on the European Defense Community:

Belgium's participation in the European Defense Community is still uncertain, and current discussions in Paris and Brussels will probably be decisive. Foreign Minister van Zeeland has adopted an extremely cautious attitude and has stated that the Belgian Parliament is merely lukewarm to the plan. He says that if Belgium had to "take it or leave it" now, a decision against participation would receive popular and parliamentary approval.

Aside from constitutional objections, Van Zeeland is opposed to the top-heavy political structure borrowed from the Schuman Plan. The US Ambassador in Brussels believes that he is also concerned about the attitude of the Belgian King, who would probably object strongly to a transfer of authority over the country's armed forces.

Except for the Foreign Minister's half-hearted approaches to Parliament, there is no indication that the Belgian Government has made a definite attempt to induce favorable parliamentary consideration of the Defense Forces plan.
