Economic Aspects of Khrushchev's Speech

In his Supreme Soviet speech of 5 May, Khrushchev held out bright hope for major improvements in the Soviet consumer's welfare but, with the exception of the plan to alter the value of the ruble, disclosed little that was new. Plans to abolish income tax for factory and office workers and shorten the workweek were restatements of Seven-Year-Plan goals. Like other topics in the speech, these plans were discussed in a way designed to gain maximum propaganda benefit, but the Soviet consumer has been and will continue to be only a residual claimant on economic output.

Khrushchev continues to be extremely optimistic about overfulfillment of the Seven-Year Plan and about progress in "catching up." His data continue to be carefully selected to make the best impression--for example, comparisons in cloth production were again presented in linear measures, after a year of using the more realistic and less favorable square measurement.

Khrushchev reiterated the goal of a 41-hour workweek for all except collective farmers by the end of 1960, and of starting on a 35-hour workweek in 1964. Less than 30 percent of the 58,000,000 workers now have the 41-hour workweek, and the conversion has hardly started outside of heavy industry. Correction of hoarding and of inefficient use of labor, together with technological improvements, is making it possible for the USSR to carry out the cut in man-hours without sacrificing increases in output.

The income tax has been a very minor source (currently about 7 percent) of budget revenue, which depends mainly on indirect taxation, e.g., profit deductions and turnover tax. The abolition of income taxes will have the effect of raising slightly the take-home pay of most workers, although the more highly paid workers will have their wages decreased by an amount equivalent to the tax no longer charged.

Khrushchev stated that all prices and all payments will be revalued at the end of the year on the basis of ten old
