Public Pressures Increasing for British Nuclear Disarmament

The resolution passed on 4 May by the Amalgamated Engineering Union, Britain's second largest, demanding that the government renounce the testing, manufacturing, and stockpiling of nuclear weapons and the basing of such arms in the United Kingdom indicated that opponents of Labor's present nuclear weapons policy will have a majority at the party conference next fall. The party's policy now calls for an independent British nuclear deterrent pending formation of a non-nuclear "club." Three of the six largest trade unions, which make up the bulk of the Labor party membership, are on record favoring unilateral nuclear disarmament. Local Labor constituencies, which muster 750,000 votes at the conference, have long supported this view. Together these add up to the 3,300,000 votes required for a conference majority.

While party leader Gaitskell insisted as recently as 1 May that Britain could not disarm unilaterally and renege on its NATO commitments, he acknowledged that Labor's policy would have to be reconsidered. He implied that as a compromise to accommodate critics of the policy, the leaders might consider calling for an end to production of nuclear weapons but for retention of those already on hand. Any change in policy would come up for ratification at the conference.

The government's decision to abandon the Blue Streak missile project, which Labor contends is an admission of the impossibility of providing an independent British deterrent, gives party leaders an occasion for changing the party's nuclear defense policy without losing further prestige.

Rising antinuclear sentiment in Britain apparently is not confined to the Laborites. In commenting on the highly successful Easter week-end march sponsored by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, the American Embassy noted that the movement now contains supporters from among an influential cross-section of the British public. These factors will add to the pressures on the Macmillan government, already highly sensitive to public opinion on the issue, to achieve some tangible progress on disarmament in East-West negotiations.
