III. THE WEST

Khrushchev's Forthcoming Austrian Visit

Premier Khrushchev's expected visit to Austria this year--for which Vienna has proposed the week of 27 June to 3 July--will continue the notable increase in official exchanges between the two countries which has followed Chancellor Raab's visit to Moscow in July 1958. More than 30 comparatively high-level exchanges have occurred since then, highlighted by Defense Minister Graf's visit to Moscow in October 1958 and President Schaerf's visit a year later. As a result of Schaerf's trip, President Voroshilov has an invitation to visit Austria.

According to Austrian plans, Khrushchev will spend three days in Vienna--where he will be entertained with "all the pomp Austria can muster"--and will then tour the provinces. Austrian officials may hope the largely ceremonial occasion will also provide opportunity to discuss trade matters. Reparations deliveries--with the exception of oil--will be completed early next year, and Vienna has long hoped that these deliveries could be placed on a commercial basis after that.

Khrushchev will probably attempt to gain support for Soviet foreign policy positions such as that on disarmament, and he will urge the Austrians, both in public and in private, to follow a strictly neutral course. He will, as Soviet visitors have in the past, emphasize Austro-Soviet friendship and cite relations between the two countries as an outstanding example of successful coexistence. US Embassy officials in Vienna note that the USSR in the past has gained "one-sided propaganda and prestige advantage" from its exchange program with Austria. During his 1958 visit, for example, Raab--who was hoping at the time to obtain some alleviation of Austria's reparations burden--virtually credited the USSR with the successful conclusion of the state treaty.

Although the embassy officials doubt the exchange program has materially changed Austria's basic anti-Soviet feelings, they believe firsthand acquaintance with the USSR's technological achievements and power have impressed Austrian visitors.
