II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey

Occasional student demonstrations continue in the larger Turkish cities, and the security situation could deteriorate rapidly if the government implements reported plans to lift the parliamentary immunity and arrest four to six opposition deputies. The situation in Ankara remains tense, as indicated by the angry student demonstration which broke out in the capital on 5 May around the car in which Premier Menderes was riding. Menderes reportedly was jostled but uninjured.

Republican People's party (RPP) leader Inonu is reported pleased with the extent of political gains which he believes have accrued to his party during recent events. He feels that the RPP should remain quiet for the present and let the administration engender greater unpopularity with its oppressive measures. The RPP will continue to apply pressure on the government, however, as indicated by the action of RPP deputies in walking out of the National Assembly on 4 May when an RPP deposition requesting an investigation of the premier's recent actions was not read before the legislature.

The chief of the Turkish Armed Forces General Staff, General Erdelhun, in reviewing recent events in Istanbul for the American army attache on 3 May, stressed that no evidence had been uncovered that the RPP had participated in or directed the student demonstrations. This comment is contrary to recent statements by Menderes and the Ministry of Interior denouncing the RPP for instigating an "open rebellion." Erdelhun also stated that as long as he remains chief of the General Staff, the Turkish Army will not be used either to overthrow the government or to crush the opposition. Erdelhun's blunt statements indicate his firm determination to maintain the armed forces' traditional aloofness from politics and do much to clarify recent speculation about the army's potential role in future political crises. The reported sudden resignation of the commander of the Army Ground Forces on 5 May demonstrates, however, that important army leaders are opposed to the present government's policies.
