[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

1 March 1960

Copy No. C 68

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1 MARCH 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev, in press conference in Indonesia, again avoids directly linking signing of separate East German peace treaty to results of May summit meeting. (1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
UAR and Israeli forces apparently still on partial alert, but the concern over hostilities appears to have abated somewhat on both sides. (2)
Japan-- Opinion favoring retaliatory measures against South Korea growing rapidly. (3)
Nehru to meet with Burmese Premier-elect U Nu in early March. (4)
Cyprus negotiations progressing satisfactorily on less controversial issues but will become increasingly difficult when the size of British bases again comes up for discussion. (5)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 March 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: In his press conference remarks in Djakarta on 29 February Premier Khrushchev again carefully avoided directly linking his threat to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany to the results of the May summit conference. He stressed that a series of summit conferences would be necessary to solve international problems and expressed his expectation that the first meeting would make a good start toward this end. In an effort to appear responsive to Sukarno's appeal for Asian-African participation at future summit conferences, the joint communiqué expressed the hope that these meetings would be attended by other countries, including Asian and African states not members of alliances. In reply to a question at his press conference concerning Chinese Communist participation in a summit, Khrushchev stated that not only China but India, Indonesia, and Japan should be included.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel: UAR and Israeli armed forces apparently remain on partial alert, but the concern over hostilities appears to have abated somewhat on both sides. Many of the 5,000 Israeli reserves called up last week now have been released. UAR Foreign Affairs Under Secretary Ghalib informed the American Embassy on 28 February that "certain military units had been pulled back," presumably from the Sinai. This has not as yet been confirmed by American observers. UAR and Israeli officials are continuing to make public statements denying any aggressive intentions. Prime Minister Ben-Gurion is still scheduled to visit the US beginning on 8 March. United Nations Secretary General Hammarskjold has sounded out UAR and Israeli representatives in New York on the possibility of his making a personal visit to the Middle East.

[PAGE 05]
Japan - South Korea: Governmental and public opinion in favor of retaliatory measures against South Korea is rapidly growing

Ambassador MacArthur believes that Kishi will be forced to take countermeasures against Seoul's to avoid a storm of public protest. A top Japanese Foreign Ministry official has indicated that the Korean diplomatic mission might soon be expelled from Tokyo and all relations terminated and that subsequently trade relations would be developed with North Korea.

Burma-India: U Nu, who takes over again as Burmese prime minister in April, will visit New Delhi in early March, reportedly at Prime Minister Nehru's request. Nehru probably is interested in getting an informed report on the recently concluded Sino-Burmese border negotiations prior to his own meeting with Chou En-lai in April. A meeting between Nehru and U Nu, who have long been close, would also provide an opportunity to coordinate Indian-Burmese views on current international issues.

Cyprus: Negotiations on Cyprus designed to remove the less controversial differences between the British and Cypriots are progressing satisfactorily. Difficulties will again be encountered when the negotiators come to the principal issue of the size of future British military bases. Archbishop Makarios has achieved new prestige among the Cypriots as a result of his tough stand on the bases thus far, but he now is coming under increased pressure from the business community to reach a settlement. London may make minor concessions on the size of the bases in order to conclude the agreement, but it insists that military needs prevent the major reductions demanded by the Cypriots.

1 Mar 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Cyprus Negotiations

Recently renewed talks on Cyprus between Cypriot leaders and a representative of the British Colonial Office are proceeding satisfactorily, but only the less controversial issues have thus far been discussed. An agreement apparently has been reached on training facilities outside the military base areas which will be retained by the British after independence. Questions regarding administration and finance remain, however, and no attempt has yet been made to solve the all-important question of the size of the British bases.

The British have publicly announced that they will continue to demand 120 square miles for the military bases and have warned privately that only minor concessions can be made. While Archbishop Makarios has never publicly altered his insistence on a maximum of 36 square miles, he has indicated that a compromise placing 80 square miles under British sovereignty--with "special facilities" in the remaining 40--would be acceptable. Cypriot officials have privately stated that an eventual compromise at about 100 square miles may be possible.

Meanwhile, Makarios' prestige among the Cypriots remains high because of his firm opposition to the British demands. Unemployment and economic uncertainty, however, are causing the business community on the island to urge Makarios to reach an early settlement. Greek Cypriot leaders are also aware that continued delay or failure of the negotiations could damage, if not destroy, the unity recently displayed by Greek and Turkish Cypriots.

1 Mar 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
