[PAGE 01]
22 September 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. COMMENT ON ARGENTINE SITUATION (page 3).

3. COMMENT ON VIET MINH CABINET CHANGES (page 5).

* * * *

THE FORMOSA STRAITS
(page 6)

[PAGE 04]
1. COMMENT ON ARGENTINE SITUATION

The new governing junta established
as a result of truce negotiations between the victorious forces of the
Argentine revolution and the military
junta of the "loyalist forces" consists
of professional military leaders, none
of whom is known to be unfriendly to
the United States.

Retired army general Eduardo Lonardi
has been announced as the head of the new junta, which
will also include Admiral Rojas and Generals Bengoa and
Bergallo. Lonardi, who has a reputation for integrity,
was implicated in the unsuccessful September 1951 revolt.
Admiral Rojas commanded the rebel fleet during the cur-
rent revolt. General Bengoa, who is widely respected
throughout the army, was reported in the early stages of
the June 1955 revolt to be the rebel commander but later
claimed to be on Peron's side. He resigned from the
service in August. General Bergallo is believed not to
have been engaged in any political activities.

The new junta will be plagued both by
interservice rivalries and by the ever-present danger of
serious strikes and possible sabotage by the General
Confederation of Labor and those members of the Peron-
ista party who remain fanatically loyal to Peron.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. COMMENT ON VIET MINH CABINET CHANGES

President Ho Chi Minh's relinquish-
ment of the premiership to Foreign
Minister Pham Van Dong, together
with appointment of Vo Nguyen Giap and Phan Ke Toai
as vice premiers, formalizes an already existing ar-
rangement. Pham Van Dong has been closely associated
with daily direction of government affairs. There is no
indication that these changes result from factional strug-
gles or policy differences.

Ho's position now more closely re-
sembles that of Mao Tse-tung in Peiping. Ho remains
president of the state and chairman of the Lao Dong
(Communist) Party.

The announcement was made before
a session of the National Assembly hastily called to ap-
prove the government's policies and its campaign for
unification of all Vietnam. Ho's new position allows him
to stand above and apart from the government and thus
may enhance his value as a popular symbol in South
Vietnam as well as in the north.

[PAGE 07]
BIWEEKLY SUMMARY
(8-21 September 1955)

THE FORMOSA STRAITS

1. Military activity in the area remained at a low level
during the period. Small-scale artillery exchanges occurred
intermittently.

2. Chief, MAAG (Formosa), reported on 18 September
that President Chiang Kai-shek has ordered an additional
artillery battalion and another infantry battalion to reinforce
the Matsu garrison. The apparent basis for this is Chiang's
expectation of a Communist attack against Matsu sometime between
27 September and 15 October. Chief, MAAG, has pro-
tested and has reiterated his position that no more troops
should be sent to the offshore islands. Of the 21 infantry
divisions in the Nationalist army, 7 1/3 currently are on the
offshore islands and chief, MAAG, considers that this is al-
ready a larger force than can be adequately supported.

The Nationalists will probably proceed with this rein-
forcement, however, just as they did with the recent move-
ment of a division to Quemoy over strenuous MAAG objections.
The claim of an impending attack against Matsu is not con-
firmed by any other sources and is probably a fabrication to
justify this reinforcement. It may be that Chiang believes
that by committing an excessively large portion of his regu-
lar forces to the offshore islands, the US will be compelled
to support him in the event of a Communist attack.

[PAGE 08]
4. Peiping's tactics evidence a continuing determina-
tion to get the US to negotiate with Communist China on the
questions now dividing the two countries. Peiping's propa-
ganda and Wang Ping-nan's statements to Ambassador John-
son have hinted that the repatriation agreement would be
jeopardized if the Americans refused to get on with the
second phase of the Geneva talks.

[PAGE 09]
