[PAGE 01]
21 May 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Gas mask issue to Chinese Communists seen as propaganda maneuver (page 3).
2. US Army Attache comments on Chinese incursion into Indochina (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iraq ready to join MEC despite Anglo-Egyptian situation (page 4).
4. Turkey sees Soviet attack on Iran or Iraq as NATO problem (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Social Democrats attack EDC treaty on constitutional grounds (page 5).
6. French Cabinet balks at European Defense Community signature (page 6).
7. Italy unlikely to meet current military production goals (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Gas mask issue to Chinese Communists seen as propaganda maneuver:

Sixteen recently captured Chinese Communist soldiers reveal that they were either issued gas masks or instructed in the use of anti-gas field expedients during April 1952, according to Far East Command. Three possible reasons advanced by FECOM for such enemy preparations are that the Communists anticipate UN use of gas, that they intend to wage chemical warfare, or that the gas masks are to provide "proof" for enemy propaganda charges of the United States using CW in Korea.

FECOM concludes that available evidence fails to indicate enemy intentions of employing chemical warfare in the immediate future.

Comment: The issue of gas masks, confirmed in prisoner interrogations, probably is intended to support Communist charges of American use of chemical warfare agents in Korea.

While specific Communist propaganda allegations of US use of biological warfare ended in early April, a continuation of the American "atrocities" theme has been provided by recent charges that the United States has used CW agents in combat. Radio Pyongyang on 24 April detailed 33 incidents of alleged use of chemical warfare occurring between 27 February and 9 April, and again on 7 May charged that the United States used CW on 22 and 25 April.

2. US Army Attache comments on Chinese incursion into Indochina:

three Chinese battalions have crossed the Indochina border near Lao Kay in Tonkin, the US Army Attache in Saigon suggests that this may be a diversion to distract attention from Viet Minh preparations to attack in the coastal zone of Tonkin.

[PAGE 04]
He states, however, that in view of reports that 20,000 gallons of gasoline have recently been delivered across the border into Tonkin, the incursion could also be a protective move to cover an accelerated delivery of supplies to the Viet Minh.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iraq ready to join MEC despite Anglo-Egyptian situation:

The Iraqi Foreign Minister has told Assistant Secretary of State Byroade that Iraq is ready to co-operate in the establishment of a Middle East defense organization if the United States is prepared to "move ahead . . . on a realistic basis." The Foreign Minister is ready to tell Egypt that concern for its own defense makes it imperative for Iraq to take this step regardless of the Anglo-Egyptian situation.

The American Minister in Baghdad is "not certain" that Iraq could proceed in this matter in the face of hostile Egyptian propaganda.

Comment: This is the first strong endorsement of the Middle East Command by an Arab official. To date, reluctance to challenge the leadership of Egypt, which rejected the idea last fall, has prevented public support by Arab leaders. They have considered a settlement of the Anglo-Egyptian dispute as a necessary condition to organizing the Command.

On 15 May the Turkish Foreign Minister reiterated that plans for a Middle East Command should be carried out regardless of the Egyptian situation. He again suggested, however, that it would be better to postpone further action for two weeks.

[PAGE 05]
4. Turkey sees Soviet attack on Iran or Iraq as NATO problem:

Turkish President Bayar and the Chief of the Turkish General Staff told the American Ambassador recently that the Soviet Union would have to defeat or neutralize Turkey before conquering Iran and Iraq. Consequently a Russian attack on Iran or Iraq would force NATO, of which Turkey is now a member, to decide whether or not to declare war.

The President added that Turkey would be prepared to fulfill its NATO obligations, but he emphasized that it would be useless for his country to act alone against the Soviet Union.

Comment: Turkey, despite its membership in NATO, still fears that the West will sacrifice the Eastern Mediterranean in the interests of Western Europe. President Bayar's remarks appear to be part of the continuing Turkish effort to convince the West that the Eastern Mediterranean is vital to European defense.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Social Democrats attack EDC treaty on constitutional grounds:

The Social Democratic Party, which contends that any West German contribution to Western defense will require an amendment to the constitution, and hence approval by two-thirds of the parliament, has formally petitioned the Federal Constitutional Court to rule on the legality of German participation in the European Defense Community. The court has agreed to consider the case on 10 June.

The Social Democrats are now also trying to force a parliamentary debate on the Allied-German contractual agreement on 23 May, three days before the scheduled signature, by invoking a provision of the constitution for a special parliamentary session on the demand of one-third of the members.

[PAGE 06]
Comment: Several months ago Allied officials were seriously worried that the Federal Constitutional Court might support the Social Democrats’ position and thus force a general election or prevent German participation in the EDC. Several prominent German jurists, however, have since then expressed the opinion that a simple majority in the parliament is sufficient to ratify the treaty.

6. French Cabinet balks at European Defense Community signature:

There is considerable sentiment within the French Cabinet for postponing signature of the European Defense Community treaty and the Contractual Agreement with Germany, according to Under Secretary Maurice Schumann. He states that a full cabinet session will decide on 21 May whether Foreign Minister Robert Schuman will be authorized to sign.

Under Secretary Schumann expects that the Foreign Minister will be given the authority, but he indicated that Premier Pinay and other ministers are inclined to look upon the European Defense Community as a complicating factor in the government's domestic program.

Comment: Despite American pressure to have both instruments signed by 26 May, Adenauer and Schuman are still at loggerheads on the time and place for the tripartite and quadripartite meetings scheduled to precede signing.

This is a critical moment for Pinay, since the French Assembly has just reconvened and he is staking the like of his cabinet on parliamentary approval of a large bond issue.

7. Italy unlikely to meet current military production goals:

An analysis of data for the third quarter of the current fiscal year indicates that Italy is not likely to reach its military production goals. There has been a sharp decline in the rate of defense orders for hard goods and a 25 percent decline in the rate of deliveries. Nevertheless, the monthly rate of defense production is still substantially above that for the previous fiscal year.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Political considerations have prompted the Italian Government to retard its defense program until after the 1953 national elections. It wants to avoid the appearance that defense expenditures are too large in comparison with civil expenditures.
