GENERAL

1. Western delegates consider Soviet agreement at Foreign Ministers Conference unlikely:

The three Western delegates at the Deputy Foreign Ministers' Conference have expressed their personal views that the Soviet performance in Paris renders unlikely agreement with the USSR at a Foreign Ministers' meeting, should one be held. French delegate Parodi believes that all the USSR sees in a meeting now is its propaganda value and the opportunity to "split" the West, upset plans for a German military contribution, hinder Western rearmament, and prevent any Italo-Yugoslav settlement of the Trieste question. Parodi suggests that under present circumstances a Foreign Ministers' meeting might be dangerous. British delegate Davies questions whether the USSR still wants a Foreign Ministers' meeting except for propaganda purposes, since the USSR now knows that it cannot stop a German military contribution and the rearmament of the West. The British delegate suggests that the USSR may be using Four Power negotiations to determine whether to shift to a full war economy and to play for time while awaiting the possible effects of the Korean offensive and the political situation in the UK and France. Davies adds that the UK definitely wants a Foreign Ministers' meeting, since British public opinion insists that a meeting be held and because the UK believes there is a faint chance of agreement with the USSR at such a meeting. The delegates have tentatively discussed a direct approach to Moscow in an attempt to reach agreement on a Foreign Ministers' agenda. The US delegate adds that Communist propaganda indicates a possible Soviet proposal for a Five Power conference.

FAR EAST

2. Current lack of Communist aggressiveness in Korea deceptive:

The Intelligence Staff of the US Far Eastern Command, in an estimate of the enemy's capabilities, warns that the enemy's "quiescent attitude" of the past 48 hours "must not be construed as an indication he has spent his offensive effort." The estimate adds that all evidence points to an early resumption of the offensive and cites the extremely heavy southward movement of vehicles in the enemy's rear (over 2,800 during the night of 29-30 April) as an indication of such intentions.
