The Situation in Laos

The northeastern province of Xieng Khouang, after an interlude of about twelve days during which it supported the Souvanna Phouma government, has again swung its allegiance to General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. The circumstances leading to the switch are somewhat obscure, but tribal unrest among the Meos--a major ethnic group in the province--may have played an important role. General Amkha, the Vientiane garrison commander who was sent to represent the Souvanna government following the province's switch of support to Souvanna, has reportedly been arrested and flown to Savannakhet. Phoumi should have little difficulty effecting Amkha's defection if he should so choose; Amkha has shown a tendency to vacillate ever since the Kong Le coup.

In Vientiane, armed forces commander General Ouane claims to have warned Captain Kong Le on 7 October of the dangers posed by the growing strength of the Pathet Lao in the capital. He noted, however, that Kong Le was "so volatile" that he could not be relied on to pursue any agreed-upon course of action to its conclusion. The armed forces commander added that the real problem in Kong Le's Second Parachute Battalion was a deputy, Lt. Deuane, who he says was responsible for organizing a leftist youth rally in Vientiane on 4 October against the wishes of the government.

Premier Souvanna meanwhile has told Ambassador Brown in Vientiane that he will insist in the forthcoming peace talks that the Pathet Lao cease attacks throughout the country and return Sam Neua Province to government administration. If the Pathet Lao refuse these demands, Souvanna claims he will break off negotiations.

The minister of public works in the Souvanna regime has informed an American Embassy officer that Burma has agreed to sell foodstuffs and other merchandise to Laos. The goods would be delivered at the Laos-Burma border and brought by river craft to Luang Prabang and Vientiane via the Mekong River. The official stated the plan would be implemented as an alternative source of supply should the Thai blockade of Vientiane continue. Motor fuel has already been flown from Burma to Vientiane, however.
