THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 1 November)

The Egyptian-dominated Arab confedera-
tion of labor has called on Arab workers to blow up Western
oil installations if necessary to stop the flow of petroleum.
The federation also called for "destruction of foreign military
bases in Arab countries which could be used for aggression,
and for an immediate halt to loading and supplying of ships
and planes of "aggressive nations." (Press)

An announcement from Baghdad states
that a meeting of all Baghdad pact powers except Britain will
be held "soon." The Shah of Iran allegedly will chair the meet-
ing, which may also be attended by the president of Pakistan
(who is now visiting Tehran), and the Iraqi, Pakistani, Iranian
and Turkish foreign ministers. (Press)

Reports from Syria and Jordan indicate the
governments of these countries, while they feel obliged to sup-
port Egypt, are pessimistic over their capabilities. According
to one report, the Syrian army staff was reluctant to order mo-
bilization because neither the necessary materiel nor money
were available. The new Jordanian prime minister told Ambas-
sador Mallory on 31 October that his government was in a "terri-
ble position" and that the only thing which could save Jordan
would be a cease-fire between Israel and Egypt.

Iraq, however, has proclaimed martial law
and partial mobilization. The Iraqi chief of staff stated on 1
November that the Iraqi 1st Division began concentrating at pump-
ing station H-3 near the Jordan border on 31 October, prepara-
tory to a move into Jordan as soon as a Jordanian request was
received. The chief of staff said he expected the request later
in the day.

The Libyan government announced on 31
October that it would use all means in its power to prevent the
use of British forces in Libya against Egypt. According to the
press, Libya has declared martial law. British units in Libya
are reported on a precautionary alert: 12 tanks have been moved
to the vicinity of Benghazi.
