LATE ITEM

DE GAULLE AND THE ALGERIAN CRISIS

Since 16 September 1959 when De Gaulle announced that Algerians would have a free choice in determining their own ultimate political future, hostility to the president and the government had grown steadily among settler and army elements in Algeria. The announcement of a meeting in Paris on 22 January of key cabinet ministers with political and military leaders from Algeria aroused settler extremists, who were already worked up over revived rebel terrorism in "pacified" areas and by the fear that the lengthy conference of rebel chiefs in Tripoli was aimed at facilitating negotiations with Paris. In this atmosphere, General Massu's interview criticizing De Gaulle's Algerian policy, which was published on 19 January in a German newspaper, forced the government to recognize openly that large elements of the army shared settler concern lest the Moslem majority be permitted to cut Algeria's ties with France. The government confirmed on 20 January its intention to pursue its announced Algerian policy, and on 22 January De Gaulle's decision to relieve Massu was announced. It evoked no overt army reaction in Algiers, but 20,000 settlers demonstrated on 23 January. The next day they set up street barricades, reportedly in the first stage of a plot by extremist civilian and army groups which may have been designed to take advantage of the expected reaction to Pinay's ouster from the government on 13 January. There is some evidence that the size of the demonstration was a disappointment to the plotters. They had hoped to overwhelm the authorities by a mass turnout which would have convinced military leaders the army would have to assume command as in 1958. The civilian extremists seem to have been disappointed when no overt military participation developed, but they were nevertheless reassured by the reluctance of the paratroop units surrounding the barricades to limit the movements of the insurgents.

Insurgent Position and Activities

A clash between settlers and gendarmes on 24 January left 19 dead and 141 wounded. General Challe immediately declared a state of siege, forbade public assembly, and summoned regiments from the interior. By 25 January the insurgents had

30 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
