East German Police Step Up Harassment of British Military Liaison Mission

Recent developments suggest that Moscow is supporting East Germany's intensified pressure on the Allied Military Liaison Missions (MLM) accredited to Colonel General Yakubovsky, commander in chief of the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany. On 4 July, the British commander in chief in West Germany was handed Yakubovsky's formal answer to the British note of 24 June which had strongly protested the assault by East German secret police on Brigadier Packard and other members of the British mission. In contrast with his apparently conciliatory remarks on receiving the British note, Yakubovsky in his note accused the British of carrying out "activities which, under the present circumstances, could lead to undesirable consequences," and undertook to guarantee safety of mission personnel only "so long as the members of the mission strictly observe the laws and regulations of the German Democratic Republic."

Meanwhile, East German police have intensified their harassment of the British mission, which they appear to have selected as a special target, using "traffic violations" as a pretext. On 4 July, the East Germans attempted to force MLM members into an East German police car. On 5 July, a mission car was stopped in Potsdam on the allegation it had exceeded the speed limit. On the same day, East German police halted a British mission officer traveling on the Helmstedt-Berlin Autobahn and threatened him with armed violence. The East Germans also have harassed the US and French missions, but to a lesser degree.

Fearing that the East Germans will stage even more serious incidents in an effort to pin spying charges on mission officers, the British commander in chief in West Germany has temporarily suspended travel by the mission. London, which thought Yakubovsky's letter was highly unsatisfactory, is considering whether to take the question up on a high diplomatic level, either in Moscow or London, or to continue action through military channels.

Meanwhile, the chief of the French mission, who submitted a stiff letter of protest to Yakubovsky following an assault on a mission car on 8 June, has received no answer.
