[PAGE 01]
27 March 1951
Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

NEAR EAST

7. US Embassy Moscow comments on possible Soviet expansionist moves in Iran (page 7).

EASTERN EUROPE

9. Widespread Soviet activity reported in Albania (page 8).

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austria acting to reduce Communist police strength (page 9).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

[PAGE 04]
[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

[PAGE 06]
[PAGE 07]
NEAR EAST

7. US Embassy Moscow comments on possible Soviet expansionist moves in Iran:

In reporting heavy Soviet propaganda emphasis on US “involvement” in Premier Razmara’s assassination and on alleged US efforts to supplant UK domination in Iran, the US Embassy in Moscow points out that the USSR, by thus blaming all disturbances that may occur in Iran on the US, could be paving the way for an even more vigorous policy toward Iran. The Embassy suggests that such a policy might involve invoking the 1921 Iranian-USSR treaty and intervening militarily in Iran in order to “defend” that country from foreign domination. As to the possibility that the USSR will achieve its goal of playing a paramount role in Iran without invoking military measures — and thus without risking a major war — the Embassy notes how welcome to the USSR is the movement to nationalize the Iranian oil industry. In the Embassy’s opinion, the USSR will increase its pressure on Iran at the present critical juncture.

Comment: The USSR is reportedly conducting spring maneuvers on the Iranian border, and several references to the 1921 treaty have been noted in Communist propaganda. While these undoubtedly will be utilized by the USSR as part of its war of nerves against Iran, there is no evidence that the USSR is contemplating military action at this time.

Present Soviet press attention to developments on the oil question, and earlier reports of possible Soviet preparations (at the USSR-Iranian trade and financial talks) for reopening the issue of oil concessions, suggest that the USSR may now renew its efforts to gain a measure of control over Iranian oil fields.

[PAGE 08]
9. Widespread Soviet activity reported in Albania:

the presence of Soviet officials in every branch of the Albanian Government and industry, but reports no Russian troops in the country with the exception of about 50 instructors.

the other Satellites are required to furnish food and miscellaneous materials to support the new Albanian Five Year plan, while the USSR sends about 5 Liberty-type ships monthly, loaded with oil machinery, electrical equipment and pipeline, into Durazzo harbor.

the general economic condition of the country has improved during the last six months, particularly in oil production.

the only foreign air traffic permitted into the country is one Soviet aeroflot plane weekly, while two new YAK-9 fighter planes patrol Tirana, reportedly in order to stop clandestine overflights. The attache reports that heavily armed guards patrol the blacked-out streets at night.

Comment: Available information on Soviet and Satellite shipments to Albania tends to confirm the reported emphasis on economic aid, with the probable aim of shoring up the stability of the Albanian regime. The Yugoslav Government still allows some Soviet overflights of Albania, but makes such permission contingent on each plane’s landing in Belgrade.

[PAGE 09]
WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austria acting to reduce Communist police strength:

Austrian Interior Minister Helmer has assured US High Commissioner Donnelly that the Austrian Government will take immediate steps to remove Communists from the police forces, beginning with the discharge of 400 members of the Vienna administrative police. Helmer said that other purge operations would be conducted more slowly because of Soviet opposition and the absence of legislation enabling the government to dismiss police officers on the grounds of pro-Communist sentiments. Helmer added that he has sent a reliable police officer to Graz (second to Vienna in Communist infiltration) to eliminate those responsible for Communist success there.

Donnelly comments that the USSR will strongly resist any measures calculated to reduce Communist representation on the police force and that these developments may bring a “tightening of the general situation” in Austria.

Comment: The surprisingly strong pro-Communist vote in the recent Vienna police union elections prompted a US-UK survey of Austrian police, which revealed that Communist strength in the police organization is much greater than responsible Austrian officials had previously indicated. Since then, the US High Commissioner has pressed the Austrian Minister of Interior for remedial action.
