[PAGE 01]
2 December 1953  
Copy No. 84  

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  

Office of Current Intelligence  
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY  

GENERAL  
2. Swiss reject participation in Korean political conference (page 3).

SOVIET UNION  
3. Ambassador Bohlen comments on removal of high party official (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA  
4.

SOUTH ASIA  
5. Afghanistan seeks improvement of relations with Pakistan (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA  
6. Turkey interested in defense pact with Pakistan (page 5).  
7. Jordan may agree to armistice talks with Israel (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE  
8. Adenauer wants Allies to stall on four-power conference (page 7).  
9. Copenhagen rejects peacetime stationing of foreign units in Denmark (page 7).  
10. Reported offer of Ho Chi Minh increases French difficulties (page 8).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL  

2. Swiss reject participation in Korean political conference:

According to a spokesman of the Swiss Foreign Ministry, the Federal Council has decided that Switzerland cannot participate as an observer in the proposed Korean political conference.

Comment: The Swiss government has increasingly felt that the truce as originally envisaged cannot be enforced.

[PAGE 04]
India has also declined to attend the conference as an observer, and Sweden has said that it could not participate with any enthusiasm.

SOVIET UNION  

3. Ambassador Bohlen comments on removal of high party official:

Ambassador Bohlen, in commenting on the removal of V. M. Andrianov as first secretary of the Leningrad Oblast committee, points out that it is still premature to attribute Andrianov's removal to an intraparty struggle. He suggests, nevertheless, that the presence of All-Union party secretary N. S. Khrushchev at the meeting which ousted Andrianov probably indicates that important party matters were discussed.

Comment: Andrianov has long been associated with Malenkov. The retention of the rest of the Leningrad party hierarchy, with the exception of N. G. Ignatov, who was transferred to work in the Central Committee apparatus in Moscow, suggests that no widespread shake-up is contemplated in the Leningrad area.

SOUTHEAST ASIA  
4.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA  

5. Afghanistan seeks improvement of relations with Pakistan:

The Afghan foreign minister told the Pakistani ambassador in Kabul that the purpose of his government's request to renegotiate the Anglo-Afghan treaty of friendship of 1921 is to clear the way for a treaty with Pakistan.

The Pakistani ambassador was "cautiously optimistic" that a satisfactory arrangement could be reached, though he, like the British ambassador and the American charge, felt Afghanistan might be seeking to force discussion of the Pushtoonistan question.

Comment: Afghanistan is probably seeking an opportunity to settle border and trade disputes with Pakistan in a new setting. The new Afghan government, unlike its predecessor, has been moderate on the question of creation of an independent Pushtoonistan. It probably recognizes that it cannot hope to embarrass Pakistan by renewing strong agitation for tribal autonomy.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA  

6. Turkey interested in defense pact with Pakistan:

President Bayar has confirmed Turkey's willingness to sign a defense pact with Pakistan, according to the governor general of Pakistan, who recently concluded diplomatic conversations in Ankara. Bayar also affirmed Turkey's willingness eventually to include Iran in the agreements, but emphasized Ankara's refusal to include any Arab state in regional defense planning.

[PAGE 06]
Comment: This report illustrates the seriousness with which Turkey and Pakistan view mutual defense problems and underscores their willingness to perfect a regional defense arrangement.

Recurring friction involving Turkey and the Arab states precludes any inclusive Near Eastern collective security pact, but there is increasing possibility of an alignment which may eventually include Turkey, Iraq, Iran, and Pakistan.

7. Jordan may agree to armistice talks with Israel:

American charge Lynch in Amman believes there is a fair chance that Jordan will agree to a UN request to hold talks with Israel within the framework of the general armistice agreement. He states, however, that Amman is extremely apprehensive over the domestic implications of any action which might be construed by the opposition as opening peace negotiations with Israel, and that the prime minister wants to discuss the subject with the other Arab states.

The Iraqi prime minister told American ambassador Berry in Baghdad that he would not oppose Jordan's participation in a conference. The Egyptian Foreign Office reportedly holds a similar viewpoint.

Comment: Such a conference, which under the armistice agreement is mandatory when called by the UN secretary general, offers little hope of reducing tension. Israel apparently called for the talks in an effort to avert the recent UN resolution on Qibya, and the domestic situation in Jordan precludes any significant changes in its policy toward Israel.

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE  

8. Adenauer wants Allies to stall on four-power conference:

Chancellor Adenauer, in a conversation with Ambassador Conant on 30 November, recommended that the Allied reply to the latest Soviet note be so phrased as to result in postponement of a four-power conference. He feels that it would be "dangerous in the extreme" for the Bermuda meeting to agree on an immediate conference, since the present French government is in no position to make firm commitments on European policy.

Comment: Adenauer was previously quoted as stating unqualifiedly that the Allies should accept the Soviet offer of 26 November for four-power talks. He may now fear that present French leaders would be unduly influenced by domestic and political considerations in view of the proximity of the presidential election.

9. Copenhagen rejects peacetime stationing of foreign units in Denmark:

Top Danish officials told General Gruenther during his visit to Copenhagen that their country could not accept an offer to station foreign NATO air units in Denmark in peacetime.

Gruenther comments that this decision will substantially reduce NATO military capabilities in northern Europe, and that SHAPE military planning will have to be revised. He believes that as far as military effectiveness is concerned, there is no satisfactory alternative.

Comment: The American embassy in Copenhagen had believed that Denmark might agree at least to the temporary stationing of American air units in the country.

The Danish decision may adversely influence Norway's attitude on the question of stationing NATO units in that country during peacetime.

[PAGE 08]
10. Reported offer of Ho Chi Minh increases French difficulties:

The American embassy in Paris feels that Ho Chi Minh's reported willingness to open negotiations to end the Indochina war has increased considerably the difficulties of the French government. While no one in the cabinet expects anything specific to result, Minister for Associated States Jacquet believes Ho is serious and will attempt to open negotiations after the Bermuda conference, "probably on impossible terms."

Comment: The French cabinet is to discuss the reported offer from Ho on 2 December. Those members of the government who have been anxious for five-power talks will increase their pressure on Premier Laniel to negotiate.
