[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

7 July 1960

Copy No. C 71

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

7 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo Republic: A mutiny by at least two garrisons of the Belgian-officered Force Publique on 6 July has seriously jeopardized security in and around Leopoldville, which has been the scene of sporadic tribal clashes for the past week. Premier Lumumba has subsequently removed the Force Publique's Belgian commander, and appears to have acceded to the mutineers' demand for the appointment of African officers. Such actions may nullify the effectiveness of the 24,000-man security force, which has played a major role in containing recent tribal outbreaks in the Congo. Although the mutiny has not yet spread to posts outside Leopoldville Province, Belgian army units near Leopoldville have reportedly been alerted to intervene on behalf of Belgian nationals if necessary.

Japan: Japanese leftists plan to extend their opposition to the security treaty by a demonstration at the US naval air station at Atsugi near Tokyo on 10 July in their effort to reinvigorate mass action against the US presence in Japan.
[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Austria - West Germany: Foreign Minister Kreisky and other top Austrian officials have welcomed the formal unpublicized protest of the West German ambassador against Khrushchev's abuse of Austrian hospitality in attacking Chancellor Adenauer. They feel it supports their own objections to Austrian Chancellor Raab's indiscreet conduct in associating himself with Khrushchev's activities. American officials in Vienna are disturbed, however, at the extent to which the Austrian Government is attempting to balance its neutrality policy by strengthening ties with the East for political and trade reasons.

7 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
IV. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

With respect to the question of Sino-Soviet bloc intentions to initiate hostilities, the Watch Committee Conclusions remain negative.

7 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
