[PAGE 01]
17 June 1952
Copy No. 53
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Tripartite agreement likely on new proposal for four-power talks on Germany (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Bao Dai reportedly gambling on early fall of new Vietnamese Government (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iranian oil shipment may be impounded at Aden (page 4).
4. Tunisian nationalists reported pressing the Bey to refuse French reforms (page 4).
5. Asian-African bloc in UN will act on Tunisian question (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. East German Security Ministry given wide new police powers (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Tripartite agreement likely on new proposal for four-power talks on Germany:

The latest American draft of the Western reply to the Soviet note of 25 May has been received favorably by the British and French Foreign Offices. Although Eden and Schuman have still to give their personal approval, the American Embassy in London believes that the principal difficulties with Britain are solved. The French Foreign Office expects that Schuman will accept the new draft.

Comment: The present draft reply proposes that four-power meetings be held in two stages. The first stage would be limited to discussions of the composition and functions of a commission to investigate conditions for all-German elections. Subsequent meetings would discuss the proposals in the Western note of 13 May concerning the status of an all-German government before the conclusion of a peace treaty.

Chancellor Adenauer has indicated that if there are four-power talks, he may have to reconsider pressing for early West German ratification of the contractual agreement and the EDC treaty.

FAR EAST

2. Bao Dai reportedly gambling on early fall of new Vietnamese Government:

Bao Dai, in yielding to French pressure to oust former Premier Huu, deliberately chose Tam as Huu's successor in the hope that Tam would further discredit the French policy of slow evolutionary progress toward Vietnamese independence. Bao Dai hoped thus to pave the way for the formation of a genuine nationalist government.

[PAGE 04]
this tactic may boomerang to the benefit of the Viet Minh and invite military disaster.

Comment: Numerous other reports on the Tam appointment lend plausibility to this view.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iranian oil shipment may be impounded at Aden:

The tanker Rosemary, under charter to an Italian company and loaded with 1000 tons of Iranian crude oil, is disabled and will reportedly put in at Aden on 17 June. According to the Foreign Office official who provided this information, the British plan to impound the cargo which was scheduled for refining in Italy and transshipment to a Swiss consignee.

Although the Italian Government has assured Britain that it will not grant an import license for the oil, it has pointed out that delivery at the free port of Naples or Trieste cannot be prevented.

Comment: The Rosemary, under Honduran registry, is carrying the first oil to leave Iran since nationalization. This shipment reportedly will be followed by others under a contract negotiated between Iran and an Italian company acting for a Swiss firm.

4. Tunisian nationalists reported pressing the Bey to refuse French reforms:

the Bey will refuse to promulgate the French program for the reorganization of Tunisia's government unless it is first discussed with representatives of Tunisian nationalism.

[PAGE 05]
Tunisian Prime Minister believes that this is chiefly responsible for the Bey's stiffer stand on reforms. The Prime Minister is said to have urged the Residency to consider taking administrative action ending the stalemate, based on French negotiations with the nationalists and American supervision of these negotiations. The program is said to be supported by the Bey and the present Tunisian Cabinet, which allegedly has secret relations with the Cairo.

France currently plans to impose rather than negotiate reforms for Tunisia and to act exclusively through the Bey.

5. Asian-African bloc in UN will act on Tunisian question:

The chief Pakistani delegate to the United Nations has stated that the Asian-African bloc on 12 June decided to request a special session of the UN General Assembly to discuss the Tunisian question. He said that the group would meet again, not later than 18 June, in an effort to obtain as many signatures as possible to the request, which would be forwarded immediately to the UN Secretary General.

Comment: The Asian-African bloc's success in obtaining the necessary 31 signatures for calling a special session of the Assembly will depend on a few uncertain members, whose attitude is likely to be affected by the United States position.

[PAGE 06]
According to American embassy officials in Latin America, Spanish diplomatic missions in that area have been instructed to seek support for the Asian-African effort. Although the Spanish Foreign Minister has denied issuing such instructions, it indicates that such representations have been made, but without much success.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. East German Security Ministry given wide new police powers:

American officials in Berlin comment that the latest East German security decree, announced 13 June, puts broad new powers into the hands of the Ministry of State Security of the German Democratic Republic and fits in with the present campaign to intimidate both East and West Germans as well as to ensure compliance with restrictive measures.

The decree, in apparently "deliberately confused language," is thought to permit the Security Ministry to execute throughout East Germany the measures which originally applied only to the restricted border area. In effect, it subordinates all police and judicial organs to the Ministry of State Security and allows the Ministry to conduct searches, make arrests, and impose sentences without reference to existing laws.
