[PAGE 01]
12 February 1957
Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

3. BULGANIN NOTE TO ADENAUER

4. JAPAN'S DEFENSE PROGRAM RECEIVES FURTHER SET-
BACK

5. OFFICIAL POLISH PRESS REBUTTAL OF BULGARIAN
CRITICISM

12 Feb 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. BULGANIN NOTE TO ADENAUER

The note of 5 February from Premier Bulganin to Chancellor Adenauer is the opening gun in a Soviet effort to create electoral difficulties for Adenauer. It seeks to prove that his policies are blocking a German settlement and to strengthen those West German parties which oppose Bonn's NATO alignment and advocate a more independent course in international affairs.

The moderately worded note offers a "decisive new orientation of relations" between Bonn and Moscow, and recalls the Bismarckian tradition in German diplomacy of maintaining close relations with Russia. On the other hand, it contains an attack on Adenauer's rearmament policy and a warning against making West Germany vulnerable to atomic counterattack by turning it into a base for atomic war.

Bulganin does not offer any new proposals. He again suggests agreements on trade, cultural and technical co-operation, while repeating the standard unification formula: rapprochement between East and West Germany. Bulganin does not pursue the suggestion for a demilitarized zone in central Europe made in the Soviet note of last October, although he does refer to the 17 November Soviet disarmament proposals, which included reductions in foreign troops stationed in the NATO and Warsaw pact territories.

The interest of the West Germans will center on the Soviet unification proposals; they will probably feel that the insistence on a rapprochement with East Germany shows the lack of Soviet interest in the subject. The note is unlikely to affect West German rearmament. On the other hand,

12 Feb 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
Adenauer recognizes the link between central European military arrangements and German unification, and will soon send Moscow a note on these matters. To avoid appearing completely negative, Adenauer may be receptive to talks aimed at increased trade, although he apparently still opposes a formal trade agreement.

12 Feb 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
4. JAPAN'S DEFENSE PROGRAM RECEIVES
FURTHER SETBACK

The Japanese cabinet has decided not to introduce legislation in the current Diet session to protect the security of military information, according to the American embassy in Tokyo. The cancellation is the direct result of adverse public reaction to recent newspaper speculation concerning the possibility of the introduction into Japan of an American "atomic task force" and of guided missiles with atomic capability.

Comment

Security legislation has been a sensitive issue in Japan because it is associated in the Japanese mind with prewar "thought control" regulations. Socialist propaganda almost certainly would also claim that the security legislation was intended to provide a cover for "secret diplomacy" and the introduction of nuclear weapons.

The absence of adequate security legislation has prevented the equipment of Japan's defense forces with advanced American weapons.

12 Feb 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
5. OFFICIAL POLISH PRESS REBUTTAL OF
BULGARIAN CRITICISM

The official newspaper of the Polish government, Zycie Warszawy, on 9 February defended Poland's concept of "democratization" against criticism by the Bulgarian party daily. Heretofore, the intellectual and youth publications of Poland have carried the burden of ideological debates, while the official government and party journals have remained aloof.

Gomulka may now feel obliged, as a result of intensified bloc attacks, to commit the government's official newspaper in the ideological struggle. The polite tone of Zycie's article may indicate that the government has stepped into the debate, in part, in an effort to direct and control the outspoken commentary of segments of the press that it regards as often irresponsible.

The Zycie Warszawy article rejected the Bulgarian journal's charge that "enemies of socialism" in Poland were resorting to a "demagogic slogan of so-called 'democratization'." It asserted that "if the struggle against the consequences of the cult of personality is not...a struggle for democratization" it is "an empty cliché and a meaningless phrase."

12 Feb 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
