[PAGE 01]
22 November 1960
Copy No. C 76

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 NOVEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping press reiterates hard line on issues involved in Sino-Soviet dispute as Moscow meetings continue.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Ethiopia--Dissatisfied officers of 6,000-man Imperial Bodyguard threaten revolt over pay and discriminatory treatment.
Sudan--UAR President Nasir received enthusiastically during Khartoum visit; Sudanese political groups expected to petition for return of civil government following Nasir's departure.
Japan--Election victory of Ikeda's Liberal Democrats not viewed as popular mandate for pro-American policies; Democratic Socialist losses dim hopes for a moderate opposition party.
Antigovernment feeling in Algeria may lead to major demonstrations in Algiers, possibly even an early coup attempt.
Situation in Laos.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communist China - USSR: After almost two weeks of high-level meetings in Moscow, Peiping continues to reiterate several basic Chinese positions in the Sino-Soviet controversy. A strong People's Daily editorial of 21 November uses the declaration which concluded similar meetings in 1957 to elaborate on Mao's "correct" assessment of the need for force in the present world situation. It implicitly criticizes Soviet overestimation of the strength of the imperialists, cites the continuing possibility of war, and emphasizes the danger from Communism's "main" enemy--revisionism. The appearance of this editorial while the meetings in Moscow are still under way suggests that the sessions have been prolonged by continued Chinese determination to get some of Peiping's hard-line views incorporated in the final communique. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Ethiopia: Discontent is widespread in the officer corps of the Imperial Bodyguard organization--Ethiopia's 6,000-man elite military unit--and at a meeting on 17 November officers threatened to revolt against the Emperor because of grievances over low pay. The Emperor is known to be concerned about discontent within the Bodyguard and can be expected to take early remedial action. On a previous occasion he met Bodyguard unrest by granting a bonus. The officers' dissension, however, also arises from alleged preferential treatment accorded other officer groups and may result in anti-regime activities if their complaints are not met. (Page 2)
[PAGE 05]
Sudan: UAR President Nasir, in the Sudan on a ten-day visit which will end on 25 November, has been greeted with considerable popular enthusiasm. Khartoum university students attempted anti-Nasir demonstrations but were restricted to the university grounds and whipped by the police. Action by larger opposition groups to take advantage of the visit to demonstrate against the regime apparently has been inhibited by extraordinary security precautions and a show of force in the 17 November anniversary parade.

However, a coalition of a number of leaders of the major political parties intends, after Nasir's departure, to present the Abboud military government with a formal demand for the reconstitution of civilian government and "the return of the army to the barracks."

Japan: Prime Minister Ikeda's Liberal-Democratic party in the election on 20 November halted a steady decline since 1952 in the conservative representation in the lower, more powerful house of parliament. However, results of the election, which was marked by the lowest percentage of voter participation since 1947, reflect traditional voting patterns, satisfaction with present economic prosperity, and the improved efficiency of party organization rather than a strong mandate for Japan's pro-Western alignment. There was an increase, moreover, in the percentage of the popular vote received by the three parties which opposed the US-Japanese security arrangement. Prospects for a moderate opposition party in the near future dimmed as the Democratic Socialists lost heavily and the radical Socialists gained. The Communists made a slight gain in popular vote, and increased their parliamentary representation from one to three. (Page 3)

22 Nov 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
*France-Algeria: Reflecting the growing antigovernment feeling in Algeria is a report of major demonstrations, and possibly even a coup attempt, to occur in Algiers, perhaps as early as 22 November. The principal settler organization, the Front for French Algeria, will precipitate a vast demonstration and that the army will remain neutral. The government, which appears to be well informed concerning rightist plotting, rushed important security police reinforcements to Algeria last week. Reports of De Gaulle's recent soundings of army attitudes in Algeria indicate strong opposition to his use of the term "Algerian Republic" in his 4 November speech; the reports also suggest that, although the army would not initiate a move against De Gaulle, an "activist" minority might swing the remainder into support of the settlers in the event that violence got beyond the control of the security police. (Page 4)

*Laos:
about 400 Vientiane troops, including two companies of Kong Le's Second Paratroop Battalion, left by truck for Luang Prabang late on 20 November for an attack on the royal capital.
these troops were to be joined en route north by an approximately equal number of Pathet Lao troops. The commander of one of the columns in the attacking force is said to be sympathetic to "General Phoumi's Savannakhet group and to be planning if possible to ambush a Pathet Lao company in his column during the operation. The report stated further that a departure base for the attack on Luang Prabang will be established at Muong Klassy, a town about 55 miles south of Luang Prabang on the road between Vientiane and the royal capital. The report contained no scheduled time for an attack.

22 Nov 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
Peiping Remains Firm on Issues in Dispute With Moscow

After almost two weeks of meetings attended by world Communist leaders in Moscow to resolve the Sino-Soviet dispute, Peiping continues publicly to reiterate several basic Chinese positions in the controversy. Using conclusions reached at a similar meeting of Communist parties in 1957 to support its arguments, a strong People's Daily editorial of 21 November elaborates on Mao's "correct" assessment of the need for a militant revolutionary line in the present world situation, implicitly criticizes Soviet overestimation of the strength of the imperialists, cites the continuing possibility of war, and emphasizes the danger from Communism's "main" enemy--revisionism.

Continuing what has become the central issue of the controversy in recent weeks, the editorial argues in effect that revolutionary methods must be promoted in any struggle for peace. In developing this thesis, the editorial declares that the balance of forces now is favorable for forceful seizure of power and that any view that overestimates the strength of the imperialists and underestimates the strength of the people is incorrect. Attacking the revisionists for having "deliberately stood things on their heads," the editorial argues that world peace can be guaranteed only by waging a joint struggle of all "peace" forces against the imperialists.

In direct contrast to these Chinese views, Soviet propaganda emphasizes the possibilities that socialism, under present conditions, may be achieved by peaceful means. As a prerequisite to such a peaceful transition, the USSR calls for the formation of a broad "democratic" alliance with nonproletarian and even bourgeois elements.

In a direct appeal to traditional Communist views, the Chinese editorial declares in conclusion that the "revolutionary spirit" is the "soul" of Marxism-Leninism and that to follow the revisionists is to "emasculate" this spirit. Appearing as it does while the meetings in Moscow are still under way, the editorial suggests that the sessions have been prolonged by Peiping's continued determination to get some of its hard-line views incorporated in the final communique.
[PAGE 08]
Discontent Reported in Elite Ethiopian Military Force

The widespread discontent in the elite Ethiopian Imperial Bodyguard was shown at an officers' meeting on 17 November when there was a threat to revolt against Emperor Haile Selassie,

The officers reportedly are dissatisfied with the higher pay granted to cadets graduating from the Harar Military Academy than to officers of equivalent rank presently on duty. Although the officers abandoned their immediate plan of action on the urging of a high-ranking officer, they claim they will take over the government if no action is taken on their case. They allege that they are supported by some 800 former officers, as well as by police officers who are only waiting to follow any action by the Imperial Bodyguard.

The Emperor is known to be concerned about the discontent within the Bodyguard, which is the core of military support for the government, and he is expected to take early remedial action. Thus a revolt would appear unlikely at this time. The officers' dissension, however, may result in anti-regime activities if their complaints are not met. The Bodyguard is particularly formidable because it is well armed and strategically placed in the Addis Ababa area.

Within the Ethiopian military establishment there is considerable competition and ill feeling between the 6,000-man Imperial Bodyguard and the 24,000-man army. There is also friction within each service between older and usually poorly trained officers and the younger men who have received educations abroad or in Ethiopia's few military academies. Although pensioning off the over-age group would permit raising the salaries of younger men, it would probably create political difficulties for the Emperor by arousing the opposition of Ethiopia's powerful traditional leaders, who have been allied with the older officers
[PAGE 09]
Japanese Electorate Returns Conservatives

As a result of the election on 20 November, Japanese Prime Minister Ikeda's Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) has halted a steady decline since 1952 in the conservative representation in the lower, more powerful house of the parliament, winning 296 seats as compared with 287 in 1958. With 96 percent of the popular vote counted, however, the party has failed to increase its popular vote over 1958.

Results of the election, which was marked by the lowest percentage of voter participation (73.5 percent) since 1947, reflect traditional voting patterns, satisfaction with present economic prosperity, and the improved efficiency of party organization rather than a mandate for Japan's pro-Western alignment. However, Toshio Tanaka, Socialist Diet member present during the demonstration against American presidential press secretary Hagerty last June, and Tokutaro Kitamura, a pro-Peiping conservative, were both defeated.

Prospects for a moderate opposition party in the near future dimmed as the representation of the moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP), running in its first national election since it split from the Japanese Socialist party last January, fell from 40 to 17. Ikeda, who in an unprecedented move before the election had urged voters to support the DSP as a responsible opposition, interpreted the unexpectedly severe setback as a mandate for a polarized political system. DSP leaders, whose party now is threatened with extinction, admitted they had suffered a serious defeat and called a policy meeting for 25 November to discuss the party's future.

There was an increase, however, in the percentage of the popular vote received by the three opposition parties which opposed the US-Japanese security treaty. The radical Socialists gained at the DSP's expense, winning 145 seats as compared with the 122 they held at the dissolution of the last Diet, and the total Socialist vote increased slightly over 1958. The Communists, with 2.9 percent of the popular vote, won their largest vote since 1949 and increased their parliamentary representation from one to three.
[PAGE 10]
Major Antigovernment Demonstrations in Algiers Possible Soon

Major antigovernment demonstrations--possibly even a coup attempt--may be made in Algiers as early as 22 November. The Front for French Algeria (FAF), the European settler organization which claims a million members, will precipitate a vast demonstration and the army will remain neutral. Settler discontent has been smoldering since De Gaulle's reference to an "Algerian Republic" on 4 November and since the 16 November announcement of an early referendum on separate Algerian institutions. Although the FAF held aloof from the Armistice Day rioting in Algiers and would probably prefer to have a coup attempt begin in metropolitan France, it recently stated it would use illegal means if necessary to oppose the forthcoming referendum.

Previous reports have suggested that some extremists believe that major violence or attacks on government installations by well-armed settlers could push matters to a point where the army would feel obliged to side with them. The government, which appears to be well informed concerning rightist plotting, rushed important security police reinforcements to Algeria last week. Reports of the recent soundings of army attitudes in Algeria by Minister of the Armed Forces Messmer and Chief of National Defense General Ely indicate strong opposition to De Gaulle's use of the term "Algerian Republic" in his 4 November speech. Although the reports suggested the army would not initiate any move against De Gaulle, they raised the possibility that an "activist" minority might swing the remainder into support of the settlers in the event that violence got beyond the control of the security police.
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
