6. Conditions in Afghanistan deteriorating:

Comment: Anti-Pakistan propaganda advocating the formation of an independent tribal state of Pushtoonistan on the western boundary of Pakistan has been used in the past to inflame Afghan opinion and to take the people's minds off the country's internal problems. If conditions actually are deteriorating within the country, there is little likelihood that Afghanistan will agree to drop its propaganda campaign preparatory to holding talks with Pakistan, as suggested by the US on 6 November 1950 in an attempt to settle the outstanding differences between the two countries. Preliminary talks held at Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan in mid-April have already broken down because of disagreement on this issue. It appears unlikely, therefore, that more formal conversations will take place in the near future.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Anti-Soviet riot follows killings in Poland:
have informed the US Embassy in Warsaw of a riot in Stettin on 9 April following the killing on the street of two Polish civilians by a Soviet officer. As a result, a crowd collected and stoned the Russian, who, after killing three more Poles, sought refuge in a nearby cellar. Polish militiamen present, pressed by the crowd to shoot the Russian, refused; the crowd, incensed, shouted that the militia could and did use arms against Poles but could not do so against a Russian murderer. In a show of force, the militiamen fired into the air; the people thereupon attacked the militiamen, killing at least three and wounding others. The demonstration was quelled by the Army, which surrounded the area and arrested some two thousand persons. The US Embassy observes that, because of the complete control exercised by the Polish authorities, no rumors of this incident are current in Warsaw.

Comment: Previous reports of unrest and labor difficulties in the Stettin area have been received. One report alleges that ethnic Germans in the area are causing difficulties; a second report states that a dock strike occurred in Stettin in February as a spontaneous demonstration against the shipment of goods to the USSR. elements of the population were to be deported from the Polish-USSR border and transported to the Stettin area; the presence of such disaffected elements undoubtedly contributes to difficulties in this area.

8. WFTU transfers its headquarters to Vienna:
The Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions has decided to locate its headquarters in Vienna, following the French Government order dissolving the international headquarters in Paris. The federation's secretariat declares that Vienna was chosen because of its favorable location and the "cordial welcome which the Austrian workers are sure to give the federation." The Viennese Communist paper calls the development a "great distinction" and "moral aid" for Austrian workers who, it is sure, will do all possible to show themselves worthy of the high honor.
