[PAGE 01]
12 July 1953

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Nehru formally requests special General Assembly session (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2. Ambassador Bohlen comments on Beria ouster (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Nationalist defense of Tachens reportedly to be limited (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
6. Pakistan reduces its military strength (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Comment on recent reports of disturbances in western Poland (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Further uprisings in East Berlin may follow work slowdown (page 8).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Nehru formally requests special General Assembly session:

In response to a formal request by Indian Prime Minister Nehru, General Assembly President Pearson stated on 10 July that if there is no Korean armistice by Monday, 13 July, he will request the secretary general on Tuesday to poll UN members on the desirability of a special session.

Pearson, although opposed to a meeting before the conclusion of a truce, feels that Nehru has a right to make this request, and that no further delay is possible. He believes that the poll will take a week.

Comment: Under the terms of the UN Charter, the secretary general must convoke a special session on request of a majority of the membership. The general UN sentiment opposed to a meeting before an armistice has weakened with the continued delay.

SOVIET UNION

2. Ambassador Bohlen comments on Beria ouster:

Ambassador Bohlen believes that Beria's arrest almost certainly occurred on 27 June or immediately prior thereto. He points out that rumors affecting top Soviet personnel generally follow rather than precede the event in question, and the rumor of Beria's disgrace was linked to his absence from the opera on that date.

The ambassador suggests that Soviet political actions since 27 June, and particularly the more liberal Hungarian policy announced on 4 July, should be carefully noted before concluding that Beria was the proponent of a line of relaxation. He questions whether the head of the secret police, because of the nature of his responsibility, would be in favor of such a line.

[PAGE 04]
Bohlen believes that it will be particularly important to watch the depth of the purge which may follow Beria's arrest, since a large scale purge would require a reversal of internal and external policies pursued since Stalin's death. He concludes that until this element in the situation is clarified, it is not possible to assess the full political significance of Beria's arrest.

FAR EAST

3. Nationalist defense of Tachens reportedly to be limited:

Chinese Nationalist forces will attempt to hold only six of the islands in the Tachen group, according to a 10 July report from the American military attache at Taipei. With two possible exceptions, only troops now in occupation of the islands will be committed to their defense.

The attache estimates that the Communists could assault the Tachens with six divisions and that they have the necessary vessels available. He believes that the main island of the group would fall within 18 to 36 hours.

Comment: Since 29 May at least 13 small islands close to the Tachens have been occupied by Chinese Communist troops, and recent reports suggest that they intend to capture all of the Nationalist-held islands in the area. The Tachens are now defended by approximately 7,400 men and were to be reinforced with some 5,000 in mid-July.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

6. Pakistan reduces its military strength:

The Pakistani army is now implementing a previously reported plan to effect major economies and to reduce its strength by

[PAGE 06]
between 30,000 and 40,000 men. It is abolishing some posts at least as high as the brigadier level; it is granting officers long leaves at reduced pay; and it is reducing line of communications units and installations to the danger point through the discharge of troops.

The American army attache states that combat units have not been deactivated but that their efficiency has certainly been reduced.

Comment: Actual implementation of the plan to cut over-all military strength by about 20 percent clearly demonstrates the Pakistani government's awareness of the serious economic problems facing it as well as its willingness to take drastic measures to improve the situation. It also presupposes a firm government decision to take no military action against India over the Kashmir issue or any other question which may not be satisfactorily settled during the forthcoming talks between Prime Ministers Nehru and Mohammad Ali.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on recent reports of disturbances in western Poland:

numerous acts of sabotage in western Poland during the first week of July. In addition to numerous popular demonstrations, strikes have occurred in the Katowice area, a number of bridges have been blasted by the underground in the Poznan area, and railroad traffic between Warsaw and East Germany has been disrupted.

Western officials stationed in Warsaw, who made field trips on 6, 7 and 8 July into southern, western, northern and central Poland, saw no signs of popular unrest and no unusual security precautions (see map, p. 7). Similar trips in these areas during the latter half of June also produced negative results. The French consul generals in Katowice and Krakow reported on 8 July that they knew of no disturbances in their areas. The embassy has observed nothing abnormal in Warsaw.

[PAGE 07]
OBSERVATIONS BY WESTERN MILITARY PERSONNEL
IN AREAS OF RUMORED DISTURBANCES

BALTIC SEA

BERLIN
EAST GERMANY
POLAND
USSR
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Berlin-Warsaw rail line
motor road

1  Observations - 18-28 June 1953
2  Observations - 6-9 July 1953
Routes taken by observers
Areas of rumored disturbances

[PAGE 08]
While resistance in the form of individual acts of sabotage and minor incidents undoubtedly continues, there is yet no reliable evidence that it has assumed a violent or organized form.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Further uprisings in East Berlin may follow work slowdown:

East German government workers expect further demonstrations or uprisings to stem from the current work slowdowns. This possibility is enhanced by the fact that the city is being patrolled only by People's Police and East German military forces, for whom the workers have less respect than for Russian troops. American military sources estimate, however, that 8,000 to 10,000 Soviet troops and 200 tanks are still in or near East Berlin.

The work slowdowns prevailed in nearly all major East Berlin factories through 9 July as a form of passive resistance and noncooperation bordering on disrespect for authority. While there has been no general or sitdown strike, tension has been heightened with the demands for freedom for imprisoned workers still being voiced.

Comment: The continued demand for the freedom of these prisoners suggests that the promise to release workers arrested for the June demonstrations may be at least partially unfulfilled. This and other grievances keep rebellious sentiments high, and the granting of free passage between the Berlin sectors as of 9 July may serve to encourage more demonstrations by the workers.
