Bloc Builds Up Pressure on Albania

The Albanian regime, long under pressure to abandon its pro-Chinese stand in the Sino-Soviet dispute, has been subjected to a new and unusual form of pressure--that of public criticism by another satellite leader. In a speech to the SED central committee plenum published on 18 December, East German boss Walter Ulbricht singled out the Albanians for holding "dogmatic and sectarian" views at the Moscow conference. This public charge confirms other reports that the Albanian delegation--led by First Secretary Enver Hoxha--sided with the Chinese against the USSR at the congress despite many months of Soviet effort to force the Albanians to desist.

Reports vary as to the extent of the Albanian "deviation" at the conference, with several claiming that the Albanians criticized Polich internal and foreign policies. The Albanians succeeded in angering the Soviets and irritating the Chinese to the point that the latter suggested the Albanians be silent. The Albanian leaders departed from Moscow about a week before other leaders did.

Specific criticism of the leadership of one bloc state by another has not been seen in Eastern Europe since the period before Yugoslavia was ousted from the Cominform. Public criticism from East Germany--particularly if echoed by the other European satellites--is a means of warning the Tirana leadership to get into line with Moscow.

The Albanian fourth party congress, originally scheduled for December, has now been postponed to 13 February. It is possible--in light of Ulbricht's statement--that the East Germans and other satellites indicated to the Albanians that they would not send high-level delegations if the congress were to be used as a forum for "dogmatic and sectarian" views. Pre-congress preparations had not been carried through, suggesting regime leaders may be attempting to work out modifications in their policies that would mollify Moscow while at the same time not compromising their basic hard-line attitudes. Initial Albanian editorial reaction to the Moscow conference indicated no fundamental change in attitude. Any modification at this time might encourage pro-Soviet elements in the Albanian party--elements which the regime apparently sought to repress by limited purges last summer--to renew their opposition to the party leadership.
