[PAGE 01]
22 October 1955

Copy No. 100

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. NEW THREAT OF AFGHAN-PAKISTANI CLASH
REPORTED (page 3).

2. BRITAIN URGES US AID TO EGYPT IN ASWAN DAM
PROJECT (page 4).

4. DELAY IN FORMATION OF MOROCCAN GOVERNMENT
(page 6).

5. INDONESIAN NATIONAL PARTY MAY ACCEPT
COMMUNIST SUPPORT (page 7).

6. JAPAN DETERMINED TO PROPOSE REDUCTION IN
CHINA EMBARGO LIST (page 8).

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. NEW THREAT OF AFGHAN-PAKISTANI CLASH
REPORTED

Comment on:

claim to have evidence that Afghan-
istan is attempting to incite the
Pushtoon tribes to an outburst against
Pakistan. The tribes live along both
sides of the border.
is on his
way to the frontier area to take charge
of counterpreparation.

Afghanistan has the capability of pro-
voking a small-scale tribal uprising and, stung by recent
diplomatic defeats in its dispute with Pakistan, it may
attempt such action. Kabul is reported to have ordered
on 18 October resumption of the Pushtoonistan propa-
ganda which it had agreed to curtail in its settlement
with Pakistan on 15 September.

A local disturbance could be handled
easily by Pakistan's quasi-military security forces and
loyal tribes without involving either country in war. It
is not likely that Kabul will order regular Afghan forces
to violate Pakistan's border.

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. BRITAIN URGES US AID TO EGYPT IN ASWAN DAM
PROJECT

Foreign Secretary Macmillan has
instructed the British embassy in
Washington to explore on an urgent
basis prospects for getting American
aid in financing Egypt's Aswan high
dam project. Macmillan emphasized
the necessity of early action to fore-
stall Soviet moves. Britain, he in-
dicated, cannot supply all of the needed funds because of
its precarious balance of payments position.

Prime Minister Eden has informed
the American embassy in London that he regards this
proposal as of major importance. He stated that a
British-French-German consortium and Nasr were ready
to enter into a contract immediately and he felt that if
possible this should be done within the coming week.

Eden said the Russian arms offer con-
stituted the "most sinister" event in the East-West con-
flict "since the Soviets took over Czechoslovakia;" and
that a Soviet deal with Egypt on the Aswan project would
be a "major blow" to the entire Western position in the
Middle East.

Comment

As part of its intensified effort to in-
crease influence in the Near East, the
USSR recently offered to help Egypt finance the Aswan high
dam by means of a 30-year loan for an unspecified amount
at 2-percent interest payable in Egyptian rice and cotton.

Nasr has continuously been pushing for
Western financing of the Nile development project and, in
view of his acceptance of Soviet arms, would probably like
to counterbalance Soviet influence by obtaining the loan from
Western sources.

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. DELAY IN FORMATION OF MOROCCAN GOVERNMENT

Fathmi ben Slimane, Moroccan premier-
designate, agreed to consider forming
a Moroccan government only because
he believed Resident General Boyer de
Latour would be replaced.
has told the American consul general in Rabat.
Ben Slimane is reported to believe it would be impossi-
ble for anyone to make a government function with Boyer
de Latour as resident general.

much of the difficulty in forming a govern-
ment arises from France's insistence on some ministers
being French. Such a plan would have no chance of popu-
lar acceptance.

Comment

The designation of Ben Slimane as pre-
mier followed by several days the an-
nouncement that he was Paris' choice to head the Moroc-
can government. This maneuver, together with the obvious
French attempt now being made to isolate the nationalist
Istiqlal party, apparently is backfiring. Both the Istiqlal and
the extremists are increasing their agitation against France's
present policy, and terrorism has substantially increased
in the past week.

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. INDONESIAN NATIONAL PARTY MAY ACCEPT
COMMUNIST SUPPORT

Although National Party leaders have
rejected Communist participation in a
new cabinet, they apparently are not
excluding the possibility of Communist
support, according to the American embassy in Djakarta.
The embassy believes the main line of Nationalist think-
ing is to negotiate with the anti-Communist Masjumi while
leaving the door open for a coalition with the Nahdatul
Ulama with Communist parliamentary support.

There appear to be three factions in
the National Party which are struggling for leadership.
The main differences among them seem to be their atti-
tude toward Communism and the extent to which they are
willing to co-operate with the Masjumi.

Comment

If final official returns show the National
Party members probably will be given the first opportunity to form
a new cabinet. His identity, however, and hence the success
of negotiations with the Masjumi, will be determined by the
outcome of the struggle for party leadership.

The Ali cabinet, which held office from
1953 until July 1955 and was led by the left wing of the
National Party, included members of the Nahdatul Ulama
(NU), and had strong Communist support. The NU, although
a conservative Moslem party, appears less concerned over
Communism than the Masjumi.

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. JAPAN DETERMINED TO PROPOSE REDUCTION IN
CHINA EMBARGO LIST

Comment on:

Japan appears determined to propose
some relaxation of China trade con-
trols at the next meeting of the Con-
sultative Group of COCOM in Paris
in December. A high Japanese official informed the
American embassy on 19 October that Japan was obliged
to take this position because of domestic pressures. Great
Britain, France, and most of the other COCOM members
are also pressing for a relaxation of trade controls.

Japan feels that the China trade is
potentially more important to it than to any other COCOM
member, and that the government would lose face domes-
tically and internationally if Britain and France were
allowed to take the lead. The Japanese have shown
willingness to delay final action for several months pend-
ing a re-examination of the problem in CHINCOM. Such
re-examination would aim at adopting a single embargo
list for the entire Sino-Soviet bloc. (Concurred in by ORR)

22 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
