Kurdish Terrorist Network Reported Uncovered in Iran

Iranian intelligence claims to have uncovered an Iraqi-
sponsored Kurdish network in northwestern Iran and is
planning the early arrest of known leaders. According to
General Bakhtiar, chief of the Iranian national intelligence
organization Savak, captured Kurdish agents have disclosed
the names of over 400 members of an alleged Kurdish na-
tionalist organization which is plotting a campaign of terrorism
and guerrilla warfare patterned after the struggle in Algeria.
The Kurds reportedly plan to disarm Iranian gendarmerie and
army posts on the Iraqi border and establish bases for night
operations in the area with Iraqi logistic support.

Under interrogation, the Kurdish agents, who may have
been tailoring their remarks to fit Iranian preconceptions and
thus ease their own lot, claimed that Iraqi Communists, Iraqi
Kurds under Mustafa Barzani, and the Qasim regime were
helping to develop the clandestine Kurdish organization for the
purpose of creating an independent Kurdistan, which would in-
clude parts of Iraq, Syria, Turkey, and Iran. These alleged
plans parallel traditional Kurdish aspirations, but reports from
Iraq suggest that Barzani has become disenchanted with his
alleged Communist sponsors and that Qasim, enmeshed in his
own national problems, probably has no desire to become even
clandestinely involved in external ventures.

Iran has apparently launched a major coordinated campaign
by Savak, the border guards, and the army's counterintelligence
corps in an effort to roll up the Kurdish network while still in its
initial stages. According to Bakhtiar, the most dangerous par-
tisans--including the top leadership--will be arrested in the near
future. The Iranians are said to be moving cautiously to keep
members of the Kurdish organization from being warned and to
prevent their escape to Iraq.

Having been alerted, Iranian security forces can probably
eliminate any immediate threat from this source in the absence of
any general breakdown of internal security. They would prob-
ably find it difficult, however, to cope with the type of guerrilla
warfare that apparently was being planned.
