Ghana Expanding Relations With Bloc

Ghana now appears to be implementing its long-professed
policy of "positive neutralism and nonalignment" in a more ac-
tive manner as far as its relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc are
concerned. Motivated apparently by an increasing interest in
exploring the possibilities of bloc economic and technical aid as
well as by a desire not to appear appreciably less "neutralist"
than Guinea, the Nkrumah regime is exhibiting increased recep-
tivity toward bloc efforts to promote contacts. These efforts
have been progressively intensified since late 1958.

Although the Soviet Embassy established in August is the
only bloc diplomatic mission in Accra at present, Prime Min-
ister Nkrumah has apparently been giving serious consideration
to an early exchange of ambassadors with Communist China. An
announcement to this effect may possibly be made in connection
with the current visit to Peiping of a Ghanaian trade and good-will
mission. Since its independence in 1957, Ghana has held that it
"inherited" recognition of Peiping from Britain and has consistently
voted in the UN against postponement of the Chinese representation
issue. Guinea's decision to establish diplomatic relations with
Communist China was announced on 4 October.

Meanwhile, the European satellites--especially East Germany,
Czechoslovakia, and Poland, which have permanent trade missions
in Accra spearhead the bloc's drive in Ghana. Their representa-
tives, including trade delegates and technicians, now account for
over 60 of the estimated 80 bloc personnel resident in Ghana.
Most of the Communist-bloc countries send periodic special del-
egations which have offered technical assistance and conducted
industrial feasibility surveys. The East Germans, striving for
international recognition, have been particularly active. Last month
they induced Ghana to sign agreements providing for the
training of 50 Ghanaian students in East German universities,
technical schools, and factories.
