Communist China: A recent article by a leading Chinese
Communist party official contains the regime's most explicit
admission of widespread discontent with the party leadership.
The article seems to be mainly addressed to the lower ranks,
but its warning against "individualism" on the part of high-
ranking party members may be directed at some of central
committee and politburo rank. Former Defense Minister Peng
Te-huai and his ex-chief of staff seem to be particularly vul-
nerable. Both men were absent from Peiping's 10th anniver-
sary celebration on 1 October and have not appeared since.
(Page 2)

Communist China - UAR: Peiping apparently does not want
a diplomatic break with Cairo, but has warned the UAR to stop
"fabricating rumors and slanders" about Communist China. In
its first public comment since the recent UAR attack--precip-
itated by Syrian Communist leader Bakdash's speech in Peiping--
the official New China News Agency categorically denied Cairo's
press charges on 8 October that the Chinese ambassador had
been recalled and that the UAR Embassy in Peiping is being
harassed. Citing the "friendship of the Chinese people to peo-
ple in the UAR," the Chinese broadcast advised UAR newspapers
to stop their anti-Chinese campaign. While the Chinese apparently
wish to avoid public recriminations, they are likely to respond
vigorously to any further UAR press attacks.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Jordan-Iraq: King Husayn said on 8 October he planned no
action in Iraq "at the present time," but he has been quoted as
being ready to assume leadership of a movement to re-establish
an Iraqi monarchy. He has been encouraged in this regard by
organization of royalist Iraqi exiles in Beirut. Following the at-
tempted assassination of Qasim, Husayn said plans were being
made to mobilize and deploy the Jordanian Army in order to pro-
tect Jordan's borders or intervene "as necessary" in Iraq. Husayn
asserts he will not move without first consulting the US.
(Page 3)

10 Oct 59 DAILY BRIEF
