[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet desire to negotiate seen in latest note (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Strong UN action urged against President Rhee (page 3).
3.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on Rumanian Cabinet dismissals (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Trieste elections reflect decreasing popularity of Italian Christian Democrats (page 5).
6. West German workers mistake purpose of strike wave (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet desire to negotiate seen in latest note:

US High Commission officials in Berlin believe that the latest Soviet note confirms that the Kremlin is not yet prepared to abandon efforts aimed at preventing implementation of the contractual agreements or securing "satisfactory" four-power agreement on Germany.

HICOG points out that the USSR has now accepted the demand of the Western powers for the establishment of an impartial commission to investigate elections, and has, at least temporarily, dropped its insistence on Germany's exclusion from any alliance of Western powers.

Comment: The recent note indicated little change in the Soviet position. It evaded the specific Western conditions regarding German elections by implying that the composition of an impartial electoral commission be settled by four-power agreement, and was ambiguous respecting Germany's right to enter into an alliance with the West.

FAR EAST

2. Strong UN action urged against President Rhee:

American Charge Lightner in Pusan believes that if democratic government in South Korea is to be preserved, immediate action is required to curb President Rhee's dictatorial methods.

[PAGE 04]
Lightner recommends a protest by the UN Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea. If this does not bring immediate results, the Charge suggests a 24-hour ultimatum specifying that UN forces will take protective action unless imprisoned National Assemblymen are released and their safety and right to meet guaranteed.

Lightner comments that if the violation of democratic processes is permitted in Korea, where the United Nations is in a strong position, Korean democratic elements will be completely disillusioned and the new governments of the Far East will gain the impression that the United States is unwilling to support the principles it professes.

3.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on Rumanian Cabinet dismissals:

The simultaneous dismissals of Teohari Georgescu, the Minister of Interior, and Vasile Luca from the Rumanian Council of Ministers tends to weaken earlier speculation that recent shake-ups in the Rumanian Government have been due to intra-party clashes between "Nationalist" and "Moscow" wings within the party hierarchy.

Luca, who was removed from his post as Minister of Finance on 8 March, is identified with the "Moscow" wing. Georgescu has generally been regarded as close to the "Nationalist" wing of the Rumanian party.

Since March, there have been reports of varying reliability that Luca's removal was engineered by Georgescu for motives of personal political ambition. This suggests that the two men, each of whom was a vice premier, might have been removed from the Council of Ministers as a result of the threat posed to Rumanian party solidarity by their reported personal rivalry and ambition.

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Trieste elections reflect decreasing popularity of Italian Christian Democrats:

Although the 25 May elections in Zone A of Trieste gave the pro-Italian parties a majority, the Christian Democrats showed a notable loss of strength since the last elections. The neo-Fascists almost doubled their vote, as did the parties favoring an independent Trieste. The Communists lost slightly in the city of Trieste, but their party remained the second strongest there and in Zone A as a whole.

The pro-Italian vote was 58.6 percent of the total as compared with 62.4 percent in 1949. In the city of Trieste, the Christian Democratic vote dropped from 39 to 33 percent of the total and that of the electoral bloc led by the Christian Democrats from 52.7 to 47 percent.

Comment: The trends in Trieste, as Premier de Gasperi had feared, are generally similar to those shown in the South Italian elections of the same date.

[PAGE 06]
6. West German workers mistake purpose of strike wave:

There is increasing evidence that many West German workers are interpreting the current demonstrations of the Federation of Trade Unions as a protest against Chancellor Adenauer's foreign policy, whereas the Federation intends them as a protest against the government's draft of the Works Organization Law. The printers' union went out on a two-day strike on 27 May, stopping all printing in West Germany, and according to German sources the labor federation may call further strikes and organize a march on Bonn.

Comment: Among the chief demands of labor in these protest actions, which began two weeks ago and have involved on occasion as many as 100,000 workers, is the extension of the right of employees to participate in managerial decisions.

The US High Commissioner's office in Bonn reported on 26 May that the Communists have been trying without much success to exploit these short-duration strikes to weaken popular support for the contractual agreement and the EDC treaty.
