[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

4 October 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. Yugoslav UN delegate sees cautious Soviet foreign policy (page 3).
2. Two new Soviet radar locations disclosed in Europe (page 3).
3. Comment on Moscow's demand for Kennan's recall (page 5).

FAR EAST

4. Tibetan tribesmen attack Chinese Communists in Szechwan (page 5).

SOUTH ASIA

5. Nehru seeks lifting of Pakistani "blockade" of Afghanistan (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Mossadeq aware of Kashani plot to seize power (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Current Yugoslav position on Trieste (page 7).
8. German Socialist chief reported planning to support EDC after four-power talks (page 8).

LATIN AMERICA

9. Chilean "president-elect" Ibanez moderates anti-US stand (page 9).

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Yugoslav UN delegate sees cautious Soviet foreign policy:

The Soviet Union has concluded that it has become too dangerous to provoke a war with the United States, in the opinion of the Yugoslav delegate to the UN. He points out that before mid-1950 Soviet foreign policy contemplated direct acts of aggression against free world members by Satellites. As a result of Korea and of growing US strength as manifested in Western rearmament and the German and Japanese treaties, however, Soviet action has been limited to "indirect aggression," "fifth column activity and sabotage.

The Yugoslav delegate believes that the USSR now sees an opportunity of using the UN to isolate the United States. Such efforts will center on alienating the Moslem and Asian countries from the Atlantic community and charging the US with unilaterally carrying on an aggressive war in Korea.

2. Two new Soviet radar locations disclosed in Europe:

The US Air Force in Europe reports that two new CPS-6 type Soviet radar locations have been identified. One is located in the Soviet Zone of Austria not far from Linz and the other in the southwest portion of the Soviet Zone of Germany. (See map)

Comment: These two stations bring the total of possible CPS-6 type Soviet radar stations in Europe to eight. Together with the Satellite radar nets, they provide increasingly dense coverage from the Baltic to the Black Sea.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
Locations of possible CPS-6 Type Radar (3 Oct. 1952)

Ruegen Is.
Gdynia
Langensalza
GERMANY
Prague
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Freistadt
AUSTRIA
POLAND
HUNGARY
Nagykanizsa
RUMANIA
BULGARIA
Burgas
Igralishte
ALBANIA

M 21003

[PAGE 05]
3. Comment on Moscow's demand for Kennan's recall:

Moscow's decision to demand the recall of Ambassador Kennan appears to spring from a desire to exclude him personally rather than an intention to alter the present state of Soviet-US relations.

Following Kennan's arrival in Moscow last April the volume of cable traffic from the Embassy markedly increased, a fact which must have been immediately noticeable to the Soviet authorities. The Kremlin probably connected this with the publication in the Western press of such items as those exposing the USSR's "hate-America campaign."

The Ambassador's recent "insulting" parallel between the treatment accorded him in the USSR and in Nazi Germany probably convinced the Kremlin that his continued presence in Moscow could result only in further revelations inimical to the present Soviet "peace campaign."

FAR EAST

4. Tibetan tribesmen attack Chinese Communists in Szechwan:

Tibetan tribesmen attacked 200 Chinese Communist garrison troops at Sungpan in northwestern Szechwan on 26 September, anti-Communist Tibetan tribes in the area can muster 8,000 men.

Comment: Sungpan is located about 50 miles north of the district in which regular Chinese Communists troops were engaged in anti-guerrilla activity in late July. This report is the first indication that the guerrillas in that area were not suppressed as a result of those operations.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
SOUTH ASIA

5. Nehru seeks lifting of Pakistani "blockade" of Afghanistan:

On 2 October Indian Prime Minister Nehru urged that the United States bring "all possible influence" to bear on Pakistan to ease transport restrictions and end its "blockade" of Afghanistan in order to strengthen the latter's position against the Soviet Union.

Nehru added that if a committee were established to study the Pushtoonistan question, Pakistan might be persuaded to give Afghanistan the support that it may need in the near future.

Comment: Following the delivery of the recent Soviet protest on oil drilling operations in northern Afghanistan, both Afghanistan and India made it clear that they expect Pakistan to ease the pressure on Afghanistan by making concessions on the Pushtoonistan and other issues.

If national security were actually endangered, the Afghan Government would probably voluntarily abandon its propaganda campaign advocating autonomy for frontier tribesmen in Pakistani territory.

It therefore appears that both Afghanistan and India are exploiting the Soviet-Afghan crisis to embarrass Pakistan.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Mossadeq aware of Kashani plot to seize power:

Ambassador Henderson reports that General Zahedi and his co-plotters have renewed their campaign to remove Mossadeq. Zahedi has been able to obtain the tentative support of disgruntled elements in the National Front and was scheduled to discuss "a deal" with Kashani on 2 or 3 October.

Mossadeq, however, is aware of the plot, although he has not yet taken steps to counter it.

the Shah, the army, National Front leader Baghai and other prominent nationalist leaders are firmly committed to the Prime Minister.

Comment: Mossadeq's awareness of the plot and the conflicting interests of the factions aligned against him have lessened the chances of a successful coup. Moreover, he has already taken measures to ensure support of the Imperial Guards.

Mossadeq's announcement on 2 October that he was prepared to break diplomatic relations with the British should strengthen his public support.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Current Yugoslav position on Trieste:

Ambassador Allen believes that several major considerations have led to the current Yugoslav proposal for a division of the Free Territory of Trieste along the present zonal boundary. The Yugoslav Government is satisfied with the present division of the Territory and is confident that Italy and the Western powers cannot force it to retreat because of Yugoslavia's strategic value to the West. Ambassador Allen points out that Tito has found the Trieste issue to be a useful rallying point for nationalistic sentiment.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
The Yugoslavs are suspicious of mediation by Western powers because they believe that Italy's membership in NATO, and Western concern over De Gasperi's internal position, unduly influence the West on the form of a Trieste settlement. Believing that there is no immediate danger of Soviet aggression, the Yugoslavs see no urgent need for cooperating with Italy.

8. German Socialist chief reported planning to support EDC after four-power talks:

Hans Hedtoft, chairman of the Danish Social Democratic Party, has told American Embassy officials that Erich Ollenhauer, new leader of the West German Social Democratic Party, with whom he recently had several long conferences, wants to turn his party away from the policies of the late Kurt Schumacher. He cannot do so, however, until four-power talks have shown that the USSR will never agree to German unity on the basis of free elections. According to Hedtoft, the Social Democratic mayors of Berlin Bremen, and Hamburg, who often disagreed with Schumacher, are in complete agreement with Ollenhauer.

Comment: At their recent convention, the German Social Democrats for the first time adopted a positive statement regarding European defense, declaring that the party would "press for an effective system of collective security in which Germany can participate as an equal, and without endangering its unity." This position leaves the door open for the Social Democrats to reverse their stand against the EDC.

- 8 -

[PAGE 09]
LATIN AMERICA

9. Chilean "president-elect" Ibanez moderates anti-US stand:

The Chilean-American military agreement will not be abrogated and strategic materials will not be exported to the Soviet Orbit after Carlos Ibanez assumes the presidency on 4 November, according to assurances he has sent to the American Ambassador.

Comment: A responsible emissary from Ibanez asserted on 26 September that the mines would not be nationalized and that diplomatic relations would definitely not be resumed with the USSR. He promised that the anti-US campaign would be dropped after Congress had declared Ibanez president on 24 October and emphasized Chile's intention to take advantage of any American military or economic assistance.

- 9 -
