French Offensive Against Terrorists in Cameroun Reported Near

Direct and concerted military action by French forces against rebellious tribesmen and politically motivated terrorists in southwestern Cameroun will begin on 15 February, according to the British charge in Yaounde. Heretofore French Army units based in Cameroun were officially confined to border control activities. Last month, however, Prime Minister Ahidjo formally requested their tactical deployment in direct support of operations against the dissident elements, which include followers of the exiled extremist leader Felix Moumie.

French forces remain in Cameroun, the former French-administered UN trust territory which became independent on 1 January, under a military accord signed with the Ahidjo government last December. They were recently reinforced to an estimated strength of 2,200 men.

The main thrust of the projected offensive, which British officials in the area have agreed to support by tightening controls on their side of Cameroun's frontier with British Cameroons, will be aimed at Bamileke Department, most of which now is apparently controlled by the dissidents. French General Briand, who is in effective control of the entire operation, has stated his forces would act as "gently" as possible in the hope of rallying the people--many of whom are reported aiding the dissidents either voluntarily or as a result of pressure tactics by terrorists.

This resort to overt French military support seems likely to set back Ahidjo's campaign to gain acceptance within the bloc of independent African states. The militant leaders of Ghana and Guinea, in particular, will claim it proves their contention that Ahidjo is a French puppet maintained in office solely by the French Army.

An Izvestia article in late January sharply criticizing Ahidjo's decision to request French assistance probably foreshadows intensified bloc attacks on Ahidjo's regime once the planned offensive gets under way. Despite its past support of Moumie, Moscow sent a delegation to Cameroun's independence celebrations and has offered both diplomatic relations and economic aid.

13 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
