[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on new Indian Cabinet (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Ankara complains of anti-Turkish propaganda in Arab states (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Communists sponsor international conference against German agreements (page 6).

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on new Indian Cabinet:

Cabinet changes announced by Prime Minister Nehru on 13 May suggest that somewhat abler executives have been placed in certain key posts, but that no major revisions of Indian domestic or foreign policies are foreshadowed. There are six newcomers in the cabinet, while several of its older members have shifted positions.

Home Minister Katju is a respected Congress Party member of long standing, friendly to the United States. Defense Minister Ayyangar replaces a much less competent man. He may be expected to reflect the Prime Minister's views on defense. Kidwai probably brings greater administrative ability to his post as Food Minister than his predecessor, but there is little reason to believe that he will be more successful.

[PAGE 05]
6. Ankara complains of anti-Turkish propaganda in Arab states:

The Turkish Foreign Minister on 9 May told Ambassador McGhee emphatically that anti-Turkish propaganda in certain Arab states was being inspired by "friends," presumably British in the case of Iraq. He added that such action was against the common interest, but that Turkey did not intend to lodge a protest or to make it a public issue.

Comment: Turkish Foreign Office officials have previously expressed dissatisfaction with the lack of cooperation on Middle East defense planning from the British and particularly from the French in Damascus. British and French officials in Syria have not favored a Turkish plan to train Syrian officers in Turkey.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Communists sponsor international conference against German agreements:

A Communist-sponsored international conference "for the peaceful solution of the German problem" is scheduled to meet in Paris from 13 to 15 June. Representatives from all Western European countries, including German Pastor Niemoeller, and delegates from Poland and Czechoslovakia are allegedly planning to attend.

The American Embassy in Paris believes that the preponderance of professors and theologians among the foreign representatives suggests that many are not aware of the actual nature of the conference.

Comment: This conference, which is being widely publicized by the French Communist press, undoubtedly will challenge the legality of the contractual agreements scheduled to be signed late this month between the Western powers and Germany.
