[PAGE 01]
6 July 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Comment on the South Korean political "compromise" (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. American Ambassador comments on weak position of new Egyptian cabinet (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Key West German Senate group supports Bonn-Paris treaties (page 5).
6. French Government handicapped in anti-Communist campaign (page 6).
7. Spain insists on defense aid in return for granting US bases (page 7).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Comment on the South Korean political "compromise":

The action of the South Korean National Assembly on 4 July in passing the "compromise" amendments to the constitution will probably bring to an end the month and a half-old political crisis between President Rhee and his opposition in the National Assembly. Earlier in the week, the president had presented the Assembly with a virtual ultimatum that they must agree to popular election of the president or face dissolution. The compromise, embodying also amendments diminishing the power of the executive, represents a major shift in Rhee's position.

Although the immediate pressure is now off both Rhee and his opposition, it is apparent that Rhee has lost little ground. As a result of superior political organization on the local level, he will continue as chief executive despite his protestations of non-availability for the popular presidential election reportedly set for 15 July. The president's political machine will in future National Assembly elections enable his supporters to nullify concessions made to the Assembly by electing a pro-Rhee majority. Martial law and other pressures on opposition Assemblymen continue.
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. American Ambassador comments on weak position of new Egyptian cabinet:

American Ambassador Caffery in Cairo states that the new Egyptian Government of Prime Minister Sirry Pasha will be undermined by the same factors that caused the fall of its predecessor and will probably not last long.

Caffery reiterates his conviction that because of Britain's inaction on the Sudan, each government in Cairo finds itself weaker than its predecessor. He warns that unless the Sudan title is recognized, sooner or later the Wafd Party will be back in power. King Farouk still hates the Wafd, Caffery says, but he would rather have a Wafdist government than lose his throne.
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Key West German Senate group supports Bonn-Paris treaties:

A leading Free Democrat in the West German state of Baden-Wuerttemberg says that his state's Federal Senate delegation will vote for the ratification of the contractual agreement and the EDC treaty. He believes that the Free Democrats in the state cabinet will either compel the Senate delegation to support the treaties or will force the dissolution of the cabinet, in order to replace the present state delegation in the Senate.

Comment: Up to now, ratification of the treaties, scheduled for September, has been endangered by Chancellor Adenauer's minority position in the Senate. With the support of the Baden-Wuerttemberg delegation, final ratification of the treaties is practically assured.

If the Baden-Wuerttemberg cabinet should be dissolved over the issue, any successor cabinet would be certain to send a delegation which would support the treaties.
[PAGE 06]
6. French Government handicapped in anti-Communist campaign:

The French Government intends to proceed with its legal campaign against Communist Party leaders, although a Justice Ministry official admits that Duclos' release has dealt the prosecution a severe blow. The most serious consequence of the grand jury's verdict is that Duclos is now entitled to demand return of the evidence seized when he was arrested, and at any future trial his incriminating notebook would probably be barred as evidence.

At the same time, according to another official source, the government was secretly relieved over Duclos' release because he was seriously ill and his death would have provided the party with a real martyr.

Comment: The blow to the government's case has been softened by the revelation that the chairman of the grand jury which released Duclos was restored to his judicial functions in 1944 by one of Duclos' present lawyers and was a signer of the Stockholm Peace Petition.
[PAGE 07]
7. Spain insists on defense aid in return for granting US bases:

The Chief of the Spanish General Staff has informed the United States Military Group that before Spain grants the bases desired by the United States, it will require a "statement of principle" from the American Joint Chiefs of Staff that the United States will provide "sufficient" defense material to offset Spain's consequent increased vulnerability. Once this prerequisite were obtained, a base agreement could be concluded "very quickly." The American Ambassador in Madrid believes that Spain is firm in its position.

Comment: In his July 1951 conversation with the late Admiral Sherman, Generalissimo Franco stated that the granting of bases would automatically place Spain in a belligerent status in the event of a war involving the United States, and, as a consequence, it must be given defense assistance. Madrid's insistence on such aid may also be based on fear that the formation of a European defense force, including Germany, reduces the importance of Spain to American security interests.
