aboard the Soviet AN-12s recently in the area. The MI-1 is a small helicopter more suitable for observation than for carrying cargo. The five larger Soviet MI-4 helicopters which entered China on 23 December en route to Hanoi are scheduled to leave Nanning for Hanoi on 7 January.

While the bloc continues its appeals for the reactivation of the International Control Commission (ICC) in Laos, it has repeatedly asserted that any new commission must deal only with Souvanna Phouma. The bloc has maintained the fiction that Souvanna represents the legal government of Laos to provide a necessary cover for its continuing airlift of supplies to the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces. By predicating its appeal for the ICC on the consent of Souvanna, the bloc has made it even more difficult to reach any agreement in principle regarding the reactivation of the ICC and will probably continue to exploit its recent military successes in order to secure control of as much territory as possible before the time comes for international negotiation.

Souvanna Phouma's consent is a prerequisite to reactivation of the ICC. This follows the even stronger declaration by the Chinese Communists on 28 December. In that statement, Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi said categorically that any reconvened ICC "must not have any contact" with the Boun Oum government. This same point was emphasized by Hanoi in a lengthy memorandum issued on 5 January.

This memorandum made North Vietnam the first Communist-bloc nation to give public endorsement to a recent proposal by Prince Sihanouk for an international meeting on Laos. The meeting reportedly would be held in some neutral country and would include representatives from Burma, Thailand, and South Vietnam, along with the 1954 Geneva participants and members of the ICC.

Additional warnings against further US "intervention" in Laos came from Chinese Communist leaders on 6 January. Chou En-lai, speaking in Rangoon, charged that armed intervention in

7 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
