5. Appointment of a Turk as Libyan defense minister appears imminent:
King Idriss is pressing for the early appointment of a retired Turkish general as Libyan minister of defense and is unconcerned over the constitutional difficulties raised by his nationality.

Comment: Idriss' interest in appointing General Betin as minister of defense may indicate his desire to bring the Libyan army under his personal control by replacing the present competent minister with an alien responsible to him. Prime Minister Muntasser in the past has strongly objected to the king's interference in cabinet appointments. Idriss' actions accordingly will probably strain further his relations with the prime minister.

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Riddleberger comments on Djilas affair:
Ambassador Riddleberger reports that many, but not all, foreign mission chiefs with long experience in Yugoslavia believe the crisis over Vice-President Djilas will be "plastered over," perhaps with a reprimand. Riddleberger thinks that the decision will be made only after Tito, who returned to Belgrade from vacation on 13 January, has personally studied the case.

This study is presumably being made in the light of Djilas' increasing popularity, his party record, and particularly his relationship with important fellow Montenegrins, many of whom are generals in the army. Riddleberger notes that however much some of the inner circle may agree with Djilas' ideological views, Tito faces a difficult political problem since pressure has been brought on top leaders by party workers who are alarmed at the favorable reception of Djilas' views in many communities.

7. Poland launches drive for Western consumer goods:
Polish commercial counselors stationed in most Western countries were summoned to Warsaw early in December to be briefed on details of a plan to increase imports of consumer goods. In turn they were to submit the proposals to the countries to which they are accredited.

The Polish commercial counselor in France, for example, was returning to Paris on 9 December with a proposal for the purchase of $3,500,000 worth of "individual consumer goods" and $1,500,000 worth of automotive equipment.

Comment: Orbit countries have recently been trying to procure foodstuffs from non-Communist countries, but this is the first firm evidence of such a coordinated attempt in any single country to purchase increased quantities of consumer goods from the West.

The proposed imports of consumer goods from France amount to almost half the value of all imports authorized under the current trade agreement. As recently as last October emphasis was placed on imports of capital goods.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Austrian intentions for the Berlin conference revealed:
Ambassador Thompson reports that Austria has developed no firm plan for the Berlin conference, but plans to ask in general terms
