[PAGE 01]
5 April 1960

Copy No. C

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet deputy defense minister says major part of reduction in armed forces will take place this spring and summer. (1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Israel--Ben-Gurion seeking invitation to Moscow. (2)
Security authorities order roundup of Communist agitators in southern Iraq. (3)
Yemen--Officials express concern at low level of US aid; Sino-Soviet projects going forward at accelerated pace. (4)
New Japanese - South Korean negotiations, opening 15 April, unlikely to produce settlement of major issues. (5)

III. THE WEST
France resumes negotiations with Tunisia on future of Bizerte base. (6)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR: Marshal Bagramyan, deputy minister of defense, told Ambassador Thompson on 1 April that a few service personnel had been released, but that the bulk of the reduction would take place in the spring and summer when the weather was more favorable for resettlement. Bagramyan observed that time was required to arrange for employment, housing, and training and that the task was large because it involved "one third of the army." (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Israel-USSR: Prime Minister Ben-Gurion has proposed to the USSR that he be invited to visit Moscow. The Soviet charge in Tel Aviv said his government is considering the proposal but gave no indication of whether or not it would be favorably received. Ben-Gurion wants to continue his personal presentations of Israel's views to big-power leaders before the summit meeting. While Israel announced on 2 April that he had received an invitation for an official visit to Paris, the French have been cool toward a De Gaulle- Ben-Gurion meeting, and it probably will not take place before the summit. (Page 2)

Iraq: A number of Communist agitators in southern Iraq were ordered arrested in order to forestall expected Communist-inspired incidents. Communist influence in the army has reportedly lessened during the past two months and discipline has improved considerably. (Page 3)
[PAGE 05]
Yemen: Yemeni officials appear increasingly concerned over what they feel is an inadequate American response to Yemen's requests for economic assistance. They claim that the Imam has decided to adopt a "pro-Western" policy and urge a prompt American effort to take advantage of the opportunity this offers. The American Legation in Taiz, meanwhile, reports that the Russians and Chinese Communists have stepped up work on the aid projects they have undertaken. (Page 4)

Japan - South Korea: Japanese - South Korean negotiations, which will be resumed on 15 April, appear to offer only limited prospects for an over-all settlement. It is unlikely that President Rhee will ever agree to reasonable terms on such major issues as the Rhee line and South Korean property and reparations claims. (Page 5)

III. THE WEST
France-Tunisia: France has resumed negotiations with Tunisia on the future status of the Bizerte base, and is prepared to begin evacuating French military forces from the town of Bizerte and bring outlying forces into the base proper.
President Bourguiba may consider the French proposal an adequate interim formula to save face over his failure to acquire by his own 8 February deadline a French commitment to evacuate the Bizerte base. He nevertheless will continue to press for total evacuation. (Page 6)
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Armed Forces Reduction

The bulk of military personnel reductions predicted in Khrushchev's speech of 14 January will take place in the spring and summer, according to Marshal of the Soviet Union Bagramyan, a deputy minister of defense. Bagramyan told Ambassador Thompson that a few servicemen had been released already, but that time was required to arrange for housing, vocational training, and employment. He stated that the task was large because it involved one third of the army, but that it probably would be relatively easy for the USSR because the Soviet Government could simply give the necessary orders and they would be carried out.

Evidence to date indicates that some personnel have been released since 14 January but that the numbers are small, and there has been no indication that any unit has been deactivated.

While Bagramyan mentioned a one-third cut in the army, Khrushchev spoke of a one-third cut in total armed forces strength. If Bagramyan actually meant that army strength was being cut by one third, this would involve about 900,000 men. A total of some 300,000 would therefore have to be dropped from the naval and air forces to complete the 1,200,000 figure announced by Khrushchev as slated for demobilization before the end of 1961.
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion Proposes Visit to Moscow

The Soviet charge d'affaires in Tel Aviv has confirmed to American Embassy officials that Prime Minister Ben-Gurion proposes to visit the USSR. An Israeli newspaper has reported that Ben-Gurion has not, however, insisted upon a formal invitation and would accept the "consent" of the Soviet Union.

The Soviet charge on 31 March said his government was considering the proposal, but gave no indication of Moscow's response. The proposed trip poses a dilemma to Soviet leaders. A visit by the Israeli leader would tend to undercut Moscow's efforts to foster an image of the Soviet Union as the big-power supporter of the Arab countries against an allegedly expansionist-minded Israel. A refusal, on the other hand, would show that Moscow favors contacts at the head-of-government level only when it feels that such contacts are in accord with Soviet policy objectives.

Ben-Gurion presumably intends to present Israel's views on Middle East issues to the Soviet Government in case the East-West summit conference should discuss problems in that area. Israel reportedly desires a declaration by the four big powers that would guarantee the territorial status quo in the Middle East and would encourage an Arab-Israeli settlement. Prospects for obtaining such a resolution, however, seem remote. Britain, France, and the US joined in a tripartite declaration in 1950 which undertook to guarantee existing Middle Eastern frontiers.

Ben-Gurion has seen Macmillan and Adenauer in addition to President Eisenhower in recent weeks, and, according to an Israeli announcement, now has been invited to make an official visit to France. The French had been cool, however, to a suggested De Gaulle - Ben-Gurion meeting and the visit will probably not take place before the summit meeting. De Gaulle has sought to disengage France from its close relationship with Israel in the interest of better relations with the Arab states, with the immediate aim of facilitating a settlement in Algeria. New French-UAR talks are said to be in progress in Paris.
[PAGE 08]
Qasim Regime Continues Anti-Communist Moves

Iraqi Communists continue to suffer rebuffs at the hands of the Qasim regime. During the past week the Communist-front Republican party's application for legal status was rejected on flimsy grounds by the Interior Ministry, and Qasim--disregarding Communist demands for executions--suspended the death sentences of Baathists convicted of last October's attempt on his life.

A number of local Communist agitators have been ordered arrested in southern Iraq, pending investigation of charges of conspiring to carry out antigovernment incidents.

Qasim's clemency toward the Baathists last week, as well as toward former royal regime leaders--including ex-Foreign Minister Jamali and ex-Deputy Chief of Staff Daghistani--was probably prompted mainly by pressure from army officers, with whom Daghistani is very popular, as well as by a desire to curry favor in religious circles during the holidays at the end of Ramadan.

Measures against the Communists have increased the influence of anti-Communist army elements within the regime and narrowed Qasim's area of maneuver by estranging Iraqi Communists, except for the Qasim-backed splinter faction.

Accompanying the stiffening attitude of the army against the Communists has been an improvement in discipline and a decrease of Communist influence within the armed forces. The army now is the mainstay of the regime and is in a position to exert more effective pressure on the civilian government.
[PAGE 09]
Yemeni Officials Anxious Over American Aid

The American charge in Taiz has recently reported growing doubt among local officials as to the genuineness of American interest in furnishing economic aid to Yemen. The charge also noted that Yemeni opinion on the Communist bloc aid efforts there appears to be increasingly favorable.

Late last year, Yemeni officials began urging fast American action to take advantage of Yemen's "rising good will" toward the West and the Imam's reported decision to adopt a "pro-Western" policy. At that time, the Imam was reported to be deeply suspicious of Communist intentions in Yemen, and this report appeared to be borne out by the fact that no new aid agreement was announced following Yemeni negotiations with Moscow last November.

A basic aid agreement with the United States was signed during the same period. A total of $2,000,000 in American aid funds has been proposed for Yemen during fiscal 1961. The major project under the US-Yemen agreement--a highway to be constructed between Taiz and Sana--is now being negotiated. Yemeni officials contend that the planned construction period of "three to four years" must be shortened to avoid unfavorable comparisons with the Chinese Communist Hudayda-Sana road project and to illustrate the United States' "real sincerity and esteem regarding Yemen."

While Moscow did not offer any new economic credits to Yemen during the visit of the Imam's brother in November 1959, the USSR did agree to undertake additional projects within the scope of the original $25,000,000 line of credit. Since then, presumably with increased Yemeni cooperation, the USSR appears to have been able to speed up work on such projects as the port at Hudayda. In addition, activity under the Soviet military aid program seems to have been renewed.

At the same time, Communist China--under its $16,000,000 interest-free credit--is reportedly overcoming obstacles initially encountered in the construction of the Hudayda-Sana road.
[PAGE 10]
Japan and South Korea to Renew Efforts for Over-all Settlement

Japanese - South Korean negotiations for a settlement of outstanding issues are to be resumed on 15 April in the more relaxed atmosphere created by the now almost completed exchange of detainees. Prospects for substantive agreement, however, are still remote.

The negotiations are expected to resume the familiar pattern of subcommittee discussions on fisheries, property claims, and the return of art objects taken by the Japanese during their occupation of Korea. Indications are that difficulties will be encountered even prior to this stage over expected Japanese requests for the release of 47 additional captured fishermen when they complete their sentences for violating the "Rhee line." Furthermore, Tokyo's efforts to gain diplomatic representation in Seoul, in reciprocity for the long-established South Korean mission in Tokyo, almost certainly will meet with opposition from President Rhee, who has refused to allow any Japanese to set foot in the country.

The relaxation of tensions between the countries is also evident in the 4 April announcement that full-scale trade will be resumed. Trade suspension, however, has proved more damaging to South Korea than to Japan, and Seoul's agreement to the detainee exchange apparently stemmed primarily from strong American representations and from a desire to reduce pressures in Japan for strong action against South Korea's "hostage diplomacy."

There is no indication whatever that President Rhee will relax his ban against Japanese fishing inside the "Rhee line" nor that Tokyo will recognize the line as a valid international demarcation. Meanwhile, Japanese violations of the line probably will continue to a limited extent, creating the possibility of future incidents and seizures as well as the renewal of pressures in Japan for a harsher policy toward South Korea.
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

New French Proposals on Bizerte

The French charge in Tunis has resumed talks with Tunisian officials on the future status of the Bizerte base. The charge informed the Tunisians on 31 March that France has decided "as a unilateral action and a major concession" to withdraw all French forces from the town of Bizerte and to pull small outlying units back into the main base. This action is scheduled to begin "in the coming days and be completed in several months."

He said Paris also is willing to demilitarize the French naval arsenal and shipyard on Bizerte Lake and transform these installations into a joint Franco-Tunisian industrial enterprise, and is prepared to agree that the use of the Bizerte base will be limited substantially to naval and air forces. These arrangements would include a guarantee that the base would not be involved in the Algerian war. About 75 percent of the 10,000 French military personnel now stationed at the Bizerte base are naval forces, and approximately 4,000 French civilians are employed at the shipyard.

French withdrawal inside the Bizerte base perimeter should provide President Bourguiba with an adequate "face-saving" formula to avoid reviving the evacuation issue which he forced early this year. It should also add a hopeful note to the discussion of Tunisian-French relations with which he is committed to open the Tunisian National Assembly on 7 April. Anticipating this speech, Bourguiba made both friendly and critical remarks about France on 1 April to the Tunisian labor congress. He, nevertheless, will continue to pursue his policy of demanding a French commitment for eventual evacuation of the Bizerte base.

Paris probably fears that any commitment to withdraw French forces from Tunisia would increase the already intensive pressure from Morocco for a French commitment to evacuate French bases there. In view of the present forecast of a long continuation of the Algerian war, France is unlikely to make such concessions voluntarily.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 April 1960

Copy No. C 68
