[PAGE 01]
State Dept. review completed
12 September 1957
Copy No. 136

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. GROMYKO STATEMENT ON MIDDLE EAST AND DISARMAMENT

3. JAPAN TO PROPOSE UN CALL FOR SUSPENSION OF NUCLEAR TESTS

4. MIKOYAN DISCUSSES SOVIET ECONOMY
(page 7).

5. MIKOYAN MAY BECOME SOVIET PREMIER
(page 8).

THE TAIWAN STRAIT

[PAGE 04]
2. GROMYKO STATEMENT ON MIDDLE EAST
AND DISARMAMENT

Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko's lengthy statement on Soviet and Western disarmament policies in Moscow on 10 September apparently is intended as a preview of the USSR's line in the forthcoming UN General Assembly debate. His denunciation of Western moves in the Middle East probably is aimed at countering recent American statements and actions, at stiffening the Syrian regime's resistance to pressures from its neighbors, and at supporting Soviet bloc charges that the UN debate on Hungary has been arranged by the United States to divert world attention from aggressive Western designs in the Middle East.

Gromyko's charge, backed by even blunter accusations in the Soviet press, that the United States is preparing plans "aimed at stifling Syria as an independent state" apparently is intended to inhibit US freedom of action in dealing with the Syrian situation.

Complaining that Turkish forces are concentrating on Syria's frontier, Gromyko asked Ankara "how would Turkey feel if troops of a foreign state were being concentrated on her frontiers?" He warned that developments in military technology have increased the danger that local conflicts might develop into a general war and noted that Syria "has numerous and reliable friends!"

Gromyko's criticism of the UN Disarmament Subcommittee's heavy NATO representation suggests that the USSR will again seek to enlarge the subcommittee. He listed as priority subjects for General Assembly consideration the cessation of nuclear tests, the withdrawal of foreign troops from Germany and other European countries, the liquidation of all foreign military bases, and the establishment of

[PAGE 05]
ground control posts to prevent surprise attack. Gromyko asserted that aerial inspection of the US, the USSR, and other countries could not begin until the "last stage of disarmament" when the "necessary confidence has been established." He made no reference to earlier Soviet proposals for limited aerial inspection as part of a first-step agreement.

[PAGE 06]
3. JAPAN TO PROPOSE UN CALL FOR SUSPENSION
OF NUCLEAR TESTS

The Japanese foreign minister is considering a resolution for submission to the UN General Assembly calling for suspension of nuclear tests and for resumption of negotiations for subsequent supervision and inspection procedures.

Ambassador MacArthur reports that Foreign Ministry officials, when they gave him a translation of the resolution as drafted, explained that public opinion throughout the world is more concerned with nuclear tests than with any other disarmament problem. They said that strong public pressure in Japan is forcing the government to this action.

Comment
Japan previously had agreed with the United States on the need for an effective inspection and control system prior to the suspension of tests. The proposed resolution also does not provide for agreement on stopping production of nuclear weapons, which is considered vital by the West.

Aside from its desire to accommodate public opinion, the Japanese government hopes to increase its international prestige by playing a leading role in attempting to ease world tensions.

[PAGE 07]
4. MIKOYAN DISCUSSES SOVIET ECONOMY

Deputy Premier Mikoyan told Senator Ellender on 9 September that the USSR has decided to plan for only one year at a time until 1960, thus sidestepping the revision of the Sixth Five-Year Plan called for at the December 1956 central committee plenum.

Mikoyan admitted that the five-year plan had received "great criticism" from the various republics and regions and he implied there had been "great difference of opinion in Moscow" about it. By 1960, the planners hope to be prepared to issue the Seventh Five-Year Plan based on the reorganized administrative structure with the participation of the regional sovnarkhozy.

Crop prospects were generally good this year despite difficulties in some areas, according to Mikoyan. He said that yields on the new lands proved much better in the first year than in succeeding years, but asked the senator to give no publicity to this statement as "this was out of no,000 field," Mikoyan indicated that the USSR planned to open 25,000,000-30,000,000 more acres of new lands, chiefly in Siberia. He said he had not "heard of any plans" for a major change in the collective or state farm systems.

[PAGE 08]
5. MIKOYAN MAY BECOME SOVIET PREMIER

According to the Warsaw correspondent of the London Daily Telegraph, citing "well informed" Polish Communist sources, Premier Bulganin will soon be replaced by Deputy Premier Mikoyan. The same sources indicate that Bulganin will be appointed to the sinecural post of chairman of the Supreme Soviet Presidium replacing the 76-year-old Voroshilov, who will retire.

Comment
In the event of a change, Mikoyan would be a likely candidate to replace Bulganin. The party central committee reportedly gave Bulganin a "last chance" censure in June for vacillating in his support of Khrushchev against Malenkov, Kaganovich, and Molotov.

Mikoyan went to East Germany with Khrushchev in August after the Soviet press had announced that Bulganin would go. On 9 September, Mikoyan talked with US Senator Ellender for an hour and a half and discussed Soviet policy on a wide range of topics in an authoritative manner contrasting sharply with that of Bulganin in recent months.

Previous reports have mentioned Defense Minister Marshal Zhukov and Party Control Committee chairman Nikolai Shvernik as possible replacements for Bulganin.

[PAGE 09]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
SUMMARY

15 August - 11 September 1957

THE TAIWAN STRAIT

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Taiwan Strait Problem

There were no significant developments in the area during the period.

[PAGE 11]
