New Inflationary High in Indonesia

Indonesia's steadily deteriorating economy has reached a new inflationary high. The open market rate for the rupiah, which was devaluated to 45 to the US dollar last August, has jumped within the past two weeks from 300 to 500 to the dollar, and prices of essential products have continued to rise.

The primary cause of the suddenly increased rate of rupiah depreciation is the flight of Chinese capital which, in turn, is the direct result of Indonesia's ban on alien retailers in rural areas. Many Chinese, although not immediately affected by the ban, are so acutely aware of the uncertainty of their future status in Indonesia that they are leaving the country or at least transferring their funds. Figures are not available on the number of Chinese or the amount of capital involved, but sailings for Hong Kong are booked solidly through August. Other causes of depreciation are public expectation of further devaluation and the continued shortage of essential commodities.

Parliament, the press, and labor unions have become openly critical of the government's economic policies, but so far with little effect. The Communist-controlled labor union, SOBSI, has demanded wage increases, and various protest groups have attempted small-scale demonstrations at government offices. Although the army has warned that the ban on demonstrations is still effective, further public action apparently is anticipated. During the past few days a heavy military guard has been placed at the office of First Minister, and concurrently Finance Minister, Djuanda. The government plans to announce shortly a prohibition on wage increases for 1960.

It is generally believed that inflationary pressure must become considerably greater before there is a threat of serious unrest. The present economic situation, combined with continuing political reorganization, however, contributes to increasing uneasiness and to further opportunities for the Communists to stir up dissension.

26 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
