[PAGE 01]
6 October 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 05a
NO CHANGE IN CLASS X
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 17 Jan 80 REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Bohlen feels Moscow is soft-pedaling Formosa "commitment" (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Railroad construction sought for coastal province opposite Formosa (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. Bao Dai implies he will retain Diem as premier (page 6).
5. Recent assassination in Laos linked to Thai-subsidized Laotian prince (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Americans endangered by Moroccan terrorism (page 8).

EASTERN EUROPE
8. Yugoslavia weighs Soviet proposal for higher-level trade talks (page 8).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. Comment on West German politician's call for zonal all-German elections (page 9).

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Bohlen feels Moscow is soft-pedaling Formosa "commitment":

At a Chinese "Liberation Day" celebra-
tion in Moscow, Malenkov, Molotov
and Voroshilov pointedly ignored the
Chinese Communist ambassador's
toast to his regime's determination to "liberate" Formosa.
Also, a Soviet censor in Moscow, in an unusual procedure,
took pains to point out to an Associated Press correspondent
that Khrushchev's Peiping speech had stated that the "Soviet
people" rather than the "Soviet Union" supported China's For-
mosan liberation campaign.

Ambassador Bohlen feels that these
incidents indicate a fear that undesirable implications have
been read into Khrushchev's speech and that the government is
attempting to soft-pedal the degree of Soviet public commitment.

Comment: Moscow's caution on the
Formosa issue is consistent with its policy of avoiding commit-
ments in Asia which might conflict with the achievement of
higher-priority cold war objectives in Europe. Khrushchev's
pledge of support by the "Soviet people" was made in the con-
text of a statement of sympathy for the Chinese Communists'
desire to liberate "their long-suffering brothers" rather than a
Soviet commitment to a military campaign. Khrushchev made
no mention of the kind, extent or timing of this support.

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3
[PAGE 04]
3. Railroad construction sought for coastal province opposite
Formosa:

The Fukien provincial delegate to the
recent National People's Congress in
Peiping expressed the "hope" that the
government would begin railroad construction in Fukien Province
opposite Formosa ahead of schedule because coastal shipping is
"obstructed" by the United States and the Chinese Nationalists
(see map, p. 5). The delegate also said the province's highways
have been considerably improved and a "sea dike" has been
filled between Amoy and the mainland to facilitate transportation
and to consolidate coastal defense.

Comment: Deprived of coastal ship-
ping, its traditional communications means, Fukien now largely
depends on poor highways for supplies brought into the province.
The principal route runs from Shangjao on the Chekiang-Kiangsi
railroad, 250 miles to Foochow. Even a short 100-mile branch

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
[PAGE 05]
5 October 1954
SOUTH CHINA COAST (incl. FORMOSA)
LOCATION OF AIRFIELDS AND STATUS OF OFF-SHORE ISLANDS
[PAGE 06]
rail line over this route, which could be built in a year, would
ease the Communists' problem of supplying air bases and other
military forces in the Fukien coastal area.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Bao Dai implies he will retain Diem as premier:

In a 3 October interview with Ambassa-
dor Heath at Cannes, Bao Dai expressed
no objection to Premier Diem's remain-
ing in office, and agreed that Chief of
Staff Hinh had acted "very reprehensibly" in opposing Diem's
orders and taking the army into politics. Bao Dai said the im-
plication in his telegram of 1 October to Diem that Hinh should
be taken into the cabinet was the result of a "drafting error," but
that Hinh should be retained as chief of staff. He thought he could
rely on Diem's loyalty more than on that of other candidates for
the premiership, although Diem was "not a natural statesman,
nor overly intelligent."

Comment: Bao Dai's remarks indicate
that Diem may be given a breathing spell in which to fend off
opposition elements which are now seeking outright control of
the government.

The chief of state's failure to mention
the Binh Xuyen organization, one of Diem's most potent enemies,
suggests that Bao Dai may continue to use this group as the lo-
cal instrument of his political influence.

5. Recent assassination in Laos linked to Thai-subsidized Laotian
prince:

The Laotian foreign minister and the
French high representative in Laos
both informed the American minister

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 6
[PAGE 07]
that the assassination of the Laotian defense minister on 18
September was carried out by a Laotian terrorist who escaped
to Thailand. The terrorist is associated with an agent of the
dissident Laotian prince Petsarath, who is now living in exile
in Thailand.

Both informants hold Petsarath respon-
sible for the murder and believe his motive was to break up the
existing government and gain a foothold in, if not control of, its
successor.

The foreign minister alleged that
Petsarath is subsidized by the Thai government, or certain ele-
ments in it which seek to strengthen their influence in Laotian
affairs. He has asked the Thai government to arrest and return
the assassin but has received no reply. The legation states that
neither Thai nor Communist involvement can be ruled out.

Comment: Prince Petsarath was asso-
ciated with his half-brother Souphanouvong, now the nominal
head of the Viet Minh-sponsored "Pathet Lao" regime, in an
independent Laotian government formed at the end of World
War II. He was reportedly involved in an abortive attempt--with
Thai support--to overthrow the Laotian government last June.

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7
[PAGE 08]
7. Americans endangered by Moroccan terrorism:

Top American civilian and military
officials in Morocco agree that the
3 October bomb explosion in Rabat, in
which six Americans were injured, was
not directed against Americans. They point out, however, the
likelihood that the 12,000 Americans in French Morocco will from
time to time be affected by such incidents and have recommended
that travel orders for several hundred air force dependents now
awaiting transportation to Morocco be held up for 90 days.

Comment: Several indications of in-
creasing anti-American sentiment among Moroccans have been
reported in recent months. American popularity is reported to
be declining as a direct result of American support for French
policy in North Africa.

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Yugoslavia weighs Soviet proposal for higher-level trade talks:

The Yugoslav government is consider-
ing a Soviet proposal for further trade
talks on a higher governmental level
than that of the negotiations just concluded,

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 8
[PAGE 09]
according to a member of the Yugoslav State Secretariat for
Foreign Affairs. He believes the character of the export items
included by the USSR in the arrangement concluded last week
indicates a desire to develop significant trade with Yugoslavia,
and that the USSR would offer to include wheat in an intergovern-
mental agreement.

The same official stated that Yugoslavia
had shown its intention to support the Battle Act by refusing to
include mercury in its export list. Mercury was requested by
the USSR in the recent trade talks.

Comment: These statements appear
designed to exert pressure on the United States to increase its
grant of 400,000 tons of wheat under the American Surplus
Commodity Act. The Yugoslavs are probably aware of currently
increased domestic and Satellite demands for Soviet wheat which
might preclude its export in substantial quantities.

The Yugoslavs will probably be willing
to conclude a one-year intergovernmental trade agreement with
the USSR substantially in excess of the recently concluded arrange-
ment for a total exchange of $5,000,000 covering the last three
months of 1954.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. Comment on West German politician's call for zonal all-German
elections:

Thomas Dehler, chairman of the West
German coalition Free Democratic
Party, has called in a magazine inter-
view for immediate negotiations with the Soviet Union on German
unification. If necessary, he said, "we should accept elections
which would not be really free" in the Soviet zone, since an all-
German parliament would be strong enough to "digest" any Commu-
nists elected.

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 9
[PAGE 10]
This is the first time any responsible
West German politician has supported the idea, occasionally
discussed in the press, of all-German elections on a zonal basis,
a procedure which some believe would be acceptable to Moscow.
The Bundestag officially favors a single election district cover-
ing all of Germany.

Dehler, who has endorsed the decisions
of the London conference, is evidently intent on gaining popu-
lar support for his party by putting it in the vanguard of renewed
efforts at German unification. His plan will probably provoke a
sharp debate, and will be opposed by Chancellor Adenauer.

6 Oct 54     CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 10
