Chinese Nationalist Irregulars in Southeast Asia

was willing to withdraw any of the Chinese military forces remaining in Burma who are willing to leave, and to cease re-supply of those who choose to remain. He predicted, however, that most of the irregulars would move to Laos rather than choose evacuation to Taiwan. Chiang Kai-shek has often maintained that the irregulars are not a part of the armed forces and will not take instructions from Taiwan. He probably hopes events will develop in Laos which would justify the use of these irregulars or enable them to establish a new base.

The Chinese Nationalist Government during 1960 attempted to reorganize and train the Nationalist irregulars in the Burma border area into an effective military force capable of tactical missions. By December Taipei had transferred from Taiwan to the irregulars' base approximately 1,000 junior officers and enlisted personnel who had received special-forces and paratroop training. The flow of weapons, ammunition, and other supplies was increased. Some of the special forces are believed to be among the 2,000 to 3,000 irregulars recently driven into Laos. Besides these, about 7,000--including both irregulars and their dependents--were forced by a Chinese Communist - Burmese offensive to cross the Mekong River into Laos in late January. Chiang has asked for United States help to resettle these refugees in Taiwan or in civilian communities in Thailand.

Burma, meanwhile, has sent a letter to the UN secretary general protesting Taiwan's overflight of its airspace and its violation of the United Nations resolution of 1953 in supplying the irregulars. Rangoon asked that all countries stop supplying the irregulars in Burma but is not now planning to call for formal UN action on the issue. The only significant force of irregulars still in Burma--possibly 3,000 to 4,000 troops--is near the Thai border.
elements of these irregulars have been under repeated attacks from the Burmese Army.

24 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
