Increased Military Dissatisfaction With South Vietnamese Regime

In conversations with the American Army attaché, Brigadier General Le Van Kim, recently transferred from the Dalat officers' school and assigned to study plans for countering insurgency, has expressed bitterness over inefficiency, nepotism, and corruption in the government and has stated that President Diem and his entourage must be replaced. Kim complained that Diem's policy of directing military operations personally or through orders to provincial authorities without staff guidance was "impossible to live with" and that the army could defeat the Communists if properly used. In late March the marine corps commandant also reportedly complained that the army command was "hamstrung by politics."

Since the abortive coup against Diem last November, the military have been conscious of increased surveillance by the clique of trusted Diem followers enjoying favored positions in government and army. A reported government plan to attach political commissars to army units is likely to be regarded as a tightening of political controls and may cast further doubt on the sincerity of Diem's intention to carry out improvements in the military command and intelligence functions. Diem's public comments have indicated that he feels the army's primary need is an increase in troop strength. He has recently authorized a large number of promotions to boost armed forces morale.

There is no evidence supporting the authenticity of the documents alleging plotting by acting chief of staff General Nguyen Khanh, field commander General Duong Van Minh, training commander General Mai Huu Xuan, and unnamed Communists. The recent assignment of General Kim under General Minh, who has at times been critical of Diem, would place in a strategic position two of the army's most competent and respected officers. The government may intend to hold these documents, regardless of their validity, for use in the event it feels it must move against the alleged plotters.

20 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
