[PAGE 01]
18 April 1958
Copy No. 140

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 APRIL 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
East Germany introducing broad program of military training.
Student unrest probable, and refugee flow may increase.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Indonesia - Fighting for control of Padang apparently still continuing; government air units have joined in attack. Government airfield in Borneo bombed.
Saudi troops in Jordan ordered to prepare to return home.
Forthcoming general election in Southern Rhodesia will probably result in gains for segregationists.

III. THE WEST
France - New premier unlikely to be named before next week. Pressure for return of De Gaulle not significant at this time.
Nuclear issue still looms large in West German politics; Adenauer parties claim Socialists making little impact.
Fall of Icelandic Government on anti-inflation measures possible.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 April 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
East Germany: The East German regime is introducing a broad program of military training, a policy which will probably lead to serious unrest in the universities. Students are to have military training courses included in their curricula, and "as many citizens as possible" between the ages of 26-35 will be given six-week training periods concurrently with the training of reserves and former servicemen. When this new program becomes as widely known, there may be an increased flow of refugees to the West.

II. ASIA- AFRICA
* Indonesia (Information as of 0200 EST, 18 April 1958):
Fighting between invading government troops and dissident defenders for control of Padang on the west coast of Central Sumatra apparently is still continuing. Although Djakarta earlier claimed Padang and its airfield had been captured, a later report quoting Djakarta navy headquarters stated that the attackers were meeting heavy resistance and that it was not certain Padang had been seized. The dissidents' Padang radio went off the air on 17 April in the middle of a broadcast.
Reports from Padang confirmed that government patrols had reached the city and that P-51's and B-25's had joined in the attack. These reports also stated, however, that government troops were not aggressively pushing the attack, and

[PAGE 05]
INDONESIA

[PAGE 06]
Watch Committee conclusion -- Middle East: A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered unlikely in the near future. However, serious incidents are likely to recur.

Rhodesia and Nyasaland: Rhodesia's progress toward racial partnership and political stability received a sharp setback on 17 April when the moderate prime minister of Southern Rhodesia was defeated by a prosegregationist in a special election. This defeat will probably lead to an immediate general election in Southern Rhodesia in which the segregationists are expected to make heavy gains which would result in a heightening of racial tension and an increase in African nationalist activity throughout the federation. (Page 2) (Map)

III. THE WEST
* France - North Africa: President Coty is not expected to name a candidate for the premiership until after the local elections of 20 April. There are some signs of renewed pressure for a call to General De Gaulle, but it has not reached significant proportions. In Tunisia, Bourguiba has publicly raised the possibility of again pressing charges of French aggression in the UN. British Foreign Office officials are concerned over the possibility of new incidents on the Tunisian--Algerian frontier, feeling that right wing elements may have more freedom of action while the government is in a caretaker status. (Page 3)

West Germany: Christian Democratic Union (CDU) spokesmen believe that Adenauer's party has not suffered any loss of popular support as a result of the Socialist campaign against nuclear weapons. The Socialists have staged large rallies in the cities they control, and are planning local referenda on the issue, but the CDU leaders feel the

18 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
that neither side appeared eager to conduct serious warfare. Other reports from inside Padang say hundreds of civilians have evacuated along with police and some defending troops. Confusion resulted in dissident forces "firing at shadows," sometimes into their own units.

the airfield at Balikpapan on Borneo, headquarters for government operations against North Celebes, was bombed and damaged on 17 April, presumably by the recently created dissident air force. (Map)

Watch Committee conclusion -- Indonesia: There is no evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily involved in Indonesia. Developments continue to favor local Communist and Sino-Soviet bloc exploitation of the situation. A military defeat of the dissidents on Sumatra would not resolve the basic issues which led to the revolt.

Saudi Arabia - Jordan: Some 3,000 Saudi troops stationed in northwestern Jordan for the past year have been ordered to prepare to return to Saudi Arabia.

This withdrawal is probably due primarily to Saudi financial troubles and to formation of the Arab Union. This move may also be designed to strengthen the impression that Saudi policy is shifting back to one of strict neutrality in intra-Arab disputes. Jordan now may request Iraqi troops to move into northern Jordan as they did in 1956. A token Saudi unit will probably remain in the Aqaba area of Jordan. (Page 1) (Map)

18 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 08]
campaign may boomerang because of public mistrust of such methods. In any event, nuclear armament will be a major issue in various state elections to be held this year, and has already caused Adenauer to have misgivings about German interests at a summit meeting.

Iceland: The 20-month-old coalition government of Progressives, Social Democrats, and the Communist-dominated Labor Alliance is approaching a crisis over measures to stabilize the country's inflation-ridden economy. The hard-core Communists within the Labor Alliance appear unwilling to accept a continued wage freeze and favor the party's withdrawal from the government--a move which would cause the government to fall. Although the coalition has weathered serious crises in the past, the possibility of a breakup cannot be ruled out. (Page 4)

18 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 09]
SAUDI TROOPS IN JORDAN
18 APRIL 1958

[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Saudi Brigade to Be Withdrawn From Jordan

The Saudi Ministry of Defense instructed the Saudi Command in Jordan on 15 April to prepare the Saudi brigade there to return home at an early date. The decision to withdraw most of the 3,500-4,000 Saudi forces in Jordan and to discontinue the $14,000,000 annual subsidy to the Jordanian Government was apparently made in January in an effort to cope with the growing Saudi economic crisis and prior to the King's relinquishment of broad powers to Crown Prince Faysal. This withdrawal is probably designed in part to create the impression that Saudi policy is shifting back to one of strict neutrality in intra-Arab disputes. However, it will be widely interpreted in the Arab Middle East as a Saudi concession to Nasir.

Saudi troops have been deployed in Jordan since late 1956, following the Israeli attack on Egypt, when all of Jordan's Arab neighbors sent forces to assist in defending the long frontier with Israel and protect their own particular interests in Jordan. Syrian and Iraqi troops withdrew during the first half of 1957, but the Saudis remained with the tacit mission of supporting King Husayn in case of efforts to overthrow him.

The Saudi brigade of about 3,000 men has been stationed in the Jordan River Valley west of Amman, while two battalions with supporting troops have been in the Aqaba area. At least some of the Aqaba forces will probably also be withdrawn.

Amman may now request Iraqi troops to enter Jordan, probably to occupy military installations in the Mafraq area north of Amman near the Syrian border.

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Racial Moderation Suffers Setback in Rhodesian Election

The defeat of Southern Rhodesian Prime Minister Sir Edgar Whitehead in a by-election for the Territorial Assembly on 16 April is a serious blow to the principle of racial partnership and will probably lessen political stability of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Under the constitution, the prime minister must be a member of the territorial legislature. Since he must be elected within four months of his appointment in order to remain in office, he will probably call for immediate general elections in which the opposition Dominion party--which openly supports racial segregation--is expected to make heavy gains.

Southern Rhodesia, keystone territory of the three-member Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, dominates the region's political life. Both Southern Rhodesia and the federation are governed by the moderate United Federal party, which is seriously divided on the racial question and subject to pressure from the growing segregationist opposition. This opposition has won most of the recent by-elections.

In February, Sir Edgar's relatively liberal predecessor was ousted by party members who feared his pro-African sympathies. This ouster destroyed much of the Africans' faith in the professed racial partnership of the ruling party and raised concern in London, which is confronted with growing white settler demands for full independence. The Africans' distrust will now be sharpened by the electorate's repudiation of Sir Edgar, and African dissidents will probably increase their nationalist agitation.

Meanwhile, in the Union of South Africa, the white electorate greatly strengthened the hold of the National party--which believes in rigid segregation--in the general elections there on 16 April.

[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

Repercussions of Gaillard's Fall

The French National Assembly has resumed its recess to campaign in the local elections scheduled for 20 and 27 April. President Coty is continuing his consultations but is not expected to name his first candidate for premier until Monday to avoid the possibility of having his choice influence Sunday's first-round vote. He may then choose a center candidate such as ex-Premier Pleven in hopes of hastening the necessary compromises between the non-Communist left and right.

The return of General De Gaulle is again being urged by his most ardent supporters but there seems to be no major increase in this pressure. Should ex-Gaullist Soustelle be named as a candidate, however, he might use his investiture attempt to rally support for the general. New Assembly elections have been urged by the conservative National Association of Small Businessmen, but such a move would encounter heavy opposition among the deputies many of whom insist on a prior change in the electoral law.

To allay the impatience of extremists in Tunisia, President Bourguiba will apparently make some early move to raise again charges of French aggression at the UN. Any serious new incidents would almost certainly force him to take immediate action, possibly including steps against French troops. The possibility of such incidents has alarmed British Foreign Office officials. They fear that the present caretaker status of the Gaillard government will give Defense Minister Chaban-Delmas a freer hand and "make him increasingly willing to accede to military and rightist pressure." Chaban-Delmas indicated to American officials just before Gaillard's fall that France was about to implement an "eye for an eye" military policy against rebel raids from Tunisia.

In Algeria, there is evidence that some French army officers have again been concerting plans with European civilian extremists aimed at overthrowing the local regime. It is improbable, however, that essential military support for such an operation would be forthcoming.

[PAGE 14]
Crisis in Icelandic Government

Iceland's 20-month-old coalition government of Progressives, Social Democrats, and the Communist-front Labor Alliance may fall as a result of disagreement over how to stabilize the inflation-ridden economy. Since mid-March the cabinet has been trying to formulate a deflationary program short of devaluation which would produce during the remaining eight months of 1958 the approximately $12,000,000 needed to cover the deficit in the Export Fund.

The government will not resort to a general devaluation of the overvalued currency (16.3 kronor to the dollar), since the Communists resolutely oppose such a move. Consequently, Prime Minister Jonasson is demanding that the Communist-controlled Icelandic Federation of Labor (IFL) accept a continuation of the present wage freeze. The Moscow-Communist wing of the Labor Alliance, however, feels that it must champion labor's demands for higher wages or risk losing control of the IFL as well as suffering further losses in the local unions, and therefore favors withdrawing from the government.

These circumstances may result in a dissolution of the coalition. In the past, however, the Communists have made far-reaching compromises to remain in the government and thus retain their growing influence on the nation's economy and political life.

[PAGE 15]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 April 1958

Watch Committee conclusion -- Indonesia: There is no evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily involved in Indonesia. Developments continue to favor local Communist and Sino-Soviet bloc exploitation of the situation. A military defeat of the dissidents on Sumatra would not resolve the basic issues which led to the revolt.

Saudi Arabia - Jordan: Some 3,000 Saudi troops stationed in northwestern Jordan for the past year have been ordered to prepare to return to Saudi Arabia.

This withdrawal is probably due primarily to Saudi financial troubles and to formation of the Arab Union. This move may also be designed to strengthen the impression that Saudi policy is shifting back to one of strict neutrality in intra-Arab disputes. Jordan now may request Iraqi troops to move into northern Jordan as they did in 1956. A token Saudi unit will probably remain in the Aqaba area of Jordan. (Page 1) (Map)

Watch Committee conclusion -- Middle East: A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered unlikely in the near future. However, serious incidents are likely to recur.

Rhodesia and Nyasaland: Rhodesia's progress toward racial partnership and political stability received a sharp setback on 17 April when the moderate prime minister of Southern Rhodesia was defeated by a prosegregationist in a special election. This defeat will probably lead to an immediate general election in Southern Rhodesia in which the segregationists are expected to make heavy gains which would result in a heightening of racial tension and an increase in African nationalist activity throughout the federation.

Iceland: The 20-month-old coalition government of Progressives, Social Democrats, and the Communist-dominated Labor Alliance is approaching a crisis over measures to stabilize the country's inflation-ridden economy. The hard-core Communists within the Labor Alliance appear unwilling to accept a continued wage freeze and favor the party's withdrawal from the government--a move which would cause the government to fall. Although the coalition has weathered serious crises in the past, the possibility of a breakup cannot be ruled out. (Page 4)

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
TOP SECRET
18 April 1958
Copy No. 140

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
