Premier-designate Ileo, in an 18 March briefing to the
diplomatic corps in Leopoldville, stated that the Tananarive
conference had had no power to change the fundamental law of
the Congo. He asserted that his provisional government would
continue to function until the new structure proposed in broad
outline at Tananarive is established and legalized. He claimed
that Tshombé and Kalonji, in signing the conference's final
resolution, had recognized the Leopoldville government for
the first time. Further claims and counterclaims can be ex-
pected.

France-Algeria: Designation by the rebel Algerian provi-
sional government of four "ministers" to meet with French
officials confirms the rebels' intention to begin high-level
negotiations on an Algerian settlement. The rebel delegation
is composed of capable men from both the military and polit-
ical factions of the rebel government, representing both "hard"
and "moderate" views. Rebel leaders, who are said to feel
that the recent secret preliminary talks with the French made
little progress in resolving key substantive issues, will prob-
ably seek to give considerable publicity to the progress of fur-
ther negotiations in an attempt to keep pressure of world opin-
ion on France. (Backup, Page 1)

Poland: Available texts--incomplete--of Cardinal Wyszyn-
ski's two most recent sermons show a decided stiffening by the
church against further compromise with the regime. Although
Wyszynski did not explicitly call for direct political opposition
by Catholics to the Communists' economic and social welfare
programs, he nevertheless implied that, if necessary to pre-
serve spiritual integrity, Polish Catholics would form an
underground church. At least until the 16 April parliament
elections, the regime may decide it is best to temporize and
avoid exacerbating a potentially explosive popular issue.
(Backup, Page 3)

Brazil: Proposed Brazilian congressional action would make it
"virtually impossible" for foreign banks to continue to
function in Brazil, according to the head of the First National

21 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  ii
