Opponents of De Gaulle's Algerian Policy Active  

Former Vice Premier Soustelle's recently launched movement advocating the maintenance of a "French Algeria" now has the support of some well-known political figures from most major non-Communist parties. These include former Resident Minister for Algeria Lacoste (Socialist), former Premier Bidault (Christian Democrat), former Defense Minister and Premier Bourges-Maunoury (Radical), former Defense Minister Morice (dissident Radical), and head of the National Assembly Defense Committee Francois-Valentin (Independent). A similar movement has been started in Algeria under the leadership of a Moslem vice president of the French National Assembly.  

The "French Algeria" groups aim to unite various elements opposed to De Gaulle's Algerian policy and are directing their primary efforts toward gaining support within the army for Soustelle's goal of completely integrating Algeria into France. The US consul general in Algiers views the army as essentially loyal and ready to obey De Gaulle's orders.  

Soustelle and some of his associates may be planning moves to overthrow the regime if De Gaulle makes significant concessions in his forthcoming negotiations with the Algerian rebels. French police are aware of a "serious" plot for combined civilian and military operations in France "to seize the government. There reportedly are some contacts between these plotters and Soustelle's group. Extremists in Algeria have been heard commenting, "Let it start in Paris this time."  

French security officials have begun to relax the special precautions instituted on 20 June when the rebel leadership agreed to negotiate. Pro-integrationist elements now indicate that, since everyone favors ending the war, cease-fire talks in themselves would not be a popular reason for rebellion. They may still plan to act, however, if and when De Gaulle's talks with the rebels result in political agreements which could be attacked as leading to the "loss" of Algeria.  

24 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
