[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

4 October 1956

Copy No. 112

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. BRITAIN FAVORS STATIONING IRAQI TROOPS IN JORDAN

3. USSR RENEWS OFFER OF ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO IRAN

4. THREAT OF VIOLENCE INCREASES IN HONDURAS

* * * *

THE TAIWAN STRAIT

4 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. BRITAIN FAVORS STATIONING IRAQI TROOPS
IN JORDAN

The British Foreign Office is convinced
it would be desirable from the stand-
point of Western interests to have Iraq
station troops in Jordan, as requested
by Jordan's King Hussain. In particular, London believes
such a move would greatly enhance Iraq's prestige at the
expense of Nasr's in the entire region.

According to the American embassy in
London, the Foreign Office appears confident that it could
allay any of Israel's fears which might result from Iraq's
movement into Jordan.

Israeli prime minister Ben-Gurion has
said Israel would not attack Jordan as a result of move-
ment of Iraqi troops into Jordan as long as the troops re-
main east of the Jordan River.

4 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. USSR RENEWS OFFER OF ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE
TO IRAN

The Shah informed Ambassador Chapin
on 30 September that N. M. Pegov, the
new Soviet ambassador to Iran, told him
that the USSR is ready to give Iran eco-
nomic assistance of any kind and in almost any amount Iran
wishes to name. Specifically, Pegov proposed joint con-
struction of a million-kilowatt hydroelectric project on the
Araks River on Iran's northwest border with the USSR. The
USSR offered to submit plans shortly for Iranian concurrence.

Comment

When the Shah visited the Soviet Union in
July, he was assured by Soviet leaders
that the USSR was prepared to give Iran unconditional large-
scale assistance for its economic development, but no spe-
cific offers were made. The Shah indicated interest at the
time in common development of water resources along the
border.

The present offer comes at a time when
Iran faces serious economic problems and is uncertain of the
extent of aid from the West, and will be difficult for Tehran
to reject.

In its negotiations with Afghanistan, Burma
and Indonesia, the USSR quickly followed up acceptance of ini-
tial general offers of economic assistance with specific pro-
posals on terms and projects.

4 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. THREAT OF VIOLENCE INCREASES IN HONDURAS

The political struggle in Honduras is
approaching a crisis, and the election
of a constituent assembly scheduled
for 7 October seems likely to provoke
disorders and, possibly, an attempted
revolt. The election will be rigged against the Nationalist
and Liberal Parties on behalf of a government-supported
National Union slate dominated by the small Reformist
Party.

The Nationalists, angered at illegal
government actions against them, announced on 1 October
that they would boycott the election. The Liberals, whose
hatred for the government surpasses their traditional en-
mity for the Nationalists, have considered co-operation on
common political action with the Nationalists. Together,
the two parties polled 79 percent of the votes in the rela-
tively free 1954 national elections. There are indications
that Nationalist Party chief Carias may now be preparing
for armed action against the government.

The ailing Julio Lozano, whose strenu-
ous efforts to create a stable coalition government have led
merely to an increase in tension, temporarily turned the
government over to popular ex-president Galvez last month.
Lozano's return as chief of state, which may occur before
the election, would probably spark serious disorders.

Most top army leaders are loyal to
Galvez and Lozano and could probably suppress a revolt at
this time.

4 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
BIWEEKLY SUMMARY
(20 September-3 October 1956)

THE TAIWAN STRAIT

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Taiwan Strait Problem

1. The only noteworthy combat activity during the period
occurred when four Chinese Nationalist F-84's on a reconnais-
sance mission along the South China coast on 1 October were
engaged by four Chinese Communist jet fighters near Swatow.
In the ensuing engagement two Communist aircraft were damaged,
according to Chinese Nationalist claims, and one F-84 received
minor damage. The incident appears to have been a chance en-
counter between the Nationalist aircraft and a Communist jet
fighter patrol on a routine mission.

2. The eighth congress of the Chinese Communist Party,
which concluded on 27 September, and statements made on
National Day (1 October) reiterated Peiping's intention to "lib-
erate" Taiwan by either peaceful or other means, but this theme
received little stress.

3. In a statement on 21 September on the Johnson-Wang
talks at Geneva, the Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry indi-
cated that it regards further discussion of the question of renun-
ciation of force as fruitless and proposed that the talks move on
to the question of trade controls. The tone of the statement was
moderate and gave no indication of any Chinese intention to break
off the talks at this time.

4 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 14]
