4. Rival Communist factions in Burma agree to collaborate:
The chiefs of the two insurgent Communist parties in Burma have now composed their long-standing differences. An agreement reached in December calls for cessation of armed conflict, collaboration in fighting the government and efforts to merge into a single Communist party.

Comment: Personal rivalries rather than ideological incompatibility have in the past precluded collaboration or union of the two Communist groups.

Reports have been received that Communist China has specified a settlement of the factional dispute as a prerequisite for substantial material aid.

SOUTH ASIA

5. Indian Government agrees to continue negotiations on Kashmir:
The Government of India has informed UN representative Graham that it is willing to continue negotiations on the Kashmir issue. It states that is has no objection to participation in the negotiations by Admiral Nimitz, plebiscite administrator designate, provided his impartiality in arranging for a subsequent plebiscite is not prejudiced.

Comment: India's agreement to Graham's suggestion practically assures that negotiations will be continued. It does not necessarily increase the likelihood that they will be successful.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Mossadeq accuses British of election interference:
Ambassador that despite British efforts to slow the elections and thus delay formal convocation of the Majlis, he hoped that a formal meeting could be held in about two weeks. He asserted that eighty percent of the deputies were the "choice of the people" and that in spite of British interference only a few "British stooges" have been elected.

Mossadeq stated that he did not know what attitude the new body would take toward his government, but that the Majlis would immediately be faced with making decisions of a very grave nature.

Comment: National Front rigging of the election has slowed the balloting and prevented assembly of the Majlis.

Mossadeq's anti-British diatribes suggest that he will continue to depend primarily upon this line to gain support for his policies. The new strongly pro-National Front Majlis may be expected to widen the gap between Iran and the West.

7. Egypt facing serious financial difficulties:
In spite of Britain's recent release of ten million pounds sterling to Egypt, Prime Minister Hilali Pasha faces a deteriorating financial situation. Egypt's rapid consumption of its sterling reserves at the rate of eight million pounds per month since 1 January places British currency "virtually in the category of hard currency" as far as Egypt is concerned.
