[PAGE 01]
22 July 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Dislodging Viet Minh irregulars south of truce line will be formidable task (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Israeli defense minister advocates tough policies (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Social Democrats may back third force line (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Dislodging Viet Minh irregulars south of truce line will be formidable task:

The existence of a Viet Minh military and administrative establishment along a 310-mile coastal strip south of Tourane will present a formidable obstacle to efforts by
[PAGE 04]
the Vietnam government to assert its authority over the non-Communist portion of Vietnam, according to the vice governor of central Vietnam. He points out that this area has been completely controlled by the Viet Minh for ten years. He is also frankly dubious that his 5,000-man guerrilla force can eliminate Viet Minh irregulars, who will continue to terrorize village authorities.

Comment: Present Vietnamese security forces are inadequate to the task of clearing Viet Minh irregular units in non-Communist Vietnam. Even the establishment of a strong government in non-Communist Vietnam--the first necessary step--would meet formidable obstacles prior to the holding of elections in July 1956, as called for in the cease-fire agreement.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
4. Israeli defense minister advocates tough policies:

Minister of Defense Lavon, in a two-hour off-the-record discussion with news correspondents on 19 July, said Israel's policies must include: (1) building up the country's military strength, (2) resisting any measures by Western powers which would increase Arab military strength, and (3) continuing military retaliation for Arab border violations.

Lavon said that the present borders between Israel and the Arab states are irrational; he believes that they should not be regarded as unchangeable, although the Israeli government has no present intention of changing them by force. He hinted that the border armistice agreement with Egypt may become invalid if British troops are withdrawn from the Suez base.

Comment: Lavon exerts considerable influence in the government. His raising of frontier questions could inject explosive elements into the Palestine situation.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Social Democrats may back third force line:

Erich Ollenhauer, chairman of the West German Social Democratic Party, plans to introduce a resolution at his party's current congress calling for a national foreign policy supporting all measures designed to weaken both the American and Soviet power blocs.

Ollenhauer feels that a German contribution to Western defense would not improve West German security, and that security can be obtained only by a weakening of the two power blocs. He reportedly will demand that European Socialists collaborate closely with British Commonwealth Socialists, Indian prime minister Nehru, and African peoples seeking independence.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: While the Social Democratic congress will probably sanction some form of West German rearmament outside EDC, a distinct party trend toward neutralism has apparently been given impetus both by diminishing West German faith in EDC and by decreasing fear of Soviet aggression.
