[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Libyan unity threatened by King's attitude (page 4).
4. Inspector General of Greek Army removed (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Czechoslovakia and Poland reportedly seek to establish missions in Panama (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Netherlands protests delay in receipt of US military equipment (page 6).

****
- 2 -

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Libyan unity threatened by King's attitude:

The Libyan King's preference for his native province of Cyrenaica and his apparent disinterest in the more important and heavily populated Tripolitania province endanger the prospects for a united Libya, according to the American Charge in Tripoli. The King seems unwilling or incapable of thinking of the country as a whole. Of the two cabinet ministers who have a true all-Libya outlook, one is definitely slated to go, while the other's tenure appears temporary.

The Charge warns that American interests in the area will be jeopardized by the King's attitude since Tripolitania contains the important US air base, Wheelus Field. He believes that the American, British and French representatives should press the King to accept his responsibilities toward all parts of his kingdom.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
Comment: When Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and the Fezzan were united to create Libya in mid-December, separatist elements were considered a threat to its future. The elections in February will be a major test for the state which, without energetic federal leadership, faces an uncertain future.

4. Inspector General of Greek Army removed:

The Inspector General of the Greek Army, General Kitrilakis, has been relieved "temporarily," on orders of the Minister of Defense. All remaining pro-Papagos officers reportedly are to be removed by May.

Comment: The removal of Kitrilakis, a firm supporter of opposition leader Marshal Papagos, is the result of the struggle for control of the armed forces which has already caused the ouster of several high-ranking pro-Papagos officers who are also pro-American.

This action assumes serious proportions because it directly violates an understanding between the American army mission in Greece and Greek defense officials which provides for consultation on major changes in assignment of Greek army personnel. It is also indicative of increasing political manipulation within the army.

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Czechoslovakia and Poland reportedly seek to establish missions in Panama:

Poland and Czechoslovakia reportedly desire to establish diplomatic missions in Panama. When questioned about the matter, the Panamanian Foreign Minister said that Czechoslovakia had not made an official approach, but

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
that the Polish representative in Mexico had formally requested an exchange of ministers, and had even submitted the name of the proposed chief of mission.

The US Ambassador believes that he may have persuaded the Panamanian Government to refuse the Polish request.

Comment: It was reported last September that the Czechoslovak Minister in Washington had made approaches to Panama for establishing official Czechoslovak representation there. There are still, however, no diplomatic missions from the Orbit in that country.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Netherlands protests delay in receipt of US military equipment:

The Netherlands has officially protested to American authorities the uncertainty of deliveries of US military equipment for the two Dutch divisions scheduled to take part in the SHAPE maneuvers next September. Officials state that serious political consequences are to be expected if the problem is not solved soon.

The American Embassy at The Hague advises that, in view of the publicity given to Dutch participation in the maneuvers, the United States will be publicly blamed for any failure to deliver the promised aid on schedule. Furthermore, delay of the shipments would probably force the Dutch Government to reduce its conscription levies. This would deal a serious psychological blow to the country's defense effort.

Comment: Since last spring Dutch officials have stated that a lack of equipment might delay fulfillment of their military commitments.

In November, the Dutch hinted that "possibility of war in 1952" was the basis for their insistence on fielding fully equipped divisions for the SHAPE maneuvers. A later report shows that Dutch military leaders are now convinced of this possibility.

- 6 -
