[PAGE 01]
20 July 1958

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 July 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

* Soviet political moves: The immediate purpose of Khrushchev's urgent call for a 22 July summit meeting is probably to deter any Anglo-American action against Iraq or the UAR. The note is also probably intended to create the maximum possible international alarm by references to a world "on the brink of catastrophe" and to Soviet possession of "ballistic rockets of all types including ICBMs," in the hope that this alarm will be translated into heavy pressure on the US and Britain to withdraw their forces from Lebanon and Jordan. Khrushchev's letters continue the USSR's cautious approach to the Middle East crisis by continuing to avoid commitments to any specific course of action.

Meanwhile the Communist campaign to build up world pressure against the Western moves is being expanded. In Potsdam, violent demonstrations were conducted against the US and British military missions. In Bucharest, an orderly 15-minute demonstration took place, marked by visible disinterest on the part of the 400 to 500 participants. In Warsaw, the government issued a comparatively mild declaration that the British and American "armed aggression" in the Middle East was a menace to world peace. In Prague, the government issued a formal statement urging UN action to force withdrawal of the "aggressors," but the US Embassy received only a nominal volume of protest letters and telegrams from worker groups.

In Peiping, an official protest against intervention in Jordan was handed the British chargé, and Peiping Radio offered volunteers from Chinese army units to fight in the Middle

[PAGE 04]
East "if necessary." In Indonesia, a veterans' organization offered 3,500 volunteers to fight against US and British troops in the Middle East.

In Tehran, Soviet Ambassador Pegov told the Shah on 19 July that if US or UK troops enter Iran to stage an attack on Iraq, the USSR will immediately invade Iran.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

20 July 58     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
* Cambodia: Cambodia has agreed to extend full diplomatic recognition, including an exchange of ambassadors, to Communist China. The decision will be made public within a few days. This will give a strong boost to the pro-Peiping Chinese community in Cambodia, and probably force the withdrawal of the unaccredited Chinese Nationalist consul. It will reinforce Saigon's strong distrust of Prince Sihanouk, and defeat any hope for an immediate Cambodia/South Vietnam conciliation.

20 July 58     DAILY BRIEF     iv
