GENERAL

1. Comment on Soviet renewal of German peace treaty proposal:
In its 9 April note, the Soviet Union for the first time directly proposed four-power discussions of free all-German elections and investigation of electoral conditions. The East German Government made such a proposal last September with Soviet support, and it was rejected by Chancellor Adenauer.

The note does not point to any forthcoming concessions, but instead reveals all the weaknesses of Russia's German policy. As a result, it is not likely to deflect the West German Government from its present course of Western integration.

The USSR has attempted to devise a new approach to appeal to West Germany and to convince the Western powers that further negotiation would produce real concessions. It has been unable to make effective proposals, however, for fear of further weakening its hold on Germany.

The new proposal indicates that the USSR cannot agree to free elections, which would result in the loss of East Germany, fearing an ultimate westward orientation of a unified Germany. Accordingly, the note only proposes that the four powers discuss the question.

In answering the Western demand for UN investigation of electoral conditions, the note suggests that such a check could be carried out by a commission of the four occupying powers, presumably operating under a Soviet veto threat, but does not propose the setting up of such a commission.

The Soviet note essentially represents a legalistic attempt to delay developments in the West without committing the USSR. Accordingly, it specifies neither a date nor an agenda for such a meeting.

The failure of the USSR to clarify its earlier proposal for a German army confirms the impression that this offer was made primarily to increase Soviet influence among German nationalists. By reaffirming the Oder-Neisse line, however, the USSR indicates that it does not intend to make a drastic play for German opinion by offering to take the former German territories away from Poland.

In a final attempt to appeal to West European and German opinion, the Soviet note concludes with the warning that the choice is now being made between a united Germany, connoting peace, and a divided Germany carrying with it a continuing threat of war in Europe.
