Pressure in Austria for Recognizing Communist China

In its session with the foreign minister, the delegation from the League of Austrian Industrialists argued that Austria should recognize Communist China before the US did, in order to avoid giving the impression that Austria was an American satellite. Kreisky, one of the prominent Socialist members of the coalition cabinet, replied that he could not move alone in the matter because his political enemies, particularly in the coalition People's party, were jealous of his growing prestige and would label him a Communist. He said that the Socialist party in general favors recognition because of its interest in developing the country's nationalized industries. Kreisky also told the delegates that in 1958 he had changed Austria's position in the UN from one of supporting the moratorium on Chinese UN representation to one of abstention on the issue, and that Austria's future attitude would depend on circumstances in the next General Assembly.

In the first ten months of 1960 Austrian imports from Communist China were worth $5,200,000, practically double what they were for the same period in 1959. Exports, however, remained at about the same level, around $11,000,000 in each period. Austrian businessmen have frequently complained that lack of political ties is hurting Austria's export trade. Austria's trade with Communist China makes up about 13 percent of its total trade with the bloc. Austria has no diplomatic, consular, or commercial representation in either Nationalist or Communist China. A trade commissioner resident in Hong Kong handles Austria's trade matters in the area.

Kreisky, in telling US Ambassador Matthews about his discussions with Polish Foreign Minister Rapacki during his visit to Vienna from 8 to 11 March, implied that establishing Austrian diplomatic relations with Communist China was mainly a matter of time. Kreisky said he had turned down Rapacki's offer of mediation because of the domestic political situation, adding that the USSR had made a similar offer but that he prefers the mediation of a neutral like Switzerland which already has an embassy in Peiping.

19 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
