10. French president reportedly opposes more liberal Indochina policy:

Minister for the Associated States Letourneau recently revealed to a French official in Saigon that he was attempting to formulate an entirely new and more liberal policy toward Indochina. He added that he was having a hard fight and that President Auriol was resisting his efforts.

The Saigon official believes that the Cambodian king's flight will make Letourneau's task more difficult than ever.

Comment: Letourneau may also be encountering opposition from his party leader, Georges Bidault, whose insistence on maintaining France's position in Indochina has prevented the Laotian appeal to the UN. The French press has been increasingly inclined, however, to protest the government's tendency to procrastinate until events force more liberal concessions than the Vietnamese nationalists themselves would have sought earlier.

11. Andre Marie given good chance to end French cabinet crisis:

Radical Socialist Andre Marie's candidacy for the French premiership is favored by the prolongation of the cabinet crisis and the growing popular disgust. The American embassy in Paris considers that the chief obstacle facing Marie is Popular Republican resentment over the Radicals' recent torpedoing of Bidault's candidacy.

Marie is essentially "a man of compromise," and his confirmation as premier would mean that the National Assembly intended to do as little as possible on major issues. The Radicals themselves expect that a Marie government would last only until the assembly reconvenes after the summer recess.

Comment: The Popular Republican deputies are likely to support Marie in order to avoid the responsibility for a further postponement of the forthcoming Bermuda conference.

Marie is reportedly intent on obtaining broad political support for some early major decisions. The most comprehensive French fiscal program of recent years was launched by Paul Reynaud as finance minister in the short-lived Marie government of 1948.
