Evacuation of Chinese Nationalist Irregulars

The Chinese Nationalist irregulars in the Burma-Thailand-Laos border area are scattered and semiautonomous, and the degree to which they will respond to Taipei's efforts is problematical. Most of the 3,000 irregulars now in Laos probably will consent to evacuation. This group includes a large proportion of the 1,000 Taiwan-trained Special Forces which were sent to the area during 1960. They are regular army personnel and responsive to orders. Others, who have been in the area since 1949 and retreated into Laos from Burma after surrendering their bases, have lost their means of livelihood.

The 3,000 to 4,000 irregulars farther south, in the Burma-Thailand border area, have been relatively independent of Taiwan. The Burmese Army has pressed them less vigorously than the group which retreated into Laos, and the Thai inhabitants tend to support them against the Burmese. Many of these irregulars have homes and families in Thai refugee villages and have achieved relatively high standards of living. As they have returned to these villages, with Thai approval, when Burmese pressures became too strong in the past, it is unlikely that many of them will opt for repatriation to Taiwan.

Although the Burmese Government has expressed gratification for United States efforts to speed the evacuation of irregulars from Burma and the anti-American press campaign has subsided, the issue remains extremely sensitive in Rangoon. The government considers the irregulars entirely dependent on foreign assistance and asserts this could not be supplied without tacit American approval; the army is bitter over the heavy casualties it has sustained in the recent campaign against the Chinese; and the country as a whole fears that the irregulars provide a standing justification for Chinese Communist incursions into Burma. It is probable that the government will renew its campaign of press denunciation and public demonstrations against the United States

14 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
