Situation in the Congo

Gizenga and other members of his regime, in conversation with an official of the US Embassy in Leopoldville who was in Stanleyville last week, stated that they have decided as a matter of policy to cooperate with the UN, despite their dislike of that organization. Stating that they are not Communists, they asked for understanding and aid from the United States. Gizenga was critical of Kasavubu, but said he recognized him as Congolese chief of state. Gizenga also said that if his security were assured, he would be willing to attend a session of the Congolese parliament, and, if then voted out of the government, would take a position in the parliamentary opposition.

The American Embassy official reports that there are four centers of political power in Stanleyville. Gizenga and his group apparently occupy a position between that of Lundula, characterized as "almost too moderate and reasonable for Stanleyville," and Interior Minister Gbenye, who is described as a "potentially dangerous, vindictive, stupid racist." These three elements still work together, but Orientale provincial president Manzikala's provincial administration apparently is at odds with all of them. Manzikala seems to be trying to build up enough strength to challenge Gizenga, but his prestige declined after Gizenga refused to let him go to Tananarive. Manzikala, generally considered a moderate, demands standard Stanleyville demands for a reconvening of parliament and the expulsion of foreign troops. He also echoed the Communist line that Hammarskjold should no longer be recognized as secretary general.

The economic situation in Stanleyville is critical. Gizenga told his Cairo representative that unless help came by 15 March, he would not be able to pay his troops. He further stated that he recognized the consequences which would follow "if the government even on one occasion has difficulty in paying the salaries of the soldiers."

The Tananarive conference recognized the existence of eight "sovereign" states--a division which has already been challenged

14 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
