[PAGE 01]
19 September 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. IL-28 bombers apparently leaving East Germany again (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Taipei's plan to avoid evacuation of Chinese Nationalists from Burma reported (page 3).
3. Chinese Communist military build-up near Burma border reported (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Iranian prime minister reportedly threatens to resign in dispute with shah (page 4).
5. Comment on the rumored Qashqai tribal revolt in Iran (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
6.

WESTERN EUROPE
7. French reportedly suggest EDC ratification with delayed implementation of treaty (page 6).

****


[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. IL-28 bombers apparently leaving East Germany again:

Comment: All IL-28 bomber and reconnaissance units were withdrawn from East Germany for unknown reasons in late June and early July. It now appears that the return of some of these aircraft was temporary and may have been an exercise in tactical redeployment from rear area bases. It may also reflect a decision to retain the IL-28's in the western USSR with former bases in East Germany serving as forward tactical airfields.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Taipei's plan to avoid evacuation of Chinese Nationalists from Burma reported:


[PAGE 04]
Comment:
Formosa has at no time taken the evacuation effort seriously. In view of this, little credence can be given to the assertion of the Chinese Nationalist foreign minister on 17 September that his government wanted to cooperate with Thailand and the United States in carrying out the evacuation plan even if Burma refused to sign the agreement.

3. Chinese Communist military build-up near Burma border reported:

Chinese Communist military preparations in southwestern Yunnan have proceeded beyond defense requirements. Although there are no firm indications that the Chinese are planning aggressive action against Burma, they appear to be developing the strength to do so. Some evidence is also reported which suggests that Peiping's forces are cooperating with the Burmese against the Chinese Nationalists and against disaffected ethnic minority groups in northeast Burma.

Comment: The possibility that the Chinese Communists are preparing to take action against the Nationalists cannot be wholly dismissed in view of the breakdown of the Bangkok negotiations, which might induce the Burmese to request Peiping's assistance in dealing with the Nationalists.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian prime minister reportedly threatens to resign in dispute with shah:

Prime Minister Zahedi has threatened to resign if the shah does not dismiss Chief of Staff Batmangelitch and Deputy Chief of Staff Dehimi.


[PAGE 05]
Comment: There are no indications that the shah will agree to the dismissal of Batmangelitch, who approves of the monarch's attempts to take over complete control of the army.

The disagreements between the shah and his prime minister will probably not cause a break at this time. Continuation of the present friction, however, may produce another serious crisis.

5. Comment on the rumored Qashqai tribal revolt in Iran:

No evidence supports the rumor that 70,000 Qashqai tribesmen are marching on Shiraz in southwestern Iran after delivering an ultimatum to Prime Minister Zahedi demanding the release of former prime minister Mossadeq. The rumor may have arisen from movements connected with the tribe's annual fall migration, which is now under way.

Qashqai leaders were strong supporters of Mossadeq and have not made their peace with the Zahedi regime, although they reportedly told the provincial governor general that they would not cause trouble if the army did not attack them. The tribe, some 200,000 strong, is traditionally opposed to the monarchy and has long sought semiautonomy. The tribe cannot put 70,000 armed men into an operation against the government; in any case, the army would probably be able to control the situation.

EASTERN EUROPE

6.


[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. French reportedly suggest EDC ratification with delayed implementation of treaty:

According to Dutch Foreign Ministry officials, the French have suggested that EDC ratification be completed and the recruiting of German forces begun but that full implementation of the treaty be spread over several years. During this period the national governments would retain control over the Commissariat, the EDC executive.

Foreign Ministry officials, some of whom suspect that the French proposal is a delaying tactic, understand that the initial West German reaction to the idea was favorable. The Dutch Defense Ministry and the prime minister's personal staff think that it may provide a solution to the problem of French ratification.

Comment: This is the first report of such a French proposal.

Foreign Minister Bidault may be attempting to adapt the EDC to the slower timing he considers necessary to win rightist acceptance for an over-all European political authority.
