5. Egyptian King unable to prevent treaty abrogation:

The Egyptian Royal Press Counselor has informed the US Ambassador that, unless Britain comes up soon with some new acceptable proposal, King Farouk will be forced to allow his government to abrogate the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty. The king, through his counselor, made it clear that he disapproved of the way his government has handled the negotiations. However, since abrogation has wide popular support, he feels compelled to go along. To do otherwise would involve "dismissing the government, dissolving parliament, and ruling by military force."

The counselor, in view of possible new proposals from the British, stated that he would suggest to the king that attempt to delay the denouncement of the treaty.

Comment: Farouk, concerned over Egyptian stability and his own position, will delay abrogation as long as he deems such action compatible with his own security. Even if Middle East Command plans are completed quickly and Egypt is invited to participate, there is some doubt as to whether such an offer would assuage Egyptian nationalism sufficiently to prevent formal denunciation of the treaty.

6. Plastiras and Venizelos to collaborate in Greek parliament:

General Plastiras, leader of the EPEK party, has told the American Embassy in Athens that he and Prime Minister Venizelos have decided to collaborate in parliament. Plastiras believes that such a combination would command a bare majority with 130 to 132 seats in parliament. According to him it was not yet decided whether the new government should be purely EPEK with Liberal support, or whether the Liberals should actively participate. Venizelos has previously told the embassy that he would prefer the former, since such a government would soon demonstrate Plastiras' utter incapacity to govern.

Comment: On the basis of Marshal Papagos' plurality he presumably will be asked to form a government. Papagos does not have a majority in parliament, and there are no indications that he will attract enough deputies from the opposition parties to form a government. A Venizelos-Plastiras combination would be highly unstable because of Plastiras' leftist views, the widely divergent policies of the two men, and the attacks that could be expected from the Papagos plurality.
