[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

28 July 1956

Copy No. 105

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. BRITISH CONSIDERING COUNTERMEASURES TO SUEZ
NATIONALIZATION

2. USSR MAY PROVIDE AID FOR ASWAN DAM

3. FRENCH ADOPTING STIFFER ATTITUDE TOWARD WARSAW
GOVERNMENT

* * * *

28 July 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. BRITISH CONSIDERING COUNTERMEASURES TO
SUEZ NATIONALIZATION

Britain apparently has ruled out recourse to the UN Security Council on Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal, and feels that Britain, France and the United States must consider the possibility of military seizure. An emergency cabinet meeting on 26 July, attended by representatives of both the United States and France, took no firm decision, however.

The cabinet agreed that the interested Western governments must consider economic, political and military measures outside the UN to ensure maintenance of the canal, freedom of transit and reasonable tolls. The cabinet felt Security Council discussion would run too great a risk of getting "hopelessly bogged down." Prime Minister Eden is apparently thinking in terms of an American-British-French ministerial conference in the immediate future.

Although London has protested sharply to Cairo that the seizure is illegal, the British government apparently does not feel that the 1888 Convention neutralizing the canal provides strong legal grounds for action at this stage. Britain's possibilities for action are limited. Eden has told parliamentary questioners that blocking Egypt's sterling balances (valued at about $290,000,000) and stopping all arms shipments to Egypt are being considered.

The cabinet ordered a study of the forces required to seize the canal, and Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd told the American representative that he thought perhaps the only solution lay in a Western operating consortium, establishing itself by force if necessary. Britain probably would not take military action, however, without American support.

On 27 July, Paris made a strong protest to the Egyptian ambassador, reserving the right to take all necessary measures in defense of French interests and freedom of transit through the canal.

28 July 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. USSR MAY PROVIDE AID FOR ASWAN DAM

The Soviet commercial attaché in Cairo on 25 July reasserted the USSR's intention to help finance the Aswan High Dam, according to the British embassy there.

This report suggests that the confusion in Cairo over the USSR's current position on the dam question may well extend to the Soviet embassy. On 21 July Soviet foreign minister Shepilov avoided committing the USSR to support of the dam, but left the door open for later negotiations.

Egyptian president Nasr in his speech on 26 July reported that Shepilov last month had promised to help Egypt "in all fields in which Egypt asked for assistance to the extent of granting long-term loans." Nasr said that he had postponed discussion of the details until his visit to Moscow scheduled for next month.

In any case, should the Suez Canal receipts appear to improve Egypt's own ability to finance the dam, Moscow might find it increasingly attractive to make a specific offer to Egypt, at least in the form of technical assistance. Since the international complications of nationalization remain unclear, the USSR may hold off, at least until Nasr's trip, before making any offer.

28 July 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. FRENCH ADOPTING STIFFER ATTITUDE TOWARD
WARSAW GOVERNMENT

French foreign minister Pineau told the Polish ambassador on 24 July that the proposed visit of Polish premier Cyrankiewicz to Paris, reportedly scheduled for September, must be postponed "indefinitely" because of the French public reaction to the repression of Polish workers.

Paris may now also defer indefinitely the planned visit of the Czechoslovak premier, according to the American embassy. The embassy expects Pineau to instruct his ambassador in Warsaw to try to have an official observer attend the Poznan trials.

Comment

Leading members of Pineau's Socialist Party recently urged the government to withdraw the Cyrankiewicz invitation unless guarantees were secured that the Poznan rioters would get a fair trial. Deferment of the Czechoslovak visit would suggest that Pineau is now anxious to disengage himself from commitments which he made to the Satellites without consulting his Foreign Ministry staff.

Polish vice foreign minister Winiewicz recently told an American official in Warsaw that the trial would be "open" and that the government would give visas to "as many journalists as possible."

28 July 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
