[PAGE 01]
State Dept.
review completed                                    8 September 1957

Copy No. 136

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

4. PEIPING EXECUTES STUDENT RIOT LEADERS
(page 6).

5. TUNISIA REQUESTS US ARMS AID

7. HUNGARY ARRESTS HIGH CATHOLIC CHURCHMEN
(page 9).

8 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. PEIPING EXECUTES STUDENT RIOT LEADERS

Peiping announced on 6 September that three leaders of a student riot which occurred in central China last June had been executed. This is the sternest measure yet taken by Peiping to end free criticism and to counter student and intellectual ferment which developed from Mao Tse-tung's "hundred flowers" policy. Apparently timed to coincide with the beginning of a new school year, the announcement is intended to sober students, who have been told that they must spend considerably more time on ideological education this year.

Despite Communist protestations that "blooming and contending" will continue, it seems unlikely now that Peiping would chance re-establishing a meaningful "liberalization" program or that the people would venture to take such a program at face value.

Several "rightist" non-Communist cabinet officials have been linked with the student riot in Communist accounts, and could become later victims. Under attack since last June, they have so far managed to survive severe criticism without even losing their jobs.

8 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. TUNISIA REQUESTS US ARMS AID

Tunisian Foreign Secretary Sadok Mokaddem on 4 September requested urgent assistance from the United States in procuring small arms and ammunition for internal defense purposes. He said that the incident of 1 September, in which a unit of the French army pursuing Algerian rebels crossed into Tunisia and clashed with a unit of the Tunisian army, has highlighted the "imperative necessity" for the government to obtain arms.

Comment

This is the third time since May that Tunisia has requested American assistance in procuring materiel to equip its small army. France, which armed one battalion and promised materiel for another, has withheld supplies on the grounds that they might be turned over to the Algerian rebels.

President Bourghiba has been particularly indignant over his conviction that France has persuaded other governments not to sell arms to Tunisia. He announced on 8 August that the Tunisian government will find arms "at any price," although it is "loath to follow the dangerous example of some Middle Eastern states which bought Communist arms." At that time he initiated a nationwide drive to raise funds to purchase arms.

8 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. HUNGARY ARRESTS HIGH CATHOLIC CHURCHMEN

The American legation in Budapest has been reliably informed of the recent arrest of four Catholic bishops, including the acting head of the church in Hungary--Archbishop Grosz of Kalocsa--and an unknown number of priests. The legation believes the churchmen were arrested to silence their strong opposition to the government's demand that the Bench of Bishops, the top Catholic ecclesiastical body in the country, sign a public declaration supporting the regime's protest against UN General Assembly consideration of the Hungarian situation.

A "protest" against the UN action was issued in the name of the Bench of Bishops on 29 August. Grosz reportedly was unaware of the action and objected strongly to it after its release.

Comment

These and other coercive measures against the church probably have the immediate objective of silencing the opposition which might have become more vocal during the UN hearings. There has been evidence that representatives of the Lutheran and Calvinist churches were preparing to join the Catholics in condemning the terrorist tactics of the regime.

Archbishop Grosz was amnestied on 11 May 1956, after being sentenced to life imprisonment in a June 1951 show trial for conspiracy against the state. His long imprisonment has added to his stature as a symbol of anti-Communist opposition to the regime. The other bishops reportedly taken into custody all have long been opponents of the regime.

Attacks on the church could also be part of an effort to force the surrender of Cardinal Mindszenty, still in asylum in the American legation. The Cardinal has recently been subjected to a campaign of vilification as a "fascist" and stooge of Western imperialists, and charged with a share of responsibility for the national uprising.

8 Sept 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
