[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

16 May 1957

Copy No. 134

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. GOMULKA REAFFIRMS INDEPENDENT POLISH ROAD TO
SOCIALISM

2. MOLLET MANEUVERS ON CANAL ISSUE

3. AUSTRIA'S NEW PRESIDENT MAY STRESS ABOLITION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN INAUGURAL ADDRESS
(page 5).

4. FRENCH TREASURY SITUATION CRITICAL

7. NEW OUTBREAKS THREATEN HAITI WITH ANARCHY
(page 9).

16 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. GOMULKA REAFFIRMS INDEPENDENT POLISH ROAD
TO SOCIALISM

In his key address to the ninth plenum
of the Polish party, Gomulka on 15 May
vigorously reaffirmed his "National Com-
munist" policies, as approved by the
eighth plenum in October. He defended
his agricultural policies, which since October have been crit-
icized by the party as causing the large-scale dissolution of
collectives. Although pitched in a conciliation tone presum-
ably intended to be palatable to the Kremlin, Gomulka made
clear that he intends to go ahead with three major points in
his program--development of workers' councils, greater
powers for local governments and establishment of certain
forms of peasant co-operatives termed "circles" or "teams."

Referring to the Soviet Union, Gomulka
declared that even if it had avoided the "disease" of Stalin-
ism, the Russian road to socialism would probably not have
been acceptable to other countries and certainly would not
have been necessary. He declared further that the victory
of socialism in the Soviet Union and the progress toward
socialism of other countries had created a "historically new
situation" which permits the pursuit of different roads to so-
cialism and enables Poland to adopt a slower speed in social-
ization, particularly in agriculture.

Gomulka's statements probably will give
a measure of reassurance to most Poles, since it does not
indicate any reversal of his middle-of-the-road program. At
the same time, the speech has been carefully tailored to ap-
peal to as many elements of the party as possible in an effort
to restore party unity.

16 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]
2. MOLLET MANEUVERS ON CANAL ISSUE

French premier Mollet's proffered resig-
nation on 15 May was probably intended
merely as a tactical move to improve his
position on the Suez Canal issue. Britain's
decision to use the canal on Nasr's terms faces France with the
necessity of modifying its stand on use of the canal.

Mollet may have in mind an attempt to save
face by having the decision seem to be forced on France. By
referring the canal issue to the UN Security Council, Mollet
may hope to accomplish this end.

To the French, Nasr's success has direct
bearing on the outcome of the Algerian rebellion. The possi-
bility of French-Israeli collusion in a move against Egypt can-
not be ruled out in the event that Cairo acts to block transit by
an Israeli ship of the Tiran Strait or the Suez Canal.

16 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. AUSTRIA'S NEW PRESIDENT MAY STRESS ABOLITION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN INAUGURAL ADDRESS

American ambassador Thompson in
Vienna reports that President-elect
Schaerf intends to make a plea for the
abolition of nuclear weapons as a prom-
inent feature of his inaugural address on 22 May. Thompson
told Schaerf that such a course would play into the hands of
the USSR, but doubts that Schaerf can be influenced in view
of his recent successful use of the issue in the presidential
campaign.

Thompson intends to carry his appeal to
Bruno Pittermann, newly elected leader of the Socialist
Party, in the hope that he will restrain the president-elect,
but Pittermann favors a search for a common ground between
NATO and Soviet bloc powers on which nuclear abolition can
be based. Thompson thinks that this may be "even more dan-
gerous" to Western unity than Schaerf's appeal because it
could easily develop into a mass demand in Europe for the
abolition of nuclear weapons.

Schaerf used the nuclear weapons issue
effectively against his conservative opponent in the closing
days of the presidential campaign by charging him with de-
manding such weapons for the Austrian army. This was an
important factor in reversing the anti-Socialist trend in
Austria and electing Schaerf. Western European Socialists,
especially in West Germany and Austria, are eager to ex-
ploit the prevailing sentiment for a ban on nuclear weapons.

16 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
4. FRENCH TREASURY SITUATION CRITICAL

Both the director of the French Treas-
ury and the governor of the Bank of
France informed the American embassy
on 14 May that the French Treasury sit-
uation is precarious and direct advances from the Bank of
France are now an urgent necessity.

They are discussing with Finance Min-
ister Ramadier methods of obtaining National Assembly ap-
proval for such advances before President Coty leaves for
the United States at the end of this month. The government's
financial situation was aggravated when, in addition to the
drain imposed by the military costs for Algeria, a fall
in normal Treasury income, its recent bond issue produced
less than 60 percent of the amount anticipated.

Comment
New taxes and budget economies are now
being pushed by Mollet with an eye to get-
ting his house in order before seeking external loans when
France's credit with the International Monetary Fund is ex-
hausted in mid-June. Requests for new taxes and for National
Assembly authorization to use the gold and dollars held in the
Bank of France will considerably increase right-center irrita-
tion over the government's financial policies.

16 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
