Brazil Facing Financial Crisis

The Brazilian Government, confronted with falling coffee prices and scheduled repayments of $350,000,000 due this year on past loans, faces the prospect of defaulting on its international obligations by midsummer. President Kubitschek has broken off loan negotiations with the International Monetary Fund and made a "final" request to the United States for an emergency balance-of-payments loan of $300,000,000, stating that failure to obtain this would "cost the US and Brazil their long friendship." Kubitschek may be willing to consider a refunding program instead of a loan, but he is almost certain to demand assurances that this will not prejudice further loan talks next year.

Kubitschek's break with the IMF on 9 June involved a disagreement over the need for a "complete" exchange reform. Commenting on Argentina's willingness to adopt a similar reform last January, Kubitschek said that the Brazilian Government, without military backing for a state of siege, could not withstand the severe strikes and rioting that have accompanied the Argentine program. Kubitschek was particularly adamant in rejecting IMF pressure for an end to import subsidies for petroleum and wheat, Brazil's two most costly imports. Price rises resulting from earlier modifications in these subsidies caused serious riots last fall.

Brazil will face serious balance-of-payments difficulties for the next several years as a result of falling coffee prices, payments due on past loans, and the government's insistence on pressing its six-billion-dollar industrial development program in which American private investors already have a $1.3 billion stake. Kubitschek has staked his reputation as president on his ability to complete this program before he leaves office in 1961.

Seeking new markets for its surplus coffee and new sources of industrial machinery, Brazil last year signed several important barter agreements with the Soviet bloc and is about to open negotiations with Czechoslovakia for a new long-term trade agreement.
