[PAGE 01]
11 September 1953

Copy No.
67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Anti-American sentiment rising in Morocco (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Austrians reported indifferent to reduction in French occupation forces (page 4).
5. French official sees possibility of French EDC ratification this year (page 5).
6. British official sees Adenauer becoming more independent (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

11 Sept 53

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Anti-American sentiment rising in Morocco:

Anti-American feeling has spread throughout Morocco and has reached a new high among the Moslems of the French and Spanish zones as a result of supposed American support of the French authorities.

Leaders of the Moroccan nationalist party, Istiqlal, are being severely criticized for depending on the United States for support. Party members are also calling for abandonment of the policy of legality and moderation.

Comment: Moderate nationalist leaders have for some time had difficulty restraining members who advocated extremist action. If the extremists gain control of the Istiqlal, the most effective native movement in Morocco, it may be expected to be amenable to Communist overtures.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Austrians reported indifferent to reduction in French occupation forces:

Ambassador Thompson reports that Austrian chancellor Raab appeared unconcerned over the possibility that the French may follow the British in announcing a considerable reduction in their occupation forces. Raab told the ambassador that he had no confidence in the French troops. He added that he saw no reason for a reduction in the American forces.

Foreign Minister Gruber has hinted to embassy representatives that an increase in the Austrian gendarmerie might compensate for the loss of French troops.

Comment: While it is unlikely that Raab would propose an American withdrawal prior to a Soviet evacuation, his indifference to the prospective reduction of French and British forces suggests that he may be considering a more active campaign for the early removal

- 4 -

11 Sept 53

[PAGE 05]
of all occupation forces. In June Raab asserted that evacuation need not await a treaty, and People's Party newspapers have recently asserted that a French withdrawal might lead to a general withdrawal.

The United States has held that an agreement with the Soviet Union on treaty terms and the preparation of an adequate Austrian security force must precede the evacuation of troops.

5. French official sees possibility of French EDC ratification this year:

French undersecretary for foreign affairs Maurice Schumann is now convinced that, given a settlement of the Saar issue, the National Assembly will ratify the EDC treaty before the end of this year. In a conversation with Ambassador Dillon on 9 September, he said that the West German elections had provided a much-needed shock for French public opinion.

The ambassador notes that this is the first time he has heard a French official volunteer a possible date for ratification.

Comment: The French have consistently maintained that a Saar settlement is a prerequisite for their ratification of the EDC treaty. There is still no indication, however, that Paris is prepared to make the concessions necessary for a Saar solution.

Meanwhile the French press tends to take a less optimistic view than Schumann of the effect of the elections on French ratification prospects.

- 5 -

11 Sept 53

[PAGE 06]
6. British official sees Adenauer becoming more independent:

The British deputy high commissioner in Bonn believes that Chancellor Adenauer following his impressive election victory will pursue a more determined line in foreign policy and press his personal views on the Allies with "ever greater emphasis." Furthermore, the normal tendency of the Federal Republic to assert German national claims will probably increase.

Comment: Adenauer can be expected to continue his dual policy of strengthening ties with the United States and of supporting the proposed European Defense Community. In order to bring the EDC into being, he may be willing to offer some concessions to France on the Saar issue.

- 6 -

11 Sept 53

[PAGE 07]
