III. THE WEST

French Deputies Attempt First Censure Vote Against
Debré Government

Many National Assembly deputies, increasingly annoyed by the government's high-handed treatment of Parliament, have seized on the popular issue of veterans' pensions to make clear their dissatisfaction. Under the Fourth Republic, all veterans received approximately $30 a year. The 1959 austerity budget, adopted by decree when there was no parliament, eliminated veterans' pensions except in cases of major disability. The 1960 budget submitted to Parliament is only slightly more lenient. The issue is one which cuts across party lines, and gives the deputies a chance to express their dissatisfaction over the degree to which the assembly's powers have been curtailed.

The constitution of the Fifth Republic provides two methods making the government responsible to Parliament. The premier may request a confidence vote on a declaration of general policy--as in the case of De Gaulle's Algerian program--or the National Assembly may initiate a formal motion of censure. This method, now undertaken for the first time, requires a petition signed by at least one tenth of the members, a 48-hour delay before the vote, and adoption by a majority of the whole house. If the censure motion is rejected, its sponsors may not propose another during the same session.

Even though considerable sentiment exists in favor of the Socialist-sponsored censure motion to be voted upon on 27 November, there is little reason to believe that the Debré government or the 1960 budget will be repudiated. The majority of the deputies are not ready to risk the dissolution of the assembly which, in view of De Gaulle's long-standing warning against the censure procedure, would probably follow a government crisis brought about by parliamentary action. Moreover, De Gaulle's public refusal to make concessions on the veterans' pensions limits the extent to which the deputies can defy the President, whose popularity is still great throughout France.

27 Nov 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
