[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
2 October 1952
Copy No. 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Colombia threatens to withdraw battalion from Korea (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. New Chinese Communist troop movements to Manchuria reported (page 3).
3. Enemy to continue heavy attacks in western Korea during October (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Mossadeq argues that Iranian Communists are indigenous (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. East Germans may announce "national armed forces" on 7 October (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Colombia threatens to withdraw battalion from Korea:
Armed Forces Commander General Rojas Pinilla has informed the American Army Attache in Bogota that because of domestic disorders, he must recommend to President Urdaneta that Colombia withdraw its battalion from the UN Command in Korea.

The American Ambassador and the attache believe that this threat is probably being used as a lever to secure prompt delivery of arms purchased last June in the United States.

Comment: Rojas Pinilla's desire to recall the battalion may also indicate a growing apprehension over the army's ability to control domestic violence and avert open civil war.

Such a withdrawal might well have an adverse political and psychological effect in the UN General Assembly when the United States requests more and larger troop commitments for Korea.

FAR EAST
2. New Chinese Communist troop movements to Manchuria reported:
A total of 45 troop trains carrying 50,000 men passed through Tientsin destined for Manchuria between 28 August and 8 September. Train guards stated that the men, including airborne as well as ground troops from the Third and Fourth Field Armies, were being sent to Mukden, where they were to receive new Soviet equipment.

Comment: While the receipt of new Soviet equipment by the Chinese Communists at Mukden cannot be confirmed, replacements for the armies in Korea, presumably transferred from units in China, are often assembled at Mukden.

[PAGE 04]
There have been no recent reports indicating that Chinese Communists are sending paratroops to Manchuria.

3. Enemy to continue heavy attacks in western Korea during October:
three regiments of the Chinese 116th Division were scheduled to "counterattack" certain terrain features in western Korea "in the first part of October."

Comment: These scheduled attacks apparently have as their objective key terrain features, including "Kelly Hill," presently held by UN forces in the west.

the assumption that recently intensified Communist operations at the front are limited in their objectives.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Mossadeq argues that Iranian Communists are indigenous:
Communism had not been brought into Iran from the outside, but had been caused by widespread poverty within the country.

Iran has few ideological Communists, Even the Tudeh leaders are not real Communists; some are "connected with the British" and others are paid agents. The only way to eliminate indigenous Communists is to eliminate want.

WESTERN EUROPE
6. East Germans may announce "national armed forces" on 7 October:
Reports that "national armed forces" will be proclaimed on 7 October, the third anniversary of the East German Republic, have been given greater weight than usual by current developments,

[PAGE 06]
the date of announcement of an East German army is a favorite subject of speculation, and that in the past, plans of East German leaders have been vetoed by the Soviet Control Commission.

Comment: Since preparations for the creation of an East German armed force are well advanced, and since its development will not be materially affected by a formal proclamation, the timing of the announcement would appear to be governed by political considerations. It has been assumed hitherto that formal proclamation would not come before Bonn's ratification of the EDC treaty.
