The delivery of the note shortly before the opening of the Bundestag on 4 September suggests that it is timed to delay ratification of the contractual agreement. This aim will be served also by the proposal to hold the four-power meeting no later than October.

The USSR can make no substantial concessions to advance its aims in all of Germany without threatening its control of East Germany and its program of sovietization. It realizes that its proposals will be unacceptable to the West, but hopes to place the onus for refusal to confer upon the West.

The lure of unity may cause some West Germans to press for talks now, but Chancellor Adenauer will probably be able to override any political pressure on this subject.

11. Italian demands for Western pressure on Tito increase:
The Italian Political Adviser in Trieste believes that Premier de Gasperi's Christian Democratic Party will be "in a most difficult situation" if it does not obtain an acceptable solution of the Trieste issue before the 1953 national elections. He said that such a solution can be reached only if the Western powers put strong pressure on Tito by threatening to withhold military and economic aid.

The Italian official stated that for a solution to be acceptable to the Italian public, Italy must get the entire coast of Zone B, but that four inland villages in that zone might be conceded to Yugoslavia. He added that his country's claims to Dalmatia and that part of Istria outside of Zone B involved "long-term problems" which could be settled only after the defeat of the USSR and Yugoslavia in a third world war.

Comment: Although the Italian Government recently indicated to the United States its willingness to reach a compromise solution of the Trieste issue, its declining popularity at home and its need for regaining public support is leading it into a course which may seriously prejudice British-American attempts to obtain a solution of the issue.

12. Dutch reassured on NATO defense plans:
The Dutch Acting Defense Minister has stated that General Ridgway's letter of 14 August to the Netherlands Chief of Staff has convinced the Dutch of the determination of Generals Ridgway and Juin to defend the Netherlands in case of hostilities.

The Dutch Minister admitted that speculation among Dutch officials and in the press that the allies would withdraw from the Netherlands under pressure had had an "unhelpful" effect on both the Netherlands and NATO.

Comment: The Dutch, who have suspected that the French defense concept was based on withdrawal from large parts of the Low Countries, had begun to believe that NATO air-base concentrations did not protect the Netherlands adequately. The Dutch press had been speculating on discord between France and other NATO countries over defense of the Elbe as against the Rhine.
