GENERAL

1. Comment on announced execution of Abakumov:

The announcement, at this time, of the execution of Abakumov and several of his associates, two years after their reported arrest, suggests that the principle of collegial leadership in the USSR is presently under severe strain. It is not inconceivable, however, that the announcement was designed by the leadership to attract further popular support through criticism of the Stalin regime and its ruthless police methods.

The nature of the charges, particularly that the "Leningrad case" was "falsified," suggests a move against Malenkov by one or more of his colleagues. The reference to the "Leningrad case" apparently applies to the widespread shake-up of the Leningrad party organization in 1949 when Abakumov was the USSR security chief. At that time, Malenkov was generally credited with using his own henchmen to replace numerous Zhdanov appointees who, although not publicly tried, disappeared from public life. This shake-up appeared as an outgrowth of the struggle for control of the party apparatus under Stalin.

On the other hand, Malenkov, himself, may be behind the move. He may wish to rid himself once and for all of any association with the Leningrad affair by publicly blaming it on Abakumov and Beria. At the same time, he may also be serving notice to a possible minority group among the leadership, that the post-Stalin policies inside the USSR will continue and public manifestations of disagreement with the leadership will not be tolerated.

Support for the thesis that there may be some strain among the top leaders has appeared in several recent incidents. Molotov has seemed unhappy with the informal and friendly manner in which Malenkov and one or two others discuss matters of Soviet foreign policy with foreign representatives. The American embassy in Moscow noted that on 21 December, Stalin's birthday, Pravda, the party newspaper, and Izvestia, the government newspaper, differed considerably on the relative emphasis to be accorded heavy industry and production of consumers' goods. These differences did not appear again.
