[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet UN delegates noncommittal on Indian truce proposal (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Split in Indonesian Army brings threat of civil war (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

8. Arabs expect greater US support from Republican administration (page 8).

EASTERN EUROPE

9. Czech trial prepares way for Party Conference (page 9).

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austrian Government facing hard trade bargaining from Poles (page 9).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet UN delegates noncommittal on Indian truce proposal:

Premier Nehru told Ambassador Bowles on 19 November that Indian representatives had "several conversations" with Soviet representatives to the United Nations and "full discussions" with the Peiping regime in regard to India's Korean truce plan. Nehru stated that both the Russians and the Chinese had been "noncommittal."

Comment: Premier Chou En-lai's statement to the Indian Ambassador in late October regarding the release of the POW's from American control is reflected in the Indian truce plan.

Soviet and Chinese Communist spokesmen suggested privately during October that a compromise on the POW issue was possible, but on 21 November Pravda attacked the Indian resolution as supporting the US position on repatriation of prisoners.

A Colombian UN delegate, who talked with Indian representatives on 20 November, reported that India planned to judge proposed amendments to its Korean plan "entirely" on the basis of their acceptability to Peiping.

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Split in Indonesian Army brings threat of civil war:

The territorial commanders of the Indonesian Army in East Java and in East Indonesia, both of whom recently declared their divisions' support for President Sukarno and renounced their allegiance to army headquarters in Djakarta, have formed a military alliance. The commanders have decided on a line, running north and south through Java, on which they will fight if forces under the Djakarta command approach or cross the line.

If any action is taken against the East Indonesian army staff, it will secede from the Djakarta government and proclaim an Islamic state.

... increased guerrilla action may be expected in West Java and that the Darul Islam, an armed Moslem dissident group there, is fully prepared to take advantage of the situation.

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
8. Arabs expect greater US support from Republican administration:

American observers in Jordan and neighboring Arab states have noted a widespread optimism among "Arabs in all strata of society" that the change of administration in Washington portends a radical change of US policy toward Israel. Ambassador Green in Amman, in reporting this information, stated he foresees a "possibility of strong anti-American reaction in case of unalleviated disillusionment."

Comment: During the recent Arab League meetings, General Nagib indicated his belief that a personal trip to the United States to see General Eisenhower might solve the Arab dispute over the German-Israel restitution agreement. Ambassador Caffery dissuaded him from taking such a trip.

[PAGE 09]
EASTERN EUROPE

9. Czech trial prepares way for Party Conference:

The American Embassy in Prague believes that the Moscow Party Congress decided to order the trial of the fourteen former Czech Communist leaders now in order to clear the way for the forthcoming Czech Communist Party Conference.

The Embassy points out that while anti-Zionism is one of the major themes of the trial, the accusation against Slansky as a Zionist is no more plausible than the charge that he is a potential Tito. Slansky refused in 1948 to give any assistance to Jews emigrating from Czechoslovakia, while Premier Zapotocky was at first quite cooperative.

Comment: The Czech Government is trying to place on Slansky and his fellow defendants the blame for the shortcomings of the regime in the social and economic fields.

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austrian Government facing hard trade bargaining from Poles:

Polish trade negotiators are insisting that any trade agreement with Austria be conditional on delivery of strategic ball bearings. Although willing to extend the present agreement to 1 March, the Poles are currently demanding that Austria fulfill back orders for $180,000 worth of the embargoed bearings, pay free dollars for Polish coal, and accept Polish wheat as a means of eliminating its favorable clearing balance with the Poles.

These conditions are not acceptable to the Austrians, who consider a temporary agreement unsatisfactory.

Comment: Austria has previously received Battle Act exception for List I bearings required to fill back orders, provided a satisfactory agreement is signed with the Poles and the total bearing commitment does not exceed $500,000.

Although the Austrians have previously considered their favorable balance would be an advantage, the Poles are apparently using it as a means of thrusting unneeded goods on the Austrians.

[PAGE 10]
