II. ASIA-AFRICA

Somali-Ethiopian Border Negotiations End in Deadlock

The UN-conducted negotiations to settle the eight-year border dispute between Ethiopia and the Italian trust territory of Somalia have broken down, according to Italy's UN delegate Vinci. Another Italian official confirmed that the final meeting held on 20 November ended in failure. UN officials now are considering the possibility of UN Secretary General Hammarskjold intervening in an effort to resolve the frontier problem before Somalia becomes independent next year and to forestall a worsening of already tense relations between Addis Ababa and Mogadiscio.

In accordance with a resolution by last year's UN General Assembly, the King of Norway selected former Secretary General Trygve Lie as an "independent person" to assist the disputants in formulating terms of reference--lack of which has hamstrung negotiations for some time. The terms of reference were to guide a three-man arbitral tribunal in demarcating the disputed frontier.

Despite some progress in resolving minor differences, the two parties have refused to compromise on major issues. Ethiopia persists in its contention that only the juridical aspects of the Italo-Ethiopian 1908 boundary convention which defines the border roughly along the present administrative frontier, should be considered. On the other hand, Somalia--through its Italian representatives--seeks to guarantee the unlimited border-crossing and grazing rights traditionally enjoyed by the 350,000 Somali nomads who drive their herds into the largely uninhabited Ethiopian province of Ogaden during the dry season.

Addis Ababa fears that the right of unlimited incursion might inspire nationalist sentiment among the half million ethnic Somalis living in eastern Ethiopia and lead them to demand that Ogaden Province be included in the creation of a Greater Somali state. Ogaden Somalis--along with nationalist leaders representing ethnic Somalis from the British and French Somaliland enclaves, northern Kenya, and Italian-administered Somalia--participated last summer in the formation of a movement designed to achieve unity and independence for all Somali-populated territories.
