[PAGE 01]
9 September 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. USSR ATTACHES CONDITIONS TO RETURN OF JAPANESE ISLANDS (page 3).

2. USSR MAKES OVERTURES TO LIBYA (page 5).

3. COMMENT ON AFGHAN-PAKISTANI AGREEMENT (page 6).

4. ANTI-TURKISH OUTBREAKS EXPECTED IN GREECE (page 7).

5. FINNISH PRESIDENT TO VISIT MOSCOW (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
1. USSR ATTACHES CONDITIONS TO RETURN OF JAPANESE ISLANDS

Soviet delegate Malik told Japanese representative Matsumoto during the London talks on 6 September that the USSR would return the Habomai Islands and Shikotan to Japan only on the condition that the islands would not be used for military purposes.

In response to Matsumoto's protest that the USSR had changed its position, Malik said that his country could not accept the prospect of additional

[PAGE 04]
military bases in the area. He added, however, that Japan would have complete sovereignty over the islands instead of "latent sovereignty"--apparently referring to the Ryukyus which are still occupied by the United States. Malik stated that the question of South Sakhalin and the Kurils was "solved" and no longer a subject of discussion.

Comment
Malik previously indicated to the Japanese that the USSR has no intention of evacuating all former Japanese territories while the United States occupies former Japanese territories in the Pacific.

Moscow's effort to contrast the return of Shikotan and the Habomais with the continued American occupation of Japanese islands could not fail to have some impact on Japanese public opinion. There is considerable official and popular irredentist sentiment in Japan concerning the Ryukyuan and Bonin Islands, and Tokyo has recently pressed the United States for a new declaration of American intentions with regard to the territories.

[PAGE 05]
2. USSR MAKES OVERTURES TO LIBYA

The Soviet ambassador in Cairo has asked the Libyan ambassador to Egypt to ascertain whether his government would accept a Soviet "diplomatic mission."

The American embassy in Cairo has learned that the Soviet ambassador said the USSR would support the Libyan candidacy for membership in the United Nations at the coming session of the General Assembly.

American officials in Tripoli comment that the two reports probably are related, with Libyan acceptance of a diplomatic mission in return for Soviet support of Libyan membership in the United Nations.

Comment
The USSR recently asked for the establishment of formal diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia, and the first Soviet delegation arrived in the Sudan in July for the purpose of establishing trade relations between the two countries.

[PAGE 06]
3. COMMENT ON AFGHAN-PAKISTANI AGREEMENT

The Pakistani ambassador in Kabul has told Ambassador Ward that his country and Afghanistan have reached a settlement of their dispute as a result of concessions by both sides. The terms as described by the Pakistani ambassador indicate a return to the status quo ante 30 March, when mob attacks on Pakistani diplomatic establishments in Afghanistan sparked the five-month dispute.

Afghanistan's support for the creation of an independent state of Pushtoonistan, which is the basic cause of trouble between the two countries, has been tempered but not abandoned. This issue will probably continue to cause tension between Kabul and Karachi.

Afghanistan's recently stepped-up economic contacts with the Soviet bloc may be expected to decline as normal trade relations with Pakistan are resumed. It is unlikely, however, that Afghanistan will again allow itself to become so completely dependent on trade routes through Pakistan.

[PAGE 07]
4. ANTI-TURKISH OUTBREAKS EXPECTED IN GREECE

Acting Foreign Minister Kanellopoulos told the American chargé in Athens on 7 September that a "domestic storm" over the anti-Greek riots in Turkey might break at any moment. Zorlu's statement in London that Greece must either abandon its Cyprus demands or forfeit Turkish friendship was termed by Kanellopoulos an "intolerable ultimatum."

Greek opinion is likely to become further inflamed as details of Turkish mob actions in Istanbul and Izmir become known. Athens may be forced to permit some public demonstrations.

British authorities in Cyprus expect serious outbreaks there in the near future.

[PAGE 08]
5. FINNISH PRESIDENT TO VISIT MOSCOW

Finnish authorities are apprehensive over possible Soviet demands during President Paasikivi's visit to Moscow beginning 15 September, according to American officials in Helsinki. The president's party will include the premier and the defense minister, but no high-ranking military personnel.

The Finnish foreign minister told the American ambassador that no agreement has been reached on the subjects to be discussed and that the "door was wide open" in this respect. He added that he believed Finland might stand to benefit from the meeting.

Comment
Finnish-Soviet relations in the past year have been marked by an increasing official display of friendliness and a greater exchange of visits by official and private groups.

The Finns are always wary of possible Russian attempts to tie them more closely to the Soviet bloc and will probably try to make this visit purely ceremonial, avoiding detailed negotiations.

[PAGE 09]
