Khrushchev Hints He May Again Address UN General Assembly On Disarmament

Khrushchev's hint in a 9 August Pravda interview that he would participate in the UN General Assembly disarmament debate this fall suggests that he sees a repeat performance at the UN as a means of refurbishing the image of himself as peacemaker which he attempted to create last September, when he unveiled his scheme for general and complete disarmament before the General Assembly. Khrushchev repeated his defense of the Soviet walkout from the ten-nation disarmament talks in Geneva last June and renewed his attacks on the Western disarmament policy, which he again called "control without disarmament." The interview was probably timed to bolster the Soviet delegation's efforts to prevent the meeting of the UN Disarmament Commission, scheduled on 16 August, which the USSR probably feels would lessen the impact of an appearance by Khrushchev before the General Assembly in September.

Khrushchev may seek to use the UN once again as a forum for announcing a dramatic new disarmament proposal, such as urging a world disarmament conference. On 11 July the Communist-front World Peace Council called for a disarmament conference to be attended by all states, whether or not they are members of the UN, and announced it would undertake a major agitation campaign on the model of the 1950 Stockholm Appeal. Both the council's president and the Soviet delegate to it claimed that the omission of Communist China had given disarmament conferences of the past ten years an "air of unreality." In anticipation of Western proposals to bring about an early resumption of disarmament talks, Khrushchev may call for a world disarmament conference or the inclusion of Communist China and neutral countries as a means of avoiding serious negotiations on this subject until a new US administration takes office. In his letters to the Western powers in late July, Khrushchev asserted that the question of inviting other states to join the talks would arise during the UN session.

Khrushchev may be contemplating an appearance before the General Assembly in conjunction with possible visits to Cuba and Mexico. Raul Castro recently stated that Khrushchev had set a definite date for a trip to Havana, but Mexican officials continue to deny that he has been invited to attend Mexico's independence celebrations.
