[PAGE 01]
SECURITY INFORMATION

8 March 1952

Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Soviet Ambassador says USSR will veto Libyan admission into United Nations (page 3).

USSR
2. New activity at Irkutsk Automobile Assembly Plant (page 3).
3. Comment on the 1952 Soviet State Budget (page 4).

FAR EAST
4. Chinese airfield near Tonkin border improved (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. French approve early establishment of embryo Middle East Command (page 5).
6. Egyptian Foreign Minister urges "early action" on Anglo-Egyptian dispute (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. German regional elections will test Adenauer's policies (page 6).

****
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet Ambassador says USSR will veto Libyan admission into United Nations:

The USSR will find it "difficult" not to veto the proposed separate entry into the United Nations of the UN-created state of Libya, the Soviet Ambassador in London told the Yemeni Minister there.

Comment: The Yemeni Minister had been instructed by his government on 8 February to make certain friendly approaches to Russian representatives, including a suggestion that the Soviet Union not block Libya's admission to the United Nations.

The General Assembly on 1 February voted in favor of admitting Libya; the Soviet bloc, however, abstained on the ground that the motion was illegal.

The Soviet Union has maintained that nine non-Communist countries including Libya, plus five Soviet Satellites, must be admitted together.

USSR

2. New activity at Irkutsk Automobile Assembly Plant:

The Irkutsk Automobile Plant is apparently starting a new type of activity in cooperation with the Ministry of the Communications Equipment Industry.

Although the exact nature of the activity is not disclosed, it is believed to be related to installation of electronic equipment on the GAZ-51 2.5-ton truck or the 1-APZ 3-ton trailer, both of which are assembled at this plant.
[PAGE 04]
This activity appears to be of such large scope as to require construction of additional facilities. Three officials of the plant were called to Moscow in mid-January for detached service with the Ministry of the Communications Equipment Industry.

Comment: This additional construction may indicate plans for a considerable increase in production of mobile electronic equipment. The more likely possibilities are: medium and high frequency radio, ultra high frequency radio relay, radar, and electronic test and maintenance equipment.

The Irkutsk plant is known to have shipped vehicles to Manchuria.

3. Comment on the 1952 Soviet State Budget:

The planned surplus of 32 billion rubles in the new Soviet budget is a deflationary measure, which indicates the magnitude of existing inflationary pressures. Moreover, some funds for Soviet atomic energy development may be derived from this source.

Conspicuously absent was any mention of a second postwar Five-Year Plan.

Similarly, no mention was made of price cuts on consumer goods, as in the years 1948-51. It may be that announcements on both of these subjects are being withheld until the World Economic Conference meets in Moscow in April.

FAR EAST

4. Chinese airfield near Tonkin border improved:

French pilots told the US Air Attache that, while patrolling at a high altitude along the Tonkin-China border, they had sighted two parallel paved runways, each 6,000 feet long, at Lungchou, some 13 miles inside China. The Attache comments that this is the first reliable information the French have provided on this field.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: The last reliable report on this installation, dated September 1951, described one clay surface runway of 1,000 feet. Extension and improvement of the field have since been reported by other sources.

This field is within combat radius of the Tonkin delta for MIG-15's without wing tanks.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. French approve early establishment of embryo Middle East Command:

The French Foreign Office in late February approved holding a secret four-power discussion in London on the organization of the proposed Middle East Command, regardless of any developments in the Anglo-Egyptian situation.

France agreed with Britain that initially the Command functions should be restricted to planning and coordination, but felt that the London discussions should be more broadly based on the original four-power proposals. France opposed the inclusion of Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa in these discussions because it would wound the sensibilities of the Arab countries and increase British influence in the organization.

Comment: Turkey also seems to have favored holding the meeting. The original British plan to announce its date following the Lisbon conference appears to have been revised in the light of American and French desires for secrecy in order not to offend the Egyptians.

The British on 16 February proposed establishment of the nucleus of the proposed Command on Cyprus with no forces assigned to it. The functions of this organization would include providing advice and training to Middle East states on their request, coordinating their requests for arms and equipment, planning for the wartime operations of all forces to be introduced into the area, and coordinating those operations with NATO plans.
[PAGE 06]
6. Egyptian Foreign Minister urges "early action" on Anglo-Egyptian dispute:

The Egyptian Foreign Minister has strongly appealed to Ambassador Caffery in Cairo for speedy action on the Anglo-Egyptian controversy. He warned that this would probably be the last chance for the free world to reach a solution and that the USSR stands ready to exploit the situation.

The Foreign Minister also pointed out that, while the new cabinet of Prime Minister Hilali is seriously considering urgent domestic reforms, nothing can be done about them until the dispute with the British is settled.

Comment: Events of the past few months have shown that domestic issues are so colored by the Anglo-Egyptian controversy that it will be difficult for any government to solve the many pressing internal problems without first reaching some settlement with Britain.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. German regional elections will test Adenauer's policies:

Constituent assembly elections in the new German Southwest State on 9 March will show the extent of popular opposition to Chancellor Adenauer's defense program and will indicate the trends that will shape next year's Bundestag elections.

American officials predict a considerable growth in the strength of the Social Democratic Party which is opposed to rearmament. If the Social Democrats gain a plurality, they will also gain control of the Federal Senate.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Adenauer's Christian Democrats, the largest party in the state, are weakened by internal dissension and the competition of two other political organizations new to the area.

Although public opinion polls show that Adenauer's party has recaptured some popularity, the sharp public reaction to the government's newly announced rearmament plans will have a dampening effect on these gains.

It is believed that the West German Communist Party as well as the right extremist Socialist Reichs Party will show some increases in this election.
