II. ASIA-AFRICA

The Iraqi Situation

Iraqi Prime Minister Qasim's declaration on 14 July that the "transitional period" of the revolution will draw to an end before 6 January 1960 probably is a move to mitigate the force of Communist criticism and pressure for immediate political activity. Qasim has opposed activity by political parties during this period, despite Communist and extreme leftist demands that political life be restored. Qasim also announced that a "national council" will be elected before the next anniversary of the revolution.

Iraqi political factions are likely to view Qasim's declaration as an invitation to begin strengthening their organizations and mass following, as well as to seek control of government departments that could be used to further their objectives. Although the National Democratic party recently has been stepping up its efforts to gain support outside the cities, the Communists appear to have better organization at the grass-roots level. This may lead to an increase of factionalism and friction rather than the stability and political truce which Qasim probably hoped for.

Qasim's reorganized and expanded cabinet, which appears to reflect a shift toward the left, may be intended to satisfy the Communists in order to balance recent moves favoring the army and nationalists. At least three of the four new members are extreme leftists--Faysal Samir, Guidance; Awni Yusuf, Works and Housing; and Nadia Dulaymi, Municipalities. Dr. Dulaymi, Iraq's first woman cabinet minister, has a long record of association with Communist-front groups; she is reputedly a member of the Iraqi party's central committee.

In early July all three signed the Communist-sponsored charter issued by the Communist-dominated "United Front" demanding participation of political parties in the government, arming of the Communist-dominated Popular Resistance Force, and a purge of "corrupt" elements from the army and government.

16 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
