[PAGE 01]
21 April 1959

Copy No.

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
21 APRIL 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev convinced Western disunity can be exploited to gain acceptance of status quo in Eastern Europe, according to West German diplomat.

East German Government gives workers wage increases in further effort to improve production; previous wage hikes led to increased work norms.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Further shake-ups in Sudanese Government likely; Soviet economic mission leaves Khartoum without concluding any major agreements.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
21 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: (Foreign Minister Gromyko told the West German ambassador recently that the USSR will concentrate on discussing the Berlin issue and a German peace treaty at the forthcoming foreign ministers' conference, but will not evade other questions. Gromyko expressed doubt regarding the prospects for a "successful" foreign ministers' conference. The West German ambassador believes this reflects Khrushchev's desire to go on to a summit meeting. In the ambassador's view, Khrushchev is convinced he can gain Western acceptance of the status quo in Eastern Europe without making any concession in return because he does not believe the West is united.)

East Germany: In a renewed effort to stimulate production, the East German Government has announced wage increases of 5 to 10 percent for approximately 750,000 workers in light industry and commerce, effective on a staggered schedule. Other recent wage increases have been accompanied by increased work norms and speed-up measures aimed at increasing production. The regime is stressing the wage increases and soft-pedaling the higher norm requirements in an effort to reduce worker resistance, which has defeated several previous efforts to raise productivity. Workers will probably react to significant norm increases with slow-down tactics, careless work, or even sporadic strikes.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudan: (Premier Abboud is again reported preparing to retire. Meanwhile, continuing dissension in the Supreme Military Council makes a shake-up of the Sudanese cabinet appear increasingly likely. The Sudanese Communist party is attempting to)

[PAGE 05]
(expand its influence among the junior officers, while pro-Egyptian elements of the National Unionist and People's Democratic parties are contemplating the establishment of an underground party. Two months of negotiations between the Sudanese Government and a visiting Soviet economic delegation produced no aid agreement and only a small trade pact.)

21 Apr 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudanese Situation

(Premier Abboud is again reported to be preparing to retire, and Hasan Bashir Nasir, deputy chief of staff and Supreme Council member, is maneuvering to obtain support in the hope of succeeding Abboud as premier. With the Supreme Military Council as seriously split as ever, some type of shake-up in the cabinet seems increasingly likely. The military leaders have, moreover, recently discussed the possibility of setting up a civilian advisory council.)

(The junior officers' movement, spearheaded by Brigadier Shannan, has succeeded in obtaining the rehabilitation of the officers arrested or suspended from duty for their involvement in the Egyptian-supported coup attempt in May 1957. Six officers released from the Port Sudan jail were flown to Khartoum on 16 April where they were met by a large delegation headed by Shannan. Suspended officers, including Shannan's two brothers, had previously been ordered back to regular duty.)

(The Sudanese Communist party, having had some recruiting success in the Northern Command, is attempting to expand its influence among junior officers. At the same time, pro-Egyptian elements of the National Unionist and Peoples' Democratic parties are contemplating the establishment in Khartoum of an underground party to be called the Arab Nationalists.)

(A Soviet economic delegation ended a two-month stay in the Sudan on 16 April without reaching any major agreements. A small trade pact was signed for the exchange of Soviet machinery)

[PAGE 08]
(and Sudanese agricultural products, and the two countries have agreed to "study" prospects for the production of fertilizers, asbestos, and cement in the Sudan. The USSR, consistent with its aid programs elsewhere, refused a cash loan to the Sudan and offered only small credits for the construction of plants by Soviet personnel. Khartoum rejected this offer because of its concern about the presence of bloc personnel in the Sudan.)
