1. ARGENTINE PROVISIONAL PRESIDENT "RESIGNS"

The "resignation" of Argentine provisional president Lonardi on 13 November appears to have been precipitated by strong military and civilian protests against his appointing as ministers of interior and justice two men associated with extreme nationalist Catholic groups.

Previous appointments from this sector had already antagonized the more liberal elements. Although there was no show of military force, the appointments of 12 November prompted night-long meetings of military and top officials, a noisy demonstration, and the resignation of most of the members of the National Consultative Council made up of representatives of various political parties.

Lonardi's successor, 52-year-old General Pedro Aramburu, is a career soldier and was appointed chief of staff of the army after the September revolt which ousted Peron. He has been described as moderate, "completely democratic" and free from nationalist leanings. The vice president, Admiral Isaac Rojas, and the army, navy, and air ministers will continue in office, according to an official broadcast. Sweeping changes in other cabinet posts are expected.

After taking his oath of office on 13 November, Aramburu explained the change of chief executive in conciliatory tones apparently designed to appease Lonardi supporters. Although Aramburu's address carefully stressed the unity of the armed forces, the army will probably try to increase its relative influence over the administration. In contrast with the junior officers' strong support for Lonardi, the top army generals are said to view some of Lonardi's policies on economic and labor matters as rash and ill-considered. Also, they believe capable civilian advisers have been discouraged from joining the government by Lonardi's pledge that no official will participate in the next elections.

Considerable skill will be required of the new administration to reduce interservice rivalries and to alleviate the country's pressing economic and labor problems.
