Seoul Renews Seizures of Japanese Fishing Crafts?

South Korea's sudden resumption of seizures of Japanese fishing craft will strengthen powerful interests in Japan which favor the use of force to protect Japanese fishermen on the high seas. Korean patrols have seized three boats in the last four days and now hold 29 fishermen. The owner of a Japanese boat that managed to escape when two others were captured on 30 July is a conservative Diet member and representative of the Japanese fishing industry who last year pressed strongly for armed protection of Japanese boats.

The seizures, made well inside the unilaterally imposed "Rhee fishing line," may have been partly a response to indications that Tokyo will renew the agreement with Pyongyang for the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea. Of the approximately 700,000 Koreans in Japan when the repatriation began last December, some 29,000 have gone to North Korea, and the Japanese estimate that between 100,000 and 150,000 may eventually choose to go. Seoul has warned that renewal of the agreement would provoke a strong reaction in South Korea.

The seizures come at a time when there are increasing signs that prospective new governments in Seoul and Tokyo are likely to take a more rigid attitude toward a settlement of outstanding differences between the two countries. A Tokyo Foreign Ministry official has noted that any future Japanese government which would undertake serious negotiations with the South Koreans probably would take a much harder line than the present administration. Acting Prime Minister Huh Chung in Seoul has recently warned that no South Korean government is likely to reach an easy settlement with Japan and reiterated that negotiations with the Japanese will not be resumed unless the repatriation to North Korea is ended.

There also is a possibility that Pyongyang may protract negotiations for extension of the repatriation agreement, which expires on 13 August, in the knowledge that a demonstration of Tokyo's desire to continue the program probably would further aggravate South Korean - Japanese relations.
