[PAGE 01]
12 August 1955
Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. REVISION OF UN RESOLUTION ON CHINESE
representation suggested (page 3).

3. PAKISTAN'S new cabinet (page 5).

4. TENSION OVER GOA may bring violence on 15 August
(page 6).
[PAGE 04]
1. REVISION OF UN RESOLUTION ON CHINESE
representation suggested:

British UN delegates reported to Ambassador Wadsworth on 10 August that the Foreign Office has suggested altering the moratorium formula on Chinese representation in the UN. The formula as altered would read, "The General Assembly decides that the time has not yet come to consider" the issue, instead of the usual "The General Assembly decides not to consider."

The British feel that this proposed change would prevent the Scandinavian and Arab-Asian countries which have supported the moratorium in the past from opposing it in the forthcoming General Assembly. According to the British, any loss in votes for the moratorium might have an "unfortunate psychological effect."

Comment

The moratorium proposal, which postpones substantive consideration of the Chinese representation issue, has maintained the support of over 40 of the 60 UN members each year since 1950. The opposition, however, has been gradually picking up votes.

The suggested revision reflects the official British view that the time is approaching when Peiping must be admitted to the UN.
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. PAKISTAN'S new cabinet:

Acting Governor General Iskander Mirza and Prime Minister Chaudri Mohammad Ali have chosen a cabinet they can easily dominate.

Serious doubts are already being raised as to the ability of Chaudri Mohammad Ali, who has been in poor health for several years, to carry out the job of prime minister. The only new minister with significant political following is 87-year-old Fazlul Huq, whose United Front Party controls East Pakistan. Huq is eccentric and personally ineffective but will probably attempt to obtain increased autonomy for East Pakistan as the price of his co-operation.

For the first time in several years, a Hindu minister, Kamini Kumar Dutta, has been included in the cabinet, apparently to secure the support of the important minority group in East Pakistan.

H. S. Suhrawardy, leader of the Awami League, will be in opposition to the government despite attempts to get him to join the cabinet as deputy prime minister. His popular appeal and political skill will make the task of the new government doubly difficult.
[PAGE 07]
4. TENSION OVER GOA may bring violence on 15 August:

Rising tension between Portugal and India and reports that 5,000 Indians have already assembled near the border of Goa have increased the possibility of serious trouble occurring on 15 August, the anniversary of India's independence.

The chief of staff of the Portuguese army has arrived in Goa, and Lisbon has reportedly warned New Delhi that India will be held responsible for any violence.

The situation has been aggravated by India's equivocal position. Although New Delhi has refused to authorize the marches on Goa planned for 15 August and insists it favors only "peaceful" methods, it has not indicated that it will use police or troops to stop the marchers as it did last year. The British Foreign Office believes that Nehru cannot afford to be less nationalistic than extremist groups agitating the problem, and that New Delhi therefore will almost certainly permit the marches on 15 August.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
