Austria Decides to Take South Tirol Dispute to UN General Assembly

Austria's decision on 28 June to take the South Tirol problem to the fall session of the UN General Assembly will aggravate and prolong the dispute between Vienna and Rome over the Italian border territory. By this action the Austrian cabinet has in effect rejected recent Italian overtures to continue bilateral efforts to reach a solution or refer the issue to the International Court of Justice (ICJ). It has also discounted repeated Western warnings that a General Assembly contest between a friendly neutral and a NATO country would embarrass the West, to the potential benefit of the bloc.

Austrian authorities have long believed that Rome is not prepared to make any major concessions and that the grievances of the German-speaking population in the South Tirol will be alleviated only if international opinion is aroused. This impression was reinforced by Italian Premier Tambroni's formal rejection on 22 June of the minimum Austrian demand for full regional autonomy for the South Tirol under the Italian constitution--a demand Rome has suspected would merely encourage demands that the area be returned to Austria. Vienna has opposed an ICJ appeal on grounds that the dispute is political rather than juridical and that lengthy legal proceedings would permit Rome to step up Italian migration into the territory.)

Italy is certain to demand NATO solidarity in the General Assembly, and officials in Vienna are under no illusions that they can expect substantial European support. Nevertheless, many Austrians will resent the lack of Western sympathy, and there has been some tendency lately to accuse Washington of giving tactical advice to Rome. Austrian officials apparently have not sought bloc support, which thus far Moscow has shown no sign of offering. Even if attracted by the possible advantages of supporting a neutral against a NATO country, Moscow will presumably also be influenced by the large Italian Communist party, which shares common Italian views on the South Tirol issue.

1 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
