The Situation in Laos

In the face of the mounting confusion in the Vientiane area, Premier Souvanna Phouma, members of his family and six of his ministers on 9 December took refuge in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Press accounts of his arrival in Phnom Penh attribute Souvanna's flight to expectations that a major struggle for control of the capital was imminent between the Communist-dominated Pathet Lao and rightist forces led by Col. Kouprasith. Souvanna earlier in the day had told that he was powerless to head off impending armed strife and that he planned to fly to Phnom Penh at the first sign of a clash between Kong Le's forces in Vientiane and those of Kouprasith, located a few miles south of the town at Camp Chinaimo.

No fighting has apparently occurred as yet, but Kong Le's paratroopers are reported to have established themselves in a blocking position on the road between Vientiane and Camp Chinaimo. estimates that this position is manned by about 100-150 of Kong Le paratroopers, supported by 4 armored cars and an M-24 tank. He estimates that Kouprasith's force at Chinaimo consists of about 1,300 men, including 200 paratroopers taken from the pro-Phoumi garrison at Luang Prabang.

In an interview with on 9 December, Kouprasith expressed concern over his ability to defend his area, running from Chinaimo south to the Mekong River boundary between Laos and Thailand. He fears that the Pathet Lao may attack, either alone or in conjunction with Kong Le. Kouprasith stated that he did not at this point intend to move toward Vientiane, but was uncertain what Kong Le would do.

Kouprasith will shortly receive reinforcements from Phoumi, including possibly another company of paratroopers and infantry elements drawn from the Phoumi force which took Pak Sane on 8 December. Thai Premier Sarit has reportedly granted Phoumi permission to move these troops toward Vientiane on the Thai side of the river. pro-Phoumi forces in Luang Prabang have been ordered to mount an offensive against Vientiane as soon as possible; the resultant weakening of the Luang Prabang garrison would make it more vulnerable to any attack by Vientiane or Pathet Lao forces.

The nineteen National Assembly deputies who slipped off to Chinaimo before Kouprasith's coup on 8 December are now en

10 Dec 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2
