Spanish Reaction to Abduction of Oil Prospectors
In Spanish Sahara

Spanish troop strength in the area, estimated at between 8,000 and 10,000, includes reinforcements of paratroops flown from Seville in six transport planes on 18 March, 1,000 Spanish foreign legionnaires moved from Villa Cisneros on the Spanish Sahara coast, and several hundred other troops dispatched from the Canary Islands. These moves are the "necessary steps" which Spain informed Rabat and UN Secretary General Hammarskjold on 17 March it had taken in order to be able to repel any attack on Spanish territory by Moroccan armed contingents concentrated near the Morocco - Spanish Sahara frontier.

On 18 March the counselor of the French Embassy in Rabat informed his American colleagues that according to a reliable source, the three Americans and the one Frenchman missing among the abducted men were at the Royal Moroccan Army's camp in the capital. The official expected the men would be "momentarily and magnanimously" released with suitable publicity. Failure to include the five Spaniards in such a gesture would sharpen the suspicion in Madrid that Morocco is preparing for military and political harassment of Spanish interests in the area, and might put strong pressure on Franco to order Spanish forces to retaliate.

In recent months Madrid has become increasingly worried over the effect political and economic instability in Morocco may have on Spain's African possessions. Although these territories have little economic value, the Spanish military set great store by the maintenance of Spain's "presence" in northwest Africa. Madrid is particularly apprehensive that the security of the whole area and of Spain as well will be seriously threatened when France and the US complete the scheduled turnover of their bases to the Moroccans.

Spain and France have continued to maintain close liaison regarding Moroccan developments, with particular emphasis on military aspects. Munoz Grandes, the chief of the Spanish High General Staff, visited Paris early in February, reportedly to put finishing touches to a new military accord between the two countries.

20 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
