III. THE WEST

Brazilian Foreign Policy Shift Toward Neutralism Reported

Under a new policy emanating from the presidential office,
Brazil, acting as a "third force," will now treat all nations--
including the US and the USSR--with "the same official attitude,
following the policy of other neutralist nations."

Such a policy directive has not yet been spe-
cifically reported by other sources and probably would be op-
posed by some presidential advisers, but pressures for such a
move have been strengthening in Brazil.

The policy change is said to result from Rio de Janeiro's
disappointment with Washington's current policy, which, they
charge, "has failed to give Brazil the favored treatment Brazil
has traditionally given the US." Specific complaints mentioned
were US aid to African coffee production and "apparent US favor-
itism toward Argentina"--the latter a persistent expression of
Brazil's traditional concern over Argentine competition for lead-
ership in Latin America.

Another reported reason for the shift is Brazil's estimate
that the future world political split will be between the Afro-Asian
and white blocs rather than between the US and the USSR. Brazil
considers its racial make-up of white, black, and yellow suitable
for maintaining a neutralist position.

Pressures for enhancing Brazil's international position and
economic situation through neutralism have influenced but not
controlled President Kubitschek's proposal for a joint inter-Amer-
ican campaign against underdevelopment--"Operation Pan Amer-
ica,"--and the sending of a trade mission to Moscow. On 9 Decem-
ber this mission signed a draft agreement calling for $107,000,000
worth of trade each way during 1960-62. The first secretary of
the Uruguayan Embassy in Moscow stated that, from contacts with
the Brazilian mission, he has gained the impression that the mis-
sion's visit is a prelude to resumption of diplomatic relations,
which may take place in about six months.

14 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
