Generally low morale, which is the result not only of mismanagement but of Vietnamese distrust of French intentions, has been a continuing factor in retarding the development of the Vietnam army, which has been considered a prerequisite to the success of the Navarre plan.

4. Thai resent lack of American support in UN election:

A member of the Thai delegation to the United Nations indicated on 25 September that because of American failure to support Prince Wan for the presidency of the General Assembly, Thailand's support on colonial issues could no longer be counted on. He said that from now on the Thai intend to work more closely with the Arab-Asian bloc.

Meanwhile, a Thai cabinet minister informed an officer of the American embassy in Bangkok that his government considered the US attitude to be "a slap in the face," and stated that the king was bitterly disappointed.

Comment: Thai resentment over this issue is concentrated among the few top officials who completely dominate the formulation of Thailand's policies, and who are quite capable of attempting to make their displeasure felt. It is not likely, however, that this attitude foreshadows any drastic revision of Thailand's pro-Western orientation.

SOUTH ASIA

5. India refuses to accept Battle Act provisions as binding:

The Indian government, though prepared not to ship any IA items under the Battle Act, has no controls on certain IB items and is actually exporting some of them, according to the secretary general of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs. The secretary general believed Prime Minister Nehru could not agree to the United States' request for prior notification of any change in the situation. He urged that since senior Indian officials are now thoroughly aware of the implications of the Battle Act, the United States let the matter rest for a few months.

Comment: This statement, following Nehru's earlier refusal to promise advance notice of the shipment of strategic materials, indicates that no formal guarantee of any kind can be expected from India. It is possible that shipments of IB items to Communist China and the Orbit will increase as a result of the Korean armistice.
