NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6. Impact of local anti-Westernism on Iraq's foreign policy:
Current strong Iraqi press and parliamentary criticism of Prime Minister Jamali for his pro-Western attitude is generally preventing him from cooperating with the West.

On 6 December Jamali told Ambassador Berry that a three-hour parliamentary attack on his pro-Western attitude prevented him from urging Jordan to hold armistice talks with Israel. A week later similar attacks kept Iraqi officials from publicly endorsing President Eisenhower's atomic energy proposals. On 29 December Jamali denied publicly any intention of leading Iraq into any Western-sponsored Middle East defense pact. Moreover, in a parliamentary debate on 2 January, he asserted Iraq's independence of Britain and the United States.

The attacks on Jamali and Egypt's current neutralist maneuvers are likely to hamper him in his efforts to obtain military aid from the United States. They will also probably make him cautious in supporting any defense pact with Turkey and Pakistan.

7. British ambassador discouraged over Suez negotiations:
British ambassador Stevenson in Cairo told Ambassador Caffery on 2 January that he was discouraged at the present atmosphere in London. A few days earlier he had recommended that London release to Cairo 15 million pounds in blocked sterling balances on 1 January as was done last year. London replied that only 5 million would be made available.

On 3 January Caffery reported that Stevenson had said, perhaps not altogether seriously, that London seemed to be putting every possible obstacle in his path.

Comment: On his return to Cairo on 17 December Stevenson was to have reopened negotiations. His discouragement and London's reported unwillingness to release a larger amount of Egypt's approximately 165 million pounds of blocked sterling balances accumulated during World War II suggest that there is little hope for a break in the present stalemate. Neither side has shown any indication of making concessions on the base availability and uniform issues.
