[PAGE 01]
27 May 1961

Copy No. C 51

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
27 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. South Korea: Revolutionary leader says junta will train young civilians for eventual leadership of government. (Page ii)

3. Congo: Gizenga continues to oppose Kasavubu's proposal on convening of parliament. (Page iii)

6. Situation in Nepal. (Page iv)
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
South Korea: Brigadier General Kim Yun-kun, commander of the marine unit which participated in the 16 May coup and one of the leaders of the revolutionary group, has asserted to American Embassy officers that the junta intends to develop a group of young civilian leaders to whom control of the government will be transferred, "possibly after two years." Kim claims that the leaders just ousted were steeped in political thought alien to democratic concepts, while the younger generation, educated in the post-1945 period, is "strongly devoted to the ideas of democracy." He also views the junta as a "shield" which will permit the existing government bureaucracy to carry out its functions free from political pressures, blackmail, and corruption. General Kim has confirmed that dissension exists within the junta, deriving largely from attempts by the younger officers to establish a virtually permanent military dictatorship.

27 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
Republic of the Congo

LIBERIA 200
INDIA 800
TUNISIA 3,200
NIGERIA 400
ETHIOPIA 200

Bangassou
Mongu
Bondo
Buta
Gemena
Lisala
Aket
Bumba
Basoko

MOBUTU 3,400
EQUATEUR
Coquilhatville
Boende
Ikela

MOBUTU 800
GIZENGA 7,000
Stanleyville

NIGERIA 500

Pointe Noire
Brazzaville
Banana
Kitona
Matadi

MOBUTU 7,200
LEOPOLDVILLE
Leopoldville
N'sele

Post Franqui
Luluabourg
Bakwanga
Lupata
Kamina

MALAYA 900
KALONJI 1,500

LIBERIA 230
ETHIOPIA 800
MALAYA 500
INDIA 300

Bukavu
Uvira
Usumbura
Kongolo
Albertville
Manono

NIGERIA 600

TSHOMBE 7,000
Elisabethville

INDIA 2,900

IRELAND 650
SWEDEN 870

Approximate area nominally controlled by:
Kasavubu-Mobutu
Gizenga
Kalonji
Tshombe

United Nations Forces (Service Forces not included)
Selected road
Selected railroad
Selected airfield

STATUTE MILES 0 400

27 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page
[PAGE 08]
Congo: Ambassador Timberlake believes that Gizenga will try to prevent the convening of parliament by Kasavubu and, if unsuccessful, will seek to delay any parliamentary session while attempting to line up support in the Congo and abroad. The ambassador adds that should parliament nevertheless meet, Gizenga will boycott the session and attempt to discredit its activities. The ambassador observes that any effort by Kasavubu to conciliate Gizenga would probably be fruitless,

(Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak has told Ambassador MacArthur that he is determined to begin the withdrawal of Belgians from the Congo, and that 49 Belgian advisers--mostly in Katanga--are to be recalled shortly. Spaak reaffirmed that he desired the withdrawal of all Belgian military personnel and "most" political advisers; he insisted, however, that Belgium was responsible for the safety of its nationals, and criticized Hammarskjold for dismissing Belgian fears with the legalistic argument that the UN is now responsible for the maintenance of order in the Congo)

(Officials of the influential Union Miniere mining firm in Katanga reportedly have appealed to the UN to retain Belgian officers in the Katangan army, or face immediate closure of local mines and the collapse of the Katanga economy. Such expressions reflect continuing Belgian apprehension regarding a possible breakdown of discipline in the Katanga army.)

27 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 09]
Nepal: (After six months of personal rule by King Mahendra, conditions in Nepal continue to deteriorate, in terms of both economic stability and effectiveness of government. However, recent assessments by the American Embassy at Katmandu suggest that while there is valid cause for concern, the threat to the King's position is neither as great nor as immediate as exiled Nepali Congress party resistance leaders in India have recently portrayed

27 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
South Korean Situation

Arrests of leftist elements, especially members of teachers' unions, continue to be numerous in the North and South Kyongsang provinces, which have been regarded as hotbeds of subversive elements. Thus far, military courts have convicted 45 civilians for violating the ban against public assembly and imposed sentences ranging from 3 to 12 months. Trials of some 1,200 "hoodlums" have commenced, and it is expected that most will be sentenced to hard labor in the National Construction Service program. Members of former Prime Minister Chang Myon's cabinet were removed from prison to house arrest with the exception of two accused of financial irregularities.

Labor unions have been disbanded by SCNR decree and business conditions remain stagnant because of the stringent measures imposed on the withdrawal of bank deposits. One bank president has commented that the SCNR seems more concerned with denying funds to potential opponents than with curbing illicit accumulations of wealth. Retail grain prices have remained at near pre-coup levels.

27 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]

[PAGE 20]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 21]
TOP SECRET
