[PAGE 01]
5 May 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. STALIN'S TERRORIST LAWS ABOLISHED (page 3).

2. AUSTRIA REPORTED PLANNING TO OUST RADIO FREE EUROPE FROM VIENNA (page 4).

3. DE GAULLE'S VIEWS ON FRANCE AND ATLANTIC SOLIDARITY (page 5).

4. USSR TO BEGIN EGYPTIAN ATOMIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE IN 1957 (page 6).

5. PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER INVITED TO VISIT USSR (page 7).

6. PATHET LAO VIEWS BUDDHIST CLERGY AS KEY TO SUBVERSION OF LAOS (page 8).

7. JAPAN MOVING TOWARD RECOGNITION OF COMMUNIST CHINA (page 9).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. STALIN'S TERRORIST LAWS ABOLISHED

Comment on:

The Soviet Union has revoked two special laws which provided a legal and procedural basis for the great purges of the 30's, thereby emphasizing that the regime is continuing its campaign to wipe off the books reminders of Stalin's use of police terror as an instrument of control. These laws, one dated 1934 and the other 1937, provided for "exceptional procedure in investigation and court trial" of persons accused of terrorism against the government and destruction of state property. The decree revoking these laws said that in the future, investigation of such crimes must be guided by normal judicial standards established by law.

The 1934 law was passed on 5 December shortly after the assassination of politburo member Sergei Kirov in Leningrad. It provided for secret trial, no appeal, and immediate execution of the sentence. It was under this law that Marshal Tukhachevsky, whose reputation was recently rehabilitated by Khrushchev, was tried and executed in 1937. It was last invoked in 1953 as the basis for trial and execution of Beria.
[PAGE 05]
2. AUSTRIA REPORTED PLANNING TO OUST RADIO FREE EUROPE FROM VIENNA

both parties in Austria's coalition government have agreed in principle to close the offices of Radio Free Europe (RFE) in Vienna after the national elections on 13 May. The decision might also apply to Radio Free Europe offices in western Austria.

Comment

overflights of Austria by RFE balloons launched from West Germany were jeopardizing RFE activities in Austria. A decision to end RFE activities may have been taken to "balance" Austria's adherence last month to the Council of Europe.
[PAGE 06]
3. DE GAULLE'S VIEWS ON FRANCE AND
ATLANTIC SOLIDARITY

General Charles de Gaulle has told an American official the belief is growing in France that the United States is becoming more and more inclined to seek bilateral solutions with the USSR on all major problems. He cited this view as the principal reason for French pessimism about European or Atlantic solidarity.

De Gaulle believes the general situation in France has deteriorated to a point where it is impossible for any government to follow a coherent policy about anything. He denied, however, that he had any "personal intention" of trying to remedy the situation.

Comment  Premier Mollet and Foreign Minister Pineau's frequent criticism of Western policy has been motivated largely by the feeling that France's views have not been given full consideration.

De Gaulle's renewed political interest may encourage independent action by French leaders who suspect that Germany and Britain may also be increasingly inclined to seek bilateral solutions with the USSR.

Interest in a strong executive is growing among parliamentary leaders of various groups, and de Gaulle will be increasingly mentioned as a likely candidate. Despite his own disclaimer of ambition, De Gaulle is now keeping in closer touch with current affairs by spending two days a week in Paris.
[PAGE 07]
4. USSR TO BEGIN EGYPTIAN ATOMIC RESEARCH
INSTITUTE IN 1957

Comment on:

TASS announced on 10 February that the USSR had agreed to send specialists to Egypt for consultation regarding the design and establishment of a nuclear physics laboratory, the supply of necessary equipment, and the training of Egyptian scientists in the USSR. Three Soviet atomic experts who will act as technical advisers to the Egyptian government have already arrived in Egypt.

Cairo has reportedly budgeted about $600,000 to finance atomic research and to cover the cost of sending atomic missions abroad. In this connection, several Egyptian scientists have been sent to Chicago to study at the School of Nuclear Science and Engineering at the Argonne National Laboratory. (Prepared by ORR. Concurred in by OSI)
[PAGE 08]
5. PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER INVITED TO VISIT USSR

Pakistan's Prime Minister Chaudhri Mohammad Ali admitted to the American ambassador on 2 May that Mikoyan had asked him to visit the USSR when the Soviet first deputy premier visited Karachi in March.

Mohammad Ali said that he had told Mikoyan that he would "think it over" and had mentioned the invitation to no one except Pakistan's president and the foreign minister.

Comment  Pakistan will probably not act on the invitation until the USSR reveals its stand on the Kashmir issue in the United Nations next month and until the present internal challenge to Mohammad Ali's continuance as prime minister is resolved.

Should a visit take place, Soviet-Pakistani economic relations would probably be the main topic of discussion. Moscow will also probably attempt to undermine Pakistan's role in the Baghdad pact and SEATO.

Mohammad Ali is scheduled to depart for Peiping on 14 May for a two-week visit.
[PAGE 09]
6. PATHET LAO VIEWS BUDDHIST CLERGY AS KEY
TO SUBVERSION OF LAOS

Pathet Lao strategy in subverting Laos relies primarily on winning over the Buddhist priesthood.

On the basic assumption that "whoever is master of the pagoda is master of Laos," the first objective is to exploit the Buddhist clergy's ignorance of political matters so that "they may appear as friends of peace and fraternity" and become unwitting propaganda agents. Some methods of penetration are gifts to pagodas, repairs to buildings, and the infiltration of the priesthood by Pathet Lao sympathizers.

Comment

the long-term nature of Communist plans to subvert Laos and the intent to foster political activities in the ten "free" provinces.

The Buddhist priests in Ceylon were instrumental in bringing about the downfall of the conservative, pro-Western government of Sir John Kotelawala.
[PAGE 10]
7. JAPAN MOVING TOWARD
RECOGNITION OF COMMUNIST CHINA

"A sweeping free world movement toward recognition of the Chinese Communists," has convinced the Japanese government it must make similar gestures if it does not want to be isolated.

in support of this view proposed extensions of Sino-Japanese private fishing and trade agreements, preparations for joint action in the field of labor, and a planned postal agreement.

Comment  The Japanese have been highly interested in French attempts to establish a permanent trade mission in China and the Japanese Foreign Ministry is studying a plan to establish a similar mission, to which the Peiping government is favorably disposed.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 4 May)

Syria, following the last-minute discussions with Secretary General Hammarskjold, had initialed a statement agreeing to an unconditional cease-fire, but with an addendum to the effect that Syria would observe its obligations under the UN charter including Article 25 (this refers to the carrying out of Security Council decisions) and hoped that Israel would do the same. Prime Minister Ghazzi told Moose that the addendum was not a condition to the cease-fire agreement, but said that Syria had told Hammarskjold it would consider Israeli resumption of work on the Banat Yacov canal a violation of the agreement. Hammarskjold said he had no assurances from Israel in regard to abiding by the Security Council decision. The secretary general felt, however, that this was implicit in UN membership, that Israel attached importance to his views, and he was therefore not worried.

An Israeli military spokesman reported that an Israeli patrol last night clashed with Jordanian infiltrators in the Gilboa region, about 45 miles north of Jerusalem. The spokesman also said that Egyptians stole Israeli crops at Nahal Oz near the Gaza strip. (Press)

a reconnaissance of the Gaza and Negev areas disclosed that large armed forces remain bivouacked just north of the Gaza strip. a heavy movement of troops and equipment from the Gedera area south to Beersheba. a very large number of military and requisitioned civilian vehicles were seen, many of them identified as from the motor vehicle park near Tel-Aviv, now virtually empty.

the Israeli press announced on 1 May that the army had "removed the wraps" from a new quasi-military border settlement in the El Auja area two kilometers east of the demilitarized zone. The new settlement, which dominates the Beersheba-El Auja highway, is
[PAGE 12]
reported to be on a hill facing the demilitarized zone, with trenches and sandbagged machine-gun emplacements.

this southward movement is probably a return of units to their normal encampment after previous withdrawal. Now that Hammarskjold has left the area, these units are presumably moving back to former positions.
