[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

5 May 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.  DIA review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. STALIN'S TERRORIST LAWS ABOLISHED
(page 3).

3. DE GAULLE'S VIEWS ON FRANCE AND ATLANTIC
SOLIDARITY

5. PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER INVITED TO VISIT USSR

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

5 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. STALIN'S TERRORIST LAWS ABOLISHED

The Soviet Union has revoked two
special laws which provided a legal
and procedural basis for the great
purges of the 30's, thereby emphasizing that the regime is continuing its campaign to wipe off
the books reminders of Stalin's use of police terror as an
instrument of control. These laws, one dated 1934 and
the other 1937, provided for "exceptional procedure in investigation and court trial" of persons accused of terrorism
against the government and destruction of state property.
The decree revoking these laws said that in the future, investigation of such crimes must be guided by normal judicial standards established by law.

The 1934 law was passed on 5 December
shortly after the assassination of politburo member Sergei
Kirov in Leningrad. It provided for secret trial, no appeal,
and immediate execution of the sentence. It was under this
law that Marshal Tukhachevsky, whose reputation was recently rehabilitated by Khrushchev, was tried and executed
in 1937. It was last invoked in 1953 as the basis for trial
and execution of Beria.

5 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. DE GAULLE'S VIEWS ON FRANCE AND
ATLANTIC SOLIDARITY

General Charles de Gaulle has told
an American official the belief is
growing in France that the United
States is becoming more and more
inclined to seek bilateral solutions
with the USSR on all major problems. He cited this view
as the principal reason for French pessimism about European or Atlantic solidarity.

De Gaulle believes the general situation
in France has deteriorated to a point where it is impossible
for any government to follow a coherent policy about anything. He denied, however, that he had any "personal intention" of trying to remedy the situation.

Comment
Premier Mollet and Foreign Minister
Pineau's frequent criticism of Western
policy has been motivated largely by the feeling that France's
views have not been given full consideration.

De Gaulle's renewed political interest
may encourage independent action by French leaders who
suspect that Germany and Britain may also be increasingly
inclined to seek bilateral solutions with the USSR.

Interest in a strong executive is growing
among parliamentary leaders of various groups, and de Gaulle
will be increasingly mentioned as a likely candidate. Despite
his own disclaimer of ambition, De Gaulle is now keeping in
closer touch with current affairs by spending two days a week
in Paris.

5 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
5. PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER INVITED TO VISIT USSR

Pakistan's Prime Minister Chaudhri
Mohammad Ali admitted to the American ambassador on 2 May that Mikoyan
had asked him to visit the USSR when
the Soviet first deputy premier visited Karachi in March.

Mohammad Ali said that he had told
Mikoyan that he would "think it over" and had mentioned
the invitation to no one except Pakistan's president and the
foreign minister.

Comment
Pakistan will probably not act on the invitation until the USSR reveals its stand
on the Kashmir issue in the United Nations next month and
until the present internal challenge to Mohammad Ali's continuance as prime minister is resolved.

Should a visit take place, Soviet-
Pakistani economic relations would probably be the main
topic of discussion. Moscow will also probably attempt to
undermine Pakistan's role in the Baghdad pact and SEATO.

Mohammad Ali is scheduled to depart for
Peiping on 14 May for a two-week visit.

5 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 4 May)

Syria, following the last-minute
discussions with Secretary General Hammarskjold, had initialed
a statement agreeing to an unconditional cease-fire, but with an
addendum to the effect that Syria would observe its obligations
under the UN charter including Article 25 (this refers to the carrying out of Security Council decisions) and hoped that Israel
would do the same. Prime Minister Ghazzi told Moose that the
addendum was not a condition to the cease-fire agreement, but
said that Syria had told Hammarskjold it would consider Israeli
resumption of work on the Banat Yacov canal a violation of the
agreement. Hammarskjold said he had no assurances from Israel in regard to abiding by the Security
Council decision. The secretary general felt, however, that this
was implicit in UN membership, that Israel attached importance
to his views, and he was therefore not worried.

An Israeli military spokesman reported that
an Israeli patrol last night clashed with Jordanian infiltrators in
the Gilboa region, about 45 miles north of Jerusalem. The spokesman also said that Egyptians stole Israeli crops at Nahal Oz near
the Gaza strip.

5 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]
