[PAGE 01]
6 November 1952
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet fighter units in Kamchatka re-equipping with jets (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Foreign Minister Okazaki lists obstacles to Japanese rearmament (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet fighter units in Kamchatka re-equipping with jets:

evidence that Soviet fighter units on
Kamchatka are being equipped with jet
planes.

On 9 and 10 October two aircraft of a
fighter regiment believed to be based at Petropavlovsk engaged in
flights at altitudes considered indicative of jet planes.

Comment: The possibility that fighter
units in Kamchatka would convert from conventional to jet planes
was suggested by the presence of MIG-15 plant representatives at
Petropavlovsk.

Two fighter regiments are known to be
based at Petropavlovsk and a third is located in the northern Kurils.

Strengthening of this outer line of Soviet
Far Eastern defenses with modern fighters was first indicated by
the conversion of units in the southern Kurils to jets, beginning in
July.

FAR EAST

2. Foreign Minister Okazaki lists obstacles to Japanese rearmament:

While stating that the new Yoshida cabinet
favors a substantial rearmament program,
Foreign Minister Katsuo Okazaki has told

[PAGE 04]
Ambassador Murphy that several major obstacles bar early action
on the question.

The chief barriers are the difficulty of
amending the anti-war clause of the Constitution; the resistance
anticipated from the Socialist Parties, intellectual groups, and women;
and Yoshida's distrust of the old military clique.

Comment: A two-thirds Diet vote, plus a
majority popular vote, is necessary to amend the Constitution.
Okazaki favors an information program to enlighten the public on the
need for rearmament prior to any attempt to initiate an amendment.
Meanwhile, the Japanese Government, mindful of the heavy cost of
rearmament, may be expected to continue its cautious approach to
the question.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE
