[PAGE 01]
16 August 1953
Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Comment on the Iranian situation (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Britain considering modification in NATO defense goals (page 4).
4. Allied and West German officials agree on plans for food program (page 4).

****
- 2 -

16 Aug 53
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Comment on the Iranian situation:

The failure of the attempt to remove Prime Minister Mossadeq and the flight of the shah to Baghdad emphasize Mossadeq's continued mastery of the situation and foreshadow more drastic action on his part to eliminate all opposition. The prime minister can utilize the situation to generate more popular support for himself at a time when he is facing the problem of how to secure the election of a new and more amenable Majlis. While in the past Mossadeq had not been very aggressive in his efforts to remove his enemies, this incident will reinforce his recent tendency to proceed arbitrarily.

The shah's flight, the involvement of the commander of the imperial guards, and the royal decrees to remove Mossadeq and appoint General Zahedi prime minister present Mossadeq with the opportunity of reducing the shah's position still further or attempting to eliminate the monarchy altogether.

The Tudeh has already come out against the shah and is charging American involvement. It may be expected to give full support to Mossadeq in any drive against the court.
[PAGE 04]
WESTERN EUROPE

3. Britain considering modification in NATO defense goals:

The British government is reconsidering its approach to Western European defense requirements and NATO force plans, according to a Defense Ministry official. Britain will recommend shifting emphasis from NATO's "forward" defensive strategy to a more modest "deterrent" force, the size of which would be within the present capabilities of NATO members and West Germany.

One purpose of this change would be the elimination of NATO's concern caused by the gap between theoretical requirements and existing forces.

Comment: There is little prospect of any substantial increase in the NATO defense effort for 1954. The proposed modification of strategy would be a further step in the process, begun during last year's annual review, in which the NATO members' political and economic capabilities were given precedence over the military requirements for the security of the entire North Atlantic area.

4. Allied and West German officials agree on plans for food program:

In a meeting of Allied representatives with West German and Berlin authorities, it was tentatively agreed that the second round of food distribution would begin as planned on 27 August but would taper off with the approach of the harvest season on about 1 October.

- 4 -

16 Aug 53
[PAGE 05]
The Federal Republic representative stated that the government has an understanding with charitable organizations aimed at a 20 to 50 percent increase, without publicity, in the mailing of food packages, which now run up to 2,000,000 monthly.

Comment: Chancellor Adenauer has suggested privately that the food program be followed by a clothing distribution program this coming winter.

- 5 -

16 Aug 53
