[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

18 February 1960

Copy No. C 67
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet military force reductions apparent-
ly not to be followed by reductions in
forces of European satellites at this time. (1)

USSR brings pressure on Western posi-
tions with regard to East Germany. (2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR army in Syria informs Cairo of Is-
raeli plan to launch "local attack" on
Syrian border; no evidence of Is-
raeli preparations for large-scale action. (3)

Morocco renews inquiries regarding
procurement of American arms. (4)

III. THE WEST

Kenya representatives at London confer-
ence accept in principle British proposal
for African majority in 65-member
legislative council.

Paraguayan Government expects attacks
this week by revolutionaries from Argen-
tine bases; President confident he can
prevent any movement into interior.

Cuban Government may soon call for
revision of Guantanamo naval base agree-
ment with US.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Eastern Europe: Khrushchev's plans to cut the Soviet
military force levels apparently are not to be followed im-
mediately by unilateral reductions in the forces of the
Eastern European satellites. The Poles have made, and
the Czechs probably will make any reductions in their own
national forces dependent on West German reductions. The
Balkan satellites may offer conditional reductions of their
forces to draw attention to their proposals for limitation of
armaments in the Balkan-Adriatic zone.

East Germany: In the past three weeks the USSR has
initiated several moves in an attempt to bring pressure on
the Western positions with regard to recognition of East
Germany and access to West Berlin, as the time for summit
negotiations approaches. The Allied Military Liaison Mis-
sions accredited to the Soviet forces in East Germany have
been issued new passes worded to imply acceptance of some
measure of East German authority over the missions and
have been given a new map of restricted areas which closes
the Soviet checkpoint at Helmstedt to mission personnel and
substitutes crossing points into West Germany at two East
German-controlled checkpoints. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel:
Israel was planning "a local at-
tack" on the Syrian border on the anniversary date of the
union (22 February). Arrangements for the participation
of UAR military units in the anniversary celebrations in
parts of Syria have been canceled, and the units alerted for
possible service on the Israeli-Syrian front. There is no
[PAGE 05]
evidence of Israeli preparations for large-scale military ac-
tion. The UAR's state of alert appears to reflect only its con-
tinuing concern over Israeli intentions following the recent
incidents in the demilitarized zone separating Syria and Israel.

Morocco: General Kettani, at the instigation of the Moroc-
can crown prince, has renewed inquiries--the first since Novem-
ber--regarding American arms which might be supplied on the
basis of the survey of Morocco's military needs by US experts
last year. Indications are that in view of the present state of
French-Moroccan relations, Morocco will for the present ignore
France's offer to equip the five units of elite troops organized
last fall. Morocco is anxious to obtain modern aircraft and is
reportedly planning to use the Ben Slimane (previously known as
Boulhaut) base--scheduled to be evacuated on 1 March by Amer-
ican forces--as a new Moroccan air training center. (Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Britain-Kenya: African and settler representatives of the
moderate faction at the London conference on Kenya's constitu-
tional reforms have accepted in principle the far-reaching Brit-
ish proposals for an African majority in a 65-member legislative
council elected on a broad franchise. The British governor would
retain substantial powers. Although some disagreement persists
over safeguards for the settler minority, strong dissent is thus far
limited to a relatively small group of right-wing settlers. The
British are sufficiently encouraged by the extent of agree-
ment to permit the first African mass meetings in Kenya since
1953. (Page 3)

Paraguay: The Paraguayan Government expects new revolu-
tionary attacks this week launched from bases in Argentina. A
military alert and roadblocks in Asuncion were reinstituted on
14 February for the first time since the attacks of December 1959.

18 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
President Stroessner reportedly feels confident he can pre-
vent any movement of revolutionaries into the interior, and
the US army attache comments that Stroessner has the solid
backing of the armed forces. (Page 4)

Cuba: The Cuban foreign minister has reportedly been in-
structed to examine the agreement under which the US Naval
Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba, with a view to
drafting a note to the US for revision of that agreement. Cas-
tro officials have in the past complained that the unilateral
power of the US to terminate the agreement is objectionable
to Cuba and probably have waited to raise the issue until they
consider the timing most useful for purposes of bargaining
and propaganda.

Watch Committee Conclusion: The following developments
are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hos-
tile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the
immediate future: None.

18 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Puts Pressure on Allies to Recognize East Germany

In moves apparently intended to enhance East Germany's
prestige and to test Allied determination to resist recognition
of the German Democratic Republic (GDR), Soviet authorities
have brought increasing pressure to bear on the Allied Military
Liaison Missions (MLM) accredited to the Soviet forces in
Germany. On 27 January, the US Mission was handed a new
map showing areas permanently denied to MLM personnel. The
restricted areas include the Russian-controlled Helmstedt-
Marienborn checkpoint on the main access route to Berlin; mis-
sion personnel instead now are to use two crossing points on the
East-West German border which are manned by the East Ger-
mans. Four days later, Soviet authorities announced that they
were issuing to MLM personnel new passes worded to imply de
facto recognition of the GDR by the Western powers. On 15
February, Soviet authorities temporarily closed a large area
in southwest Germany to visits of MLM personnel. US Army
authorities note that the exception of one highway through the
restricted area may have been intended as bait to induce mis-
sion personnel to use their new passes in order to enter the
restricted area.

These moves coincided with a Soviet effort to involve the
Allies in an admission of some East German authority over air
access to West Berlin. On 3 February, Soviet officials in Berlin
issued a flight safety guarantee, rejected by the West, for a spe-
cial Scandinavian Airlines System flight along the air corridor to
West Berlin's Tempelhof airport; the guarantee stated that per-
mission for the flight had been given by "governmental author-
ities of the German Democratic Republic."

18 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Morocco Reopens Question of Procurement of US Arms

Prompted by Moroccan Crown Prince Moulay Hassan,
who is chief of staff of the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces,
Maj. Gen. Ben Hamou Kettani has made renewed inquiries--
the first since November--regarding the procurement of
American arms. A survey of Morocco's military needs was
conducted last fall by US experts in response to Moroccan
arms requests. A token shipment of American equipment ar-
rived in Morocco in time to be displayed during the national
holidays in mid-November.

The crown prince wants American materiel to equip five
units of elite troops--totaling about 1,750 men--organized
last fall. Paris has offered to equip these units, but in the
light of the present state of French-Moroccan relations, in-
dications are that Morocco for the time being at least will
ignore this offer.

Morocco is likely to request modern American planes in
view of the early availability of the American air base at Ben
Slimane (formerly Boulhaut), which is scheduled for evacua-
tion on 1 March.

Morocco has three jet fighter pilots and five students undergo-
ing flight training in France. Any plans Rabat may have for
the immediate utilization of the Ben Slimane base, however,
may be complicated by negotiations with France. Under the
1950-51 French-American base agreements--not recognized
by the Moroccan Government--the land and permanent base
installations are the property of the French Government.

18 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Kenya Constitutional Conference Reaches Major Agreement

Representatives of African groups and moderate Euro-
peans at the constitutional conference in London have accepted
in principle the far-reaching British proposals for an African-
dominated legislative council chosen by a greatly broadened
electorate. Strong dissent is thus far limited to a relatively
small group of right-wing settlers, and the extent of the agree-
ment is acclaimed by the British press as a triumph for Colo-
nial Secretary Macleod.

Of the 65 members, 33 Africans, 10 Europeans, 8 Asians,
and 2 Arabs will be directly elected by a single multiracial
electorate. The remaining 12 members--4 African, 4 Euro-
pean, and 4 others--will be chosen by the legislative council
itself. Although the Africans failed to eliminate racial appor-
tionment of seats, their leading spokesmen have indicated ac-
ceptance of the gains achieved at London. The franchise is
extended to all who possess any one of the following qualifica-
tions: literacy, age over 40, holder of an office, or an annual
income of $210. Some disagreement persists over constitutional
safeguards for the settler minority. The conference is expected
to end shortly. A detailed constitution--under which the British
governor will retain some controls even over internal affairs--
will then be drafted.

Encouraged by the African willingness to compromise, the
British on 28 February will permit the first African mass meet-
ings held in Kenya since 1953. Violence by the right-wing
settlers remains a possibility, although they are not believed
to have the support of most white Kenyans.

18 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Paraguay Expects New Rebel Attacks

President Stroessner, increasingly spotlighted as the
last dictator in South America, is strengthening security meas-
ures in anticipation of new rebel attacks this week. On 14 Feb-
ruary the regime reinstituted a military alert and again set up
roadblocks in Asuncion--measures taken at the time of the De-
cember 1959 revolutionary attacks by the small 14th of May
Movement. Also on 14 February the Humaita, one of Para-
quay's two gunboats, steamed southward from Asuncion; it
rarely leaves port unless trouble is expected.

The rebel plan is to isolate Asuncion by gaining control of
the Paraguayan cities of Encarnacion, Concepcion, and Pilar.
The first step would be an invasion south of Pilar,

rebel para-
military organizations in Argentine border cities comprise an
estimated 1,000 men in the Resistencia-Corrientes area and
between 1,500 and 2,000 men in Formosa. New probing attacks
by the rebels in several areas have been rumored in the press.

The exile groups are still not completely united, and op-
position party leaders in Asuncion still urge noninvolvement
in the attacks. The Argentine police have recently raided
some rebel arms caches, although some Argentine officials
disapprove of their government's agreement with Paraguay to
restrain rebel operations from Argentine territory.

Stroessner reportedly feels confident that he can prevent
a rebel movement into the interior of Paraguay. The US army
attache in Asuncion commented on 14 February that the armed
forces are solidly behind Stroessner.

18 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
