newspaper have been ordered closed. The effectiveness of
some of these measures, particularly orders to turn in arms,
is doubtful. (Page 8)

Cyprus: The 29 July announcement in Athens by former
EOKA leader Grivas that he "dissociated" himself from the
February agreements settling the Cyprus dispute has brought
his rift with Archbishop Makarios into the open. Makarios ap-
pears convinced he can defeat Grivas in a contest for political
supremacy at this time. The outcome of the struggle between
the two will depend largely on the attitude of former lieutenants
of Grivas in the EOKA movement, several of whom are cur-
rently working with Makarios in the transitional Cypriot cab-
inet.

*Meanwhile, the denunciation of Grivas and strong support
for Makarios contained in Premier Karamanlis' 30 July state-
ment will probably cause the ex-EOKA leader to hasten his for-
mal entrance on the Greek political scene. Opposition politicians
in Athens have long hoped to capitalize on Grivas' popularity to
bring down the government.

Nehru's recommendation on 30 July to suspend parliamentary government in Kerala and
take over direct administration of the state probably will re-
sult in a proclamation imposing President's Rule shortly. Dis-
missal of the Communist state government on grounds that it
was unable to function constitutionally and maintain internal
stability will be a serious setback to Communist prestige through-
out India. In turn, the Congress party in Kerala will face a crit-
ical test in the period prior to new state elections, which are
likely to be held within six months. The Communists retain con-
siderable strength in the state, and the present close coopera-
tion among anti-Communist groups may deteriorate once the
Communist government is ousted. (Page 9)

Japan-Korea: South Korea officially proposed to Japan on
30 July the "unconditional" reopening of talks for the normal-
ization of relations, which would include the question of repa-
triating Koreans to South Korea. Seoul's reported position that
the talks would not touch on Tokyo's policy of repatriating some

31 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
