Nehru Recommends President's Rule in Kerala State

Prime Minister Nehru on 30 July advised President
Prasad, on the recommendation of the Indian cabinet, to
take over direct administration of Communist-governed
Kerala State under his emergency powers. Prasad is ex-
pected to issue a formal proclamation imposing President's
Rule shortly.

New Delhi's intervention will climax a bitter struggle begun
by combined anti-Communist groups on 12 June to unseat the
Communist government. Suspension of parliamentary govern-
ment in Kerala--probably accompanied by the dismissal of
the Communist ministry--on grounds that it was unable to
function constitutionally and maintain internal stability will
be a serious setback to Communist prestige throughout India.
The party may succeed in saving some face, however, by claim-
ing it was victimized by the central government acting in col-
lusion with the anti-Communist opposition leaders in Kerala.
The Communists also plan to launch large-scale retaliatory
agitation against Congress party governments in such key states
as West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, and Bombay. Party leaders
reportedly have decided, however, to limit their campaign to
nonviolent action in order to avoid any further loss of popular
support.

With the Communist party returning to a defensive position in
Kerala, the Congress and other non-Communist parties will be
put to the test. State elections are likely to be held within six
months. In order to defeat the Communists and establish a more
effective and stable government, the Congress party will have to
strengthen its leadership and organization as well as maintain
the working relationship with other non-Communist groups. Ex-
perience gained in the current campaign against the Communist
government has substantially increased the prospect for unity,
but the present close cooperation may deteriorate as the competi-
tion for power increases. Moreover, the Communist party could
recover some of the popular support it has lost in Kerala if Presi-
dent's Rule is prolonged and elections are held after anti-Commu-
nist sentiment has subsided.

31 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
