LATE ITEM

Cuban President's Forced Resignation Increases Communist Opportunities

Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro's successful maneuver on 17 July of forcing the resignation of President Manuel Urrutia by dramatically threatening his own resignation has increased the opportunities for Communist gains in Cuba. Implying that the Cuban revolution was threatened by "reactionary interests" in the United States, Castro charged Urrutia with near treason for allegedly paralyzing government operations at a time when "we are the target of an intense foreign campaign." He sharply attacked Urrutia for criticizing Communists and said his differences with the former President were "95 percent ideological."

Communists quickly joined in the emotional public expressions of support for Castro and against Urrutia. One top Communist leader, Lazaro Pena, declaring publicly that the revolution was in danger, called for the formation of a "truly revolutionary government" with Communist representation. All major labor unions, most of them controlled by Castro's 26 of July Movement, were ordered mobilized for possible action, and the armed forces were placed on alert.

Frictions between Urrutia and Castro's brother Raul, chief of the armed forces, may have contributed to the action against Urrutia. Raul Castro, who has facilitated Communist penetration of the armed forces, reportedly told Urrutia on 11 July that he would make certain government appointments regardless of the President's contrary wishes. Urrutia's resignation at that time is said to have been prevented only by the intervention of Fidel, who secured Urrutia's agreement to stay on if permitted to make a public anti-Communist statement. Fidel agreed over Raul's objections, and Urrutia made an extremely strong attack on the Communists on 13 July.

The new President, Osvaldo Dorticos, is a prominent lawyer in his mid-40s who has been closely associated with the moderate, pro-US Jose Miro Cardona, Fidel Castro's predecessor as prime minister. Head of the National Bar Association under the Batista regime, Dorticos led that group in open and vehement attacks on Batista and was forced to flee the country shortly before the former dictator fell. He has had little experience in politics.

18 July 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8
