Opposition Restive Under Restrictions
Of South Vietnamese Regime

President Diem's continued postponement of political and social reforms which would rally popular support has apparently encouraged further coup plotting since the unsuccessful para-troop coup effort last November. A faction of the once influential anti-Communist Dai Viet party claims to have a plan of action and the necessary military support to overthrow Diem and replace him with a non-Communist coalition representing government and opposition groups. Other Dai Viet factions are reported to have received Communist offers of cooperation.

No Dai Viet faction currently has sufficient influence to challenge the government without backing from the military, which demonstrated its loyalty to Diem in suppressing the November uprising. Continuing dissatisfaction in the armed forces, however, is evident in the statements recently made to the American ambassador by the air force commander. He expressed doubt that Diem ever intended to introduce reforms or that reorganization of the command structure would halt political interference at all levels of the military.

Diem has indicated that he plans some additional reorganization of his cabinet and intends to strengthen both appointive and elective representation at the village level. No changes have been announced, however, and he still seems reluctant to consider adequate reforms. Moreover, some opposition circles are spreading rumors--so far unsubstantiated--that there has been severe repression against regime opponents not implicated in the November attempt.

The government reportedly hopes to channel and control opposition activity through the creation of a new political front before the presidential election on 9 April. However, the planned front, apparently to be an outgrowth of the government-inspired People's Committee Against Rebels and Communists which was organized to ferret out collaborators in the November coup attempt, is unlikely to attract such cooperation or satisfy demands for an open opposition party.

16 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
