Army Dissidence Threatens Ethiopia

Ambassador Richards indicated on 22 March that while an uneasy calm has returned to Addis Ababa, trouble could break out again unless the Emperor acts quickly to accommodate the army dissidents' demands.

The Emperor's attempts to date to reduce the growing criticism of his regime appear to have failed. He sought to alleviate army discontent on 14 March by announcing a modest increase in its pay scales and to quell dissension among junior and middle-level officers the next day by promoting 73 army officers. The pay increase, however, which is to come from the present army budget, falls considerably short of that promised by the rebel leadership last December. Moreover, air force, police, and navy personnel will be aroused over being denied a pay raise equal to that given the army, while army officers are likely to regard their promotions simply as a counterbalance to those given air force officers last month. Police officials are also displeased because the Emperor recently appointed an army officer instead of a career police official as commissioner of police.

Government officials are sufficiently alarmed to have ordered precautionary measures, including the construction of breastworks around at least one army installation and the positions of heavy weapons and additional guards at other key places.

Handbills, which may have originated in the Ministry of Defense, were circulated in the capital on 20 March setting forth the demands of the dissidents. These included--in addition to the pay raise--the dismissal of Chief of Staff Kebede and other high government officials, threatening direct action if they are not complied with.

The American army attaché notes that the dissidents apparently have succeeded in establishing organizational ties through several if not all local army units. A leader capable of directing action against the regime is not yet known to have emerged, however. Although army officers reportedly have

23 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
