Moroccan Claims to Saharan Territories

Soon after Spain published regulations on 15 June 1959 for the exploitation of petroleum resources in the Spanish Sahara, the Moroccan Embassy in Madrid made known Morocco's claims of sovereignty over the region. The Moroccan economic counselor in Madrid indicated at that time that he thought American oil companies should be advised this was a contested area and that they might subsequently have to renegotiate their status with another government. The following year, nine American firms obtained concessions from the Spanish Government, and by January 1961, 38 American teams were engaged in exploratory work. Emphasis was placed on the northwestern part of the Spanish Sahara because of the availability of supply lines and water. The United Oil Company, whose 11 employees were captured--apparently by Moroccan irregulars at the direction of the Moroccan Army--on 11 March, had recently ceased operations in Latin America to concentrate on exploratory work in Spanish Sahara and Australia.

Spanish Army Minister Barroso continues to view Moroccan troop movements near the Spanish Saharan border as menacing, and claimed on 21 March that Spanish troops had the previous day captured "300 Moroccan camels" in the Spanish Sahara. Spanish officials in Paris are reported to have proposed that France join forces with Spain for a systematic cleanup of Moroccan irregulars operating in Spanish Sahara and Mauritania. Such a joint operation early in 1958 suppressed Moroccan irregular activities in the region. Paris purportedly has not responded to this request and is not anxious to become involved in such an expedition.

The Moroccan press, meanwhile, continues to play up charges of Spain's aggressive intentions, reporting on 21 March the arrival of Spanish reinforcements not only in Spanish Sahara but also in the Spanish-held presidios of Ceuta and Melilla on Morocco's Mediterranean coast. It also claims that Spanish military aircraft created havoc among the population by flying low over the southern Moroccan town of Tarfaya on 20 March, and

23 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8
