GENERAL

1. Comment on resolution of Supreme Soviet Presidium of the USSR:

The stereotyped nature of the proposals contained in the Soviet reply to the US Congressional resolution transmitted on 7 July suggests that the answer sprang primarily from a necessity to refute the previous, well-publicized US communication. Even though the resolution contributes to the campaign to portray the USSR as cooperative and non-aggressive, it contains no indication of any forthcoming Soviet concessions which could add substance to the peace campaign.

The resolution follows the standard two-pronged argumentation of Soviet propaganda. The denunciation of US policy centers on allegedly discriminatory practices such as the export control system, but contains only relatively mild criticisms of US-initiated policies such as rearmament and the creation of NATO. The "peace" policy of the USSR is buttressed with references to proposals like the Five-Power pact twice put forward in the UN since 1949, but the UN is not mentioned by name. This evasion may result from a Soviet wish to identify objectives such as disarmament with Communist "peace" organizations rather than with the UN, which has rejected Soviet proposals for prohibiting atomic weapons, for arms limitation and for a Five-Power peace pact.

2. Anglo-American disagreement over Far East policy seen as probable in event of Korean armistice:

The US Embassy in London predicts that British differences with the US over Far East policy, now held in check in order to preserve a united UN front in Korea, will probably revive if a Korean armistice is achieved.

The embassy indicates that the British see an armistice as the first phase in "step-by-step" negotiations leading eventually to a general settlement in the Far East, and expect the Chinese Communists to demand admission to the UN as a pre-requisite to an over-all Korean settlement. The embassy estimates that the present government would find great difficulty in trying to dodge such a demand in the face of UK public opinion on the issue.
