[PAGE 01]
27 March 1961
Copy No. C

Approved for Release:

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
27 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Laos. (Situation as of 0400 EST) (Page 1)

2. Congo: Foreign Minister Bomboko invites UN to send technicians to Matadi. (Page ii)

3. New uprisings reported planned in southern Angola and Cabinda. (Page ii)

4. Fighting breaks out between Pakistani military units and Pushtoon tribes. (Page iii)

5. USSR: Comment on earth satellite launching of 25 March. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
NORTHERN LAOS

GOVERNMENT
KONG LE - PATHET LAO Forces in Contact
KONG LE - PATHET LAO AREAS
X SITE OF C-47 SHOOTDOWN
ROAD
TRAIL
ROUTE NUMBER

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 March 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*Laos: Moscow's first comment on President Kennedy's press conference and the present situation in Laos appears designed to retain flexibility of action while pressing for its basic demands. By emphasizing the "urgent" need for an international conference, but taking no stand on the question of a prior cease-fire and ICC meeting, Moscow has left itself free to accept these Western proposals if its proposals on the composition, timing, and agenda for the international meeting, which are expected to be presented by Gromyko, are accepted by the West.

Although the Chinese Communists have not yet made any comment of their own on the press conference, Peiping has broadcast a North Vietnamese editorial of 25 March expressing Hanoi's opposition to a cease-fire before an international conference. The editorial declares that "only a Geneva"-type conference or an enlarged conference will be competent to settle questions of a cease-fire and reactivation of the International Commission in Laos."

The bloc has not yet reported the shooting down of an American C-47 aircraft over the Plaine des Jarres on 23 March. The plane burned completely following the crash. The one survivor, presumably an assistant army attache in Vientiane, is reportedly in a hospital near Xieng Khouang town with a broken shoulder.

(Backup, Page 1) (Map)

[PAGE 06]
Congo, Foreign Minister Bomboko has sent a letter to the UN's acting representative in the Congo, Makki Abbas, inviting the UN to send technicians to Matadi to cooperate with the port authority in clearing up the backlog of UN supplies there. Bomboko's letter added that the government could not authorize the return of UN troops to Matadi because of the feelings of the population. Ambassador Timberlake reports that the pile-up of supplies at the port was due to the failure of the UN to issue shipping instructions. The UN is reported to have rejected an offer by a local shipping firm and the port authority to assume joint responsibility for forwarding UN merchandise to Leopoldville. Timberlake believes the return of civilians to Matadi would involve a minimum risk of incidents. He also believes the climate of relations between the UN and the Congolese has "changed radically" since the arrival of Abbas in mid-March but that Abbas has not yet been able to capitalize on it because of the expected return of Dayal.

(Backup, Page 3)

Angola: Angolan dissident leaders, encouraged by the response of the African population to their terrorist campaign in northern Angola, believe they can continue their activities indefinitely, although on a reduced scale. They are planning new uprisings for southern Angola and for the Cabinda enclave, but no dates have been set for these operations.

Lisbon, aware of the threat of an outbreak in southern Angola, is seeking the cooperation of the South African authorities to control agitators using South-West Africa as a haven.

New outbreaks would probably be accompanied by additional demonstrations against Americans in Angola; rumors

27 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
linking local Americans with the terrorism are still being given wide circulation there. (Backup, Page 5)

Afghanistan-Pakistan-USSR: Foreign Minister Naim told Ambassador Byroade on 26 March that "major fighting" has broken out between Pakistani military units and several dissident Pushtoon tribes on the Pakistani side of the Afghan-Pakistani frontier. The action reportedly is taking place in the same semiautonomous tribal area where clashes occurred last fall. Pakistani authorities recently have been trying to suppress localized tribal resistance there--in part Afghan inspired--and to extend their control over the border areas. A widespread tribal uprising within Pakistan probably would draw active support from related tribal groups on the Afghan side.

(Backup, Page 7) (Map)

*USSR: The experience gained by the USSR with its large satellite payload recoveries has probably given the Russians a scientific and technological base and confidence level sufficient for them to attempt a manned recovery from orbit in their next launching. It is believed such an attempt will be made prior to the middle of April, when the Sibir Pacific ships will need to return to port.

Preliminary analysis in Washington has not yet provided a firm answer as to the identity of the biological payload. An undetermined object apparently encased in a transparent, dome-shaped container.

While it has not been possible to confirm or deny the Soviet statement that a dog was a passenger, on balance it is believed the statement is valid.

The Sputnik IX and X operations were similar in many aspects. The Sputnik X operation was supported by three Sibirs

27 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii

[PAGE 08]
in the Pacific and probably by three other ships in the Atlantic. The use of the Sibirs in this ESV recovery program probably indicates that Sputnik X was the dress rehearsal for a manned experiment.

27 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  iv

[PAGE 09]
Situation in Laos (Situation as of 0400 EST)

Moscow has consistently avoided committing itself on whether an international conference would have to meet before a cease-fire could become operative. It has at various times called for reactivation of the International Control Commission for Laos, but has always specified that this body could not resume its activities in Laos without new directives from a conference. On 22 March, however, Moscow broadcast without comment Souvannah Phouma's suggestion that a cease-fire could be arranged by the ICC pending the convocation of an international conference.

The Pravda article maintains this careful avoidance of the question of timing, while heavily emphasizing the dangers of international conflict through the "intervention" of SEATO and the United States and the consequent urgency of an international conference. By driving home the point that it has long favored a conference, Moscow has put itself in position to claim that the convocation of a conference and a cessation of hostilities is a consequence of its initiatives and another example of the ability of the "Socialist camp" to prevent "aggression" by the imperialists.

Accompanying its charges that SEATO members are preparing for direct military action in Laos, Pravda warns that "peace-loving countries will not remain indifferent" to direct intervention by SEATO which could lead to "far reaching consequences." A more explicit threat has been made in the presence of US Ambassador Ravndal in Prague by the Czech Deputy Foreign Minister. Responding to a remark from the Indian Ambassador, the Czech stated: "If the United States invades Laos, members of the Warsaw Pact have decided to enter Laos in return."

Peiping has not yet commented on President Kennedy's press conference on Laos, although, the Chinese Communists have broadcast a substantial account of his remarks. Peiping's last comment suggesting its disapproval of a cease-fire before an international conference is convened was contained in a People's Daily article of 23 March. Since then there have been only hints that its attitude remains the same. The first

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1

[PAGE 10]
negative reaction to such a cease-fire appeared in an editorial on 25 March in the North Vietnamese newspaper, Nhan Dan. The paper accuses the US of putting the "cart before the horse" in order to gain time to strengthen "rebel" forces. Peiping has reported this editorial without adding comments of its own.

The King and General Phoumi have reacted favorably to latest Western moves toward a peaceful settlement of the Laotian crisis. Both, however, expressed concern that Laos' problems would be subordinated to other world issues in a 14-nation conference. Phoumi had reservations about a return of the International Control Commission to Laos on the grounds that this would effectively prevent Western aid to the Laotian Army, while bloc supply of the Pathet Lao would go unchecked.

Rumors in Vientiane that the city is in imminent danger of attack were probably circulated by Communists. The departure of the King, prime minister, and Phoumi to attend a long-scheduled national ceremony in Savannakhét may have strengthened the rumors. The royal party will remain there until 28 March. The credibility attributed to these rumors by the populace is indicative of the low morale in Vientiane. Since 1 March about 200 troops have deserted in the area.

The military situation north and south of the Phou Khoun junction of Routes 7 and 13 is relatively unchanged. The enemy maintains his hold on the southern approach to the Plaine des Jarres and is exerting pressure on government troops at Tha Thom. Attack on Tha Thom scheduled for 25 March was being successfully resisted.

Five companies of Laotian Army troops under the command of Colonel Kham Ouane Boupha are reportedly en route from Phong Saly to join army forces at the outpost of Muong Sai in Luang Prabang Province. Since the Kong Le coup, this commander has maintained a precarious "neutrality" between all factions in the crisis and has entered into at least informal working relations with Pathet Lao troops who control most of

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2

[PAGE 11]
Phong Saly. Preliminary reports indicate that Kham Ouane's move was precipitated by fears the Pathet Lao were about to arrest him.

Soviet transports continue flights into Laos. On 23 March eight IL-14s and at least two but possibly five LI-2s flew from Hanoi to Xieng Khouang. Additional flights were scheduled for 26 March. The North Vietnamese are apparently training Pathet Lao communications personnel in Hanoi.

"They were scheduled for training at Hanoi but might have stopped at Khang Khay for preliminary training."

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2A

[PAGE 12]
The Situation in the Congo

In Stanleyville, Gizenga told a press correspondent that his regime was based on positive neutralism and would accept unconditional aid from any source. He said, however, that practically nothing had been forthcoming and that of the 20 countries which had recognized his government, only ten had done so in writing. He added that his government would respect present and future foreign investments, and claimed his troops would be willing to surrender their arms to the UN if this would lead to "republican legality." He disclaimed being a Marxist, saying that he had never studied Marxism and that although he had visited Moscow as recently as 1960, he had spent more time in Western capitals and had twice been to the United States.

UAR military representatives in Stanleyville complained to Cairo of difficulties in working with Gizenga's forces. The representatives said that in addition to linguistic problems encountered "because we did not know French," they almost became embroiled in a fight with Gizenga's troops when the weapons arrived in Aketi "because they imagined we were spies, in spite of the fact that it was they themselves who got the weapons. They wanted to hold Major Samir as a hostage until they were sure." Moreover, the mission was unable to effect an adequate training program for Gizenga's troops. It could not find officer material to train in the use of UAR-supplied weapons and also encountered delays in recruiting noncommissioned officer trainees and in distributing weapons. The mission also complained of the lack of discipline on the part of the Congolese during a trip to reconnoiter the air-drop zone--a trip that should have taken two days but took five--and of a lack of appreciation for its efforts by "anyone but Gizenga and some of the ministers." In contrast, "because her broadcasts are heard here," there was a growing appreciation for Ghana. Finally, the representatives complained of inadequate food and medical facilities and the harshness of conditions generally.

The Malayan UN commander in Kindu has been able to establish contact with the "Leopard men" in southwestern Kivu

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3

[PAGE 13]
Province. This secret group, founded six months ago by Lumumba, is supposedly anti-Christian and anti-white but now is "running out of steam," and its members are willing to return to their homelands in northern Katanga.

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4

[PAGE 14]
The Situation in Angola

The recent outbreaks in northern Angola were instigated by six Angolans trained by the Tunisian UN contingent in the Congo. The six entered Angola clandestinely just before the outbreaks and each directed a campaign of terror in a specific region.

The Tunisian Government is backing the Angolan People's Union (UPA), led by Holden Roberto, an organization which opposes the more extreme pro-Communist Angolan dissident group based in Guinea. Tunisian representatives are said to have told UPA leaders that Tunisia and the other Afro-Asian countries would find it difficult to support their objectives in the United Nations unless the UPA took action to make Angola an issue for world attention.

President Bourguiba is reported to have congratulated Roberto, who stopped in Tunis after a recent visit to UN headquarters, on the success of the uprising. He advised Roberto to form a "committee of national liberation," rather than a government-in-exile, because few countries would be ready to recognize an exile government. Tunisian Foreign Secretary Mokaddem is reported to have promised Roberto that Tunisia would provide rifles, machine guns, ammunition, and medical supplies, and Bourguiba's Neo-Destour party has assigned an expert to act as an adviser on guerrilla warfare tactics and political organization. The Tunisians have also offered to assist the formation of an Angolan trade union.

The Lisbon Foreign Ministry described the Portuguese in southern Angola as "somewhat tense because there have been numerous purchases of crude weapons (chains, etc.)." The governor of Angola had received threatening letters from "Portuguese negro" refugees in the frontier area of South-West Africa. The South African Government had previously arrested similar agitators.

Luanda warned Lisbon that the local security forces were inadequate to

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5

[PAGE 15]
cope with demonstrations like that against the American Consulate. The clinic of the local Evangelical Mission, which has an American as titular director, although most of its personnel are foreign, was sacked by a mob on 24 March.

In Portugal itself, the government-controlled press is reported to have called for a demonstration in downtown Lisbon today to protest recent international criticism of Portugal. Right wing elements led by the National Front reportedly plan to turn the demonstration into a march on the US Embassy, and, according to press reports, thousands of handbills calling for such action have already been distributed in the city.

Opinion in some regime circles is beginning to turn against the government, however, as a result of the Angolan situation and many persons are criticizing the government for not having taken measures some time ago that would have avoided the present difficulties. A report is said to be circulating among regime supporters that two unidentified army generals have told Premier Salazar that Portuguese policy toward Africa must be radically changed. On 23 March the undersecretary of the Overseas Ministry told the American Embassy in Lisbon that for the past six months, the government had been actively studying far-reaching reforms in all sectors of the overseas provinces.

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6

[PAGE 16]
AFGHANISTAN - PAKISTAN
(PUSHTOON TRIBAL AREA)

PUSHTOON TRIBES
AREA OF GREATEST FRICTION

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page

[PAGE 17]
Fighting Breaks Out in Pakistan Near Afghan Border

Guerrilla fighters from three of the major Bajauri tribes--the Salarzai, Utman Khel, and Mamund--reportedly have been engaged against Pakistani troops since 24 March. If this resistance continues, the powerful Mohmand tribe may join its neighbors. Other Pushtoon tribes, such as the Wazirs, might also lend their support and further extend the area of fighting. All the tribes, whose area extends on both sides of the border, want to remain relatively free of government control and resent Pakistani Government moves since last September to strengthen control over Bajaur. If the present fighting should become widespread, it would so deepen the antagonism between these tribes and Pakistan that the latter would be forced to suspend its efforts to bring the Pushtoon tribes all along the frontier under its administrative control.

The fighting in Bajaur follows recent moves by Afghanistan to strengthen its regular forces at the border opposite the area. In discussing this build-up with the American Army attaché in Karachi, the director of Pakistan's joint military intelligence said that the Pakistani Army would actually welcome the chance to defeat Afghan intruders again--whether tribal irregulars or Afghan Army units--and reiterated his government's determination to use whatever force is necessary to maintain its position in Bajaur.

Kabul, fearful of strong Pakistani counteraction, probably does not plan to send readily identifiable Afghan forces across the border. While it may be giving covert assistance in the form of arms and tribal "volunteers," the Afghan Government wants the fighting to appear to involve only the "oppressed" Pushtoon tribesmen on the Pakistani side of the line and the Pakistani Government.

Afghanistan would like to bring the matter before the United Nations to generate international pressure on Pakistan to negotiate the status of the Pushtoon tribes living in Pakistan. Kabul, however, probably calculates that open Afghan intervention would merely strengthen the Pakistani case in the eyes of the UN General Assembly.

The USSR probably would not be happy to see the Pushtoonistan issue come to a head again at this time. Moscow has made a

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7

[PAGE 18]
small but impressive beginning toward achieving a more favorable position in Pakistan. Support for Afghanistan, however, would result in a decline in this position.

Khrushchev is on record in support of the Afghan position on Pushtoonistan, and in the event of a military clash between the Afghans and Pakistanis, it is probable that the USSR would feel that it had to give increasing propaganda support to Afghanistan.

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8

[PAGE 19]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 20]
27 March 1961
Copy No. C 22-1

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
