Indonesia Plans Military Incident in Netherlands New Guinea

The Indonesian Government reportedly plans to create, shortly after 3 January, a military incident in the Netherlands New Guinea area of sufficient gravity to bring Indonesia's claim to the area before the United Nations. Although this report is unconfirmed, there are numerous indications that Indonesia will expand its paramilitary and diplomatic efforts during 1961 with regard to New Guinea. Djakarta's strategy seems to be to incite local rebellions, believing this would increase international pressures on the Dutch to cede the area.

An Indonesian Air Force directive of 30 December ordered "increased fighting-endurance training to meet New Guinea preparations." Indonesia's delegation at the UN has been ordered to prepare a note for submission to UN Secretary General Hammarskjold which will state that in view of augmented Netherlands forces in New Guinea, it will be difficult to prevent an encounter between Netherlands and New Guinea forces in the area.

At least half of a 23-man armed Indonesian force which landed in southwest New Guinea about 15 November is believed to be still at large. efforts to communicate with these infiltrators and have directed that other forces remain in readiness for a further mission.

infiltration attempts must be discontinued, pending a change in the situation, and that "those within" must take the initiative. The Dutch administration in New Guinea has reported that there have been at least 13 infiltration attempts since 1952, five of them in 1960; the infiltrating groups apparently are charged with intelligence collection and psychological warfare.

Djakarta is using the New Guinea claim to cloak other issues. The alleged need to arm against meager Dutch reinforcements is being cited to justify a high-level mission recently sent to Moscow to request accelerated deliveries of contracted naval equipment and possibly to negotiate new purchases for all services. President Sukarno may try to overcome army opposition to his appointment of Communists to the cabinet by rallying the country behind him in a New Guinea campaign; under cover of such a movement he may press for a cabinet reorganization, claiming there is need for a government which will unite all significant political elements.

3 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
