Government's mounting dissatisfaction with the French is reflected in Premier Phoui's bitter complaints about France's
attitude and the "do nothing" performance of French military
advisers with the Laotian Army.

The Laotian Army commander may have taken the first
step in a plan to redeploy some units from Sam Neua Province
to Luang Prabang in the belief that the rebels may shift their
operations from the border areas to the Laotian interior. According to late press reports, the airlift of a paratroop battalion
from Sam Neua to Luang Prabang now is in progress.
(Page 3)

Indonesia: Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio will
visit China, possibly in October, at Peiping's invitation, to
discuss Djakarta's recently imposed restrictions on Chinese
business. Although Indonesia has received two strong protests
from Peiping regarding the treatment of local Chinese merchants,
Subandrio says the Indonesian Government will not retreat from
its position.
(Page 4)

Krishna Menon: Top government leaders in New Delhi are
continuing to press Nehru to dismiss Defense Minister Krishna
Menon. Nehru reportedly has told his cabinet colleagues he will
respect their desires that Menon be removed from the Defense
Ministry, and President Prasad has stated that Menon's chances
of continuing to hold his post are nil. The subject of Menon's dismissal recently became a burning issue when army commander
General Thimayya charged Menon with interfering in army affairs for personal and political reasons and with countermanding
military measures ordered by Thimayya in defense of the Indo-Tibetan border. There is some possibility of a general cabinet
shuffle within the next few months which would retain Menon in
a less critical post.

Japan: Japanese Prime Minister Kishi has warned factional
leaders in his Liberal-Democratic party that he will dissolve the
Diet if the party cannot agree on terms for revising the US-Japan
Security Treaty. Recent attempts by anti-Kishi conservative leaders to undermine Kishi on the treaty issue have not succeeded, but
the treaty question has been revived following the visit of former

25 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
