[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

24 August 1959

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Page Denied

Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Laos: A statement broadcast from Hanoi on 21 August, but attributed to a spokesman of the Laotian Communist front, calls for the government to realign its pro-Western foreign policy and
[PAGE 05]
to set up a coalition government with Communist participa-
tion. North Vietnamese propaganda attempting to show that
Saigon is intimately linked with the Laotian crisis suggests
that Hanoi is concerned over the possibility that South Vietnam
has secretly agreed to send military aid to Laos.

24 Aug 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

France- Algeria: During UN Secretary General Hammar-
skjold's recent visit to France, De Gaulle gave no indication
that he plans any major change in France's Algerian policy. He
also ruled out negotiations for a political settlement with Pre-
mier Abbas of the Provisional Algerian Government, explaining
that Abbas is without a mandate to represent the Algerians and
is too weak to control or lead them. Premier Debré, who took
a considerably tougher line during the 31 July talks with Hammar-
skjold, stated that if the UN interfered with France on the Algerian
question, France might have to walk out of the General Assembly.

UK- Maldives: The present impasse between Britain and the
government of the Maldive Islands--over terms governing British
use of a key RAF base being completed on Gan Island in southern-
most Addu Atoll--could aggravate Britain's relations with India
and Ceylon and provide an issue for international Communist prop-
aganda. Britain is prepared to repulse any effort by the govern-
ment of the Maldive islands to suppress dissidents who control
Addu Atoll and provide workers for the base.

24 Aug 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Situation in Laos

A Hanoi broadcast of 21 August, attributed to a spokesman of
Laos' Communist front Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) party, called for
the creation of a coalition government with Communist participa-
tion, the realignment of Laos' pro-Western foreign policy, and a
return to the privileged position secured through the negotiations
between the Communists and the royal government which culmi-
nated in the unification settlement of November 1957. By tak-
ing this extreme position, the NLHZ is creating a climate in
which its proscription as a political party is almost inevitable.
Its line also suggests that the NLHZ is preparing to abandon le-
gal political activity in favor of guerrilla warfare.

Reports point to intensified Communist partisan operations
in northern Laos, especially in Sam Neua Province and areas of
eastern Luang Prabang Province adjacent to Sam Neua. The press
states that infiltration in Vientiane Province has forced the govern-
ment to abandon several posts. The scale of operations appears to
be smaller than is suggested by the reports, however.

North Vietnam has markedly increased its accusations that
South Vietnam is actively involved in the Laotian crisis, suggest-
ing concern over the possibility that Saigon has secretly agreed
to give military aid to Laos. Specifically Hanoi accuses Saigon of
training anti-Communist terrorists for the Laotian Government
and sending advisers to help the army, and claims that a decision
now has been reached to dispatch troops from South Vietnam. At
the very least Hanoi probably is worried that Saigon will utilize
the present crisis to increase its influence in Laos.

In another development, has reported ru-
mors circulating in Hanoi that Premier and Foreign Minister Pham
Van Dong left North Vietnam for Communist China around 17 Au-
gust to meet President Ho Chi Minh, who has been in China since
early August, and to confer with Peiping's leaders about the Lao-
tian situation. Such action would indicate the Communists' press-
ing need for close policy coordination at this time.

24 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Page Denied

Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Paris Shows No Signs of Changing Algerian Program

President de Gaulle told UN Secretary General Hammar-
skjold on 31 July that he has no definite plan for a "final solu-
tion," of the Algerian question. He said he was willing to accept
whatever solution "evolved" as long as it was based on a "dem-
ocratic" decision. He ruled out any negotiations on political
matters with Provisional Algerian Republic Premier Abbas, ex-
plaining that Abbas has no mandate to represent the Algerians and
is too weak to rule them if given an opportunity. De Gaulle said
he had made his policy clear and saw no reason to restate it.

The French cabinet is scheduled to review the Algerian ques-
tion 26 August, the day before De Gaulle leaves for a three-
day visit to the area.

Premier Debré, on the other hand, took a much tougher
line in his conversation with Hammarskjold. He stated that if
the UN General Assembly interfered with France on Algeria,
France might have to "cease its cooperation" with the General
Assembly. Hammarskjold understood that the threatened walk-
out would not extend to the Security Council or the UN as a whole.

Recently there have been indications that Paris intends to pre-
pare a strong case for the UN debate. Such an approach would
undoubtedly lead to renewed insistence that France's allies give
their full support.

24 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
Page Denied
[PAGE 12]
Complete Impasse Reached in British-Maldivian Relations

Relations between Britain and the Maldives, a British-pro-
tected sultanate 400 miles southwest of Ceylon, have reached an
impasse over the terms governing Britain's use of the air base
under construction on Gan Island. This base, a key RAF stag-
ing post and an important link between the Middle East-African
area and Singapore-Australia, is located in Addu Atoll, one of
the three southern atolls which were taken over by a secession-
ist movement in March.

Two of the three atolls were recaptured in early August,
and the British now have informed the Maldivian Government
that they are prepared to resist by force any effort to recapture
Addu Atoll from the rebels, who provide labor on the air base.
A 50-man RAF detachment from Aden is replacing a 100-man
army contingent flown in from Singapore in early August when
local British officials feared trouble. The Maldivian Govern-
ment, which earlier charged Britain with instigating the revolt,
has rebuffed British offers of mediation, and the prime minis-
ter has refused to negotiate further about the base.

24 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
