[PAGE 01]
24 August 1959
Copy No. C 53

DOCUMENT NO.
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO:
NEXT REVIEW DATE:
AUTH:
DATE:
REVIEWER:

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
24 AUGUST 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev assures Nasir he will make no Middle Eastern agree-
ments with President Eisenhower behind Nasir's back; agreement on
additional Soviet arms for UAR expected shortly.

Ulbricht meeting with Khrushchev; East German officials allegedly
fear Khrushchev will concede too much on Germany.

Hanoi broadcasts charge Saigon with involvement in Laotian situation and carry Laotian Communist call for realignment of Laotian for-
eign policy and for coalition government.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru wishes to visit Tehran after a scheduled three-day visit to Kabul
in mid-September.

Iraq--US Embassy doubts that anti-Communists or Communists feel
strong enough for coup now, but more incidents of violence could force the
hand of either.

Ethiopia--Assassination of Haile Selassie reportedly planned for 24
August.

III. THE WEST

De Gaulle, in talks with UN Secretary General, ruled out political
negotiations with Algerian rebel premier and gave no indications of
major change in France's Algerian policy.

British-Maldivian negotiations at an impasse over terms for key RAF
base on southernmost atoll.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-UAR: A personal letter from Khrushchev to Egyp-
tian President Nasir on the forthcoming trip to the United
States was delivered on 15 August by the Soviet charge in
Cairo. The Soviet premier
explained the purpose of his exchange of visits with Pres-
ident Eisenhower and offered assurances that he would make
no agreements behind Nasir's back. Khrushchev asked for
Nasir's views on probable American proposals for the Middle
East and expressed fear that President Eisenhower would sug-
gest an arms embargo for the area, opposition to which would
place the USSR in an awkward position.
Negotiations now are in progress in Moscow concerning
the supply of additional arms to the UAR, and an official agree-
ment is expected to be concluded shortly.

USSR-East Germany: East German party leader Ulbricht,
who is conferring with Khrushchev at the Black Sea resort at
Sochi on current strategy, fears that the Soviet leader may not
hold to previously agreed positions on Germany and Berlin.
Therefore, Ulbricht "intends to stay as close as possible" to
Khrushchev to keep him from wavering and may remain in the
USSR until the Soviet leader leaves for the United States. Other
East German officials also have expressed concern that Khru-
shchev may concede too much during his talks with the Pres-
ident. An East German party plenum scheduled for late August
has been postponed pending Ulbricht's return.

Laos: A statement broadcast from Hanoi on 21 August, but
attributed to a spokesman of the Laotian Communist front, calls
for the government to realign its pro-Western foreign policy and
[PAGE 05]
to set up a coalition government with Communist participa-
tion. North Vietnamese propaganda attempting to show that
Saigon is intimately linked with the Laotian crisis suggests
that Hanoi is concerned over the possibility that
has secretly agreed to send military aid to Laos.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-Afghanistan-Iran: Prime Minister Nehru is to visit
Kabul from 14 to 17 September and
has indicated his desire to visit Tehran for three days imme-
diately thereafter. This trip, which appears to be at Nehru's
initiative, probably reflects Nehru's increasing concern over
Communist long-range intentions in Asia. Greatly irritated by
Peiping's actions in Tibet and along India's Himalayan border,
Nehru now may be undertaking a personal study of the relations
of Afghanistan and Iran with the USSR.
(Page 2)

Iraq: The US Embassy reports a continuing atmosphere
of acute tension in Baghdad as a result of Qasim's efforts to
"maintain the balance" between the Communists and anti-Com-
munists. The American ambassador doubts that either anti-
Communist army officers or Communist party leaders are sure
enough of their chances of success to attempt a coup against
Qasim under present circumstances. New eruptions of violence
might, however, force the hand of either side.

there have been incidents in Sulaymaniyah Province on the east-
ern border but on nothing like the scale reported by UAR prop-
aganda.

possibility of major Communist-perpetrated disturbances in the
city of Karbala south of Baghdad during a 24-26 August Shiite re-
ligious festival there and have also reported a sharp influx of
Communists into Baghdad.
(Page 3)

24 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Ethiopia: An attempt may be made to assassinate Em-
peror Haile Selassie on 24 August when he returns to Addis
Ababa from his two-month trip abroad.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs has drawn up
a long list of persons to arrest should any trouble develop. This
report of an assassination plan may be related to earlier reports
of plotting by a group opposed to the agreements signed by the
Emperor in Moscow and Prague. Death or incapacitation of the
Emperor would probably set off a prolonged period of instabil-
ity in Ethiopia.

III. THE WEST

France-Algeria: During UN Secretary General Hammar-
skjold's recent visit to France, De Gaulle gave no indication
that he plans any major change in France's Algerian policy. He
also ruled out negotiations for a political settlement with Pre-
mier Abbas of the Provisional Algerian Government, explaining
that Abbas is without a mandate to represent the Algerians and
is too weak to control or lead them. Premier Debré, who took
a considerably tougher line during the 31 July talks with Hammar-
skjold, stated that if the UN interfered with France on the Algerian
question, France might have to walk out of the General Assembly.
(Page 4)

UK- Maldives: The present impasse between Britain and the
government of the Maldive Islands--over terms governing British
use of a key RAF base being completed on Gan Island in southern-
most Addu Atoll--could aggravate Britain's relations with India
and Ceylon and provide an issue for international Communist prop-
aganda. Britain is prepared to repulse any effort by the govern-
ment of the Maldive islands to suppress dissidents who control
Addu Atoll and provide workers for the base.
(Page 5) (Map)

24 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Situation in Laos

A Hanoi broadcast of 21 August, attributed to a spokesman of
Laos' Communist-front Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) party, called for
the creation of a coalition government with Communist participa-
tion, the realignment of Laos' pro-Western foreign policy, and a
return to the privileged position secured through the negotiations
between the Communists and the royal government which culmi-
nated in the unification settlement of November 1957. By tak-
ing this extreme position, the NLHZ is creating a climate in
which its proscription as a political party is almost inevitable.
Its line also suggests that the NLHZ is preparing to abandon le-
gal political activity in favor of guerrilla warfare.

Reports point to intensified Communist partisan operations
in northern Laos, especially in Sam Neua Province and areas of
eastern Luang Prabang Province adjacent to Sam Neua. The press
states that infiltration in Vientiane Province has forced the govern-
ment to abandon several posts. The scale of operations appears to
be smaller than is suggested by the reports, however.

North Vietnam has markedly increased its accusations that
South Vietnam is actively involved in the Laotian crisis, suggest-
ing concern over the possibility that Saigon has secretly agreed
to give military aid to Laos. Specifically Hanoi accuses Saigon of
training anti-Communist terrorists for the Laotian Government
and sending advisers to help the army, and claims that a decision
now has been reached to dispatch troops from South Vietnam. At
the very least Hanoi probably is worried that Saigon will utilize
the present crisis to increase its influence in Laos.

In another development,
has reported ru-
mors circulating in Hanoi that Premier and Foreign Minister Pham
Van Dong left North Vietnam for Communist China around 17 Au-
gust to meet President Ho Chi Minh, who has been in China since
early August, and to confer with Peiping's leaders about the Lao-
tian situation. Such action would indicate the Communist press-
ing need for close policy coordination at this time.

As a VIP flight left Hanoi for Peiping on 18 August,
and as Dong has not been reported attending any public function during
the last week, the report may be true.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru to Visit Kabul and Probably Tehran

The Iranian Embassy in New Delhi informed Tehran on
19 August that Indian Prime Minister Nehru would pay an of-
ficial visit to Kabul from 14 to 17 September and wished to
visit Tehran for three days thereafter. The embassy strongly
urged that Nehru be invited to Iran, partly to view conditions
in the country and partly because world opinion would probably
consider a visit by such an outspoken opponent of the Baghdad
Pact an indication that Nehru is changing his viewpoint.

As suggested by the Iranian Embassy, Nehru's trip may
well be motivated by his irritation over Peiping's recent be-
havior in Tibet and along India's Himalayan border. He may
desire to study the relationships of states having common bor-
ders with the USSR. Nehru's visit to Kabul should provide him
with a valuable insight into the extent of Afghanistan's economic
and military dependence on the USSR and give him an opportunity
to describe India's recent experiences with the Chinese. In Iran,
the Shah, who will almost certainly postpone a projected visit
to Jordan in order to receive Nehru, is well equipped to discuss
Soviet border tactics as well as Communist subversive activities.

Should Nehru also meet with Pakistani President Ayub in
early September, as was suggested on 22 August by both the
Indian and Pakistani press, Nehru might well return from his
trip at the end of the month with a more sympathetic understand-
ing of the area's problems. This could be reflected in Indian dip-
lomatic actions in Southeast Asia and at the Afro-Asian economic
conference now scheduled to be held in Colombo next December.

The Shah will probably welcome Nehru's visit in the hope that
it will bolster his prestige at home and abroad. The Shah may
also ask Nehru's assistance in convincing Afghanistan of the dan-
gers of close association with the Soviet bloc and in urging Kabul
to reach a settlement of the current Afghan-Iranian dispute over
distribution of the waters of the Helmand river.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Continuing Tension in Iraq

The US ambassador reports a continuing atmosphere of ap-
prehension in Baghdad. Some Western diplomats describe the
present situation, which has resulted from Qasim's efforts to
"maintain the balance" between Communists and anti-Commu-
nists, as the most explosive since the 1958 revolution which
brought Qasim to power.

There have been persistent reports of coup planning by both
the Communists and a group of high-placed anti-Communist army
officers. The American ambassador believes that Qasim's recent
actions have cost him reliable supporters in both camps but doubts
that either side has wide enough support and great enough confi-
dence of the outcome to attempt a coup under present circumstances.
The Ambassador points out that Qasim has shown shrewd ability to
retrieve difficult situations in the past and thinks that he may well
do so again. Security arrangements in Baghdad appear to be rou-
tine, according to the embassy, and there are fewer guards around
the Defense Ministry, where Qasim has his office, than for some
time past.

Nevertheless, new major eruptions of violence between Com-
munist and anti-Communist elements might force one side or the
other to choose between sacrifice of its present power position or
a precipitate attempt to seize control of the government. Violent
incidents have continued to occur sporadically in several parts of
the country and any one of these might abruptly develop into major
proportions.

major disturbances this week in the city of
Karbala south of Baghdad and have also reported a large influx of
Communists into Baghdad as a result of enforcement of anti-Com-
munist measures in several of the provinces.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Paris Shows No Signs of Changing Algerian Program

President de Gaulle told UN Secretary General Hammar-
skjold on 31 July that he has no definite plan for a "final solu-
tion" of the Algerian question. He said he was willing to accept
whatever solution "evolved" as long as it was based on a "dem-
ocratic" decision. He ruled out any negotiations on political
matters with Provisional Algerian Republic Premier Abbas, ex-
plaining that Abbas has no mandate to represent the Algerians and
is too weak to rule them if given an opportunity. De Gaulle said
he had made his policy clear and saw no reason to restate it.

The French cabinet is scheduled to review the Algerian ques-
tion 26 August, the day before De Gaulle leaves for a three-
day visit to the area. Socialist leader Mollet told an American
official on 20 August that De Gaulle has a "liberal and farsighted
outlook" on Algeria and is only seeking the means of putting his
point of view over to his cabinet, the army, the people, and the
UN.

Premier Debré, on the other hand, took a much tougher
line in his conversation with Hammarskjold. He stated that if
the UN General Assembly interfered with France on Algeria,
France might have to "cease its cooperation" with the General
Assembly. Hammarskjold understood that the threatened walk-
out would not extend to the Security Council or the UN as a whole.

Recently there have been indications that Paris intends to pre-
pare a strong case for the UN debate. Such an approach would
undoubtedly lead to renewed insistence that France's allies give
their full support.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Complete Impasse Reached in British-Maldivian Relations

Relations between Britain and the Maldives, a British-pro-
tected sultanate 400 miles southwest of Ceylon, have reached an
impasse over the terms governing Britain's use of the air base
under construction on Gan Island. This base, a key RAF stag-
ing post and an important link between the Middle East-African
area and Singapore-Australia, is located in Addu Atoll, one of
the three southern atolls which were taken over by a secession-
ist movement in March.

Two of the three atolls were recaptured in early August,
and the British now have informed the Maldivian Government
that they are prepared to resist by force any effort to recapture
Addu Atoll from the rebels, who provide labor on the air base.
A 50-man RAF detachment from Aden is replacing a 100-man
army contingent flown in from Singapore in early August when
local British officials feared trouble. The Maldivian Govern-
ment, which earlier charged Britain with instigating the revolt,
has rebuffed British offers of mediation, and the prime minis-
ter has refused to negotiate further about the base.

A Commonwealth Relations Office official has shown a com-
placent attitude toward any possible repercussions, knowing that
work on the base can continue. Britain's use of force to prevent
a government from restoring its rule to territory Britain ac-
knowledges it rightfully controls could nevertheless aggravate
its relations with India and Ceylon and be readily exploited by
international Communist propaganda.

24 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
