[PAGE 01]
20 August 1958

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Large-Scale Soviet Deliveries to Egypt

A fleet of 25 Soviet ships is due to deliver "full equipment for many factories" to the port of Alexandria shortly, according to a bloc press report. The shipment is described as "one of the greatest operations in the history of the port," and wharves at the harbor are being cleared to receive the cargoes.

The equipment is to be used in establishing industrial enterprises contracted for under the Soviet-Egyptian Economic and Technical Cooperation Agreement which was signed in Moscow on 29 January 1958. Moscow and Cairo now have concluded contracts for most of the 65 projects to be carried out by the Soviet Union under its $175,000,000 credit to Egypt. The Soviet program involves primarily assistance in developing Egyptian metallurgical, mining, and petroleum industries, but it also provides for enterprises in the chemical, food, and textile fields.

Widespread publicity for these deliveries may be designed to offset the impact of President Eisenhower's proposals for Middle East regional economic development set forth at the special session of the UN General Assembly. Moscow has followed the line of Gromyko's remarks that the proposals "require careful and suitable consideration," but must not be allowed to "divert" attention from the immediate issue of Western troop withdrawals from Lebanon and Jordan.

Cairo announced last month that about 150 Soviet experts will be employed on projects under the Soviet aid program; 70 of them were expected to arrive in July. These specialists are in addition to the more than 300 bloc technicians now engaged in Egypt on economic projects outside the aid agreement. Facilities to train Egyptian personnel are already being established by the USSR, in accordance with the January aid agreement.
[PAGE 07]
Geneva Technical Talks Nearing Completion

The Soviet and Western delegations to the Geneva conference on detecting nuclear tests have reached agreement on the two major issues--the number of control posts needed and the necessity to supplement this system with mobile inspection teams. A formal agreement will probably be signed by Thursday in Geneva, and the recommendations forwarded to the respective governments.

Moscow will probably move quickly to accept the Geneva conference recommendations, anticipating that this will give it a tactical advantage in its campaign to halt nuclear tests. The USSR probably believes that it can gain strong public support for its claim that the success of the Geneva conference binds the Western powers to stop tests despite Washington's prior disclaimers of such a commitment.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Pressure Mounting for Revision of Venezuelan
Petroleum Policy

Political pressure is mounting in Venezuela, the world's leading exporter and second-ranking producer of oil, for revision of the prevailing 50-50 profit split between the government and the foreign oil companies. The Communist-penetrated Federation of Oil Workers, one of the country's most powerful labor organizations, passed resolutions at its August convention calling for a minimum 75-percent government share in profits, general revision of the 1956-57 oil concessions for which recipient companies paid about $700,000,000 in royalties, and the establishment of a competing national oil industry. The major parties and the press have almost unanimously endorsed changes in oil policy similar to those suggested by the federation.

The caretaker governing junta has announced that it will honor existing oil agreements during its tenure, scheduled to end next April. Nevertheless, nationalistic public opinion, Venezuelan resentment of US oil import restrictions, and the debts resulting from the financial obligations inherited from the deposed Perez regime may force the interim administration to lay the groundwork for negotiating changes in the oil contracts. The influence of Middle East developments on future Venezuelan policy is suggested by the caretaker government's acceptance of an invitation to attend the Arab League Petroleum Conference in Cairo in November.

Private foreign investment in the Venezuelan petroleum industry, prior to payments for the new concessions in 1956-57, was an estimated $3.3 billion.
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Special Adviser to the President
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 11]
