EASTERN EUROPE

4. Plans reported for marked expansion of Polish Merchant Marine:

The primary objective of the Polish Merchant Marine is to expand its present 270,000 ton fleet to 600,000 tons. To achieve this goal, Poland must resort to the purchase of shipping from outside the orbit. The expanded fleet of ships is expected nearly to double the twelve ships currently plying the China trade routes.

Comment: The reorganization of the Polish Merchant Marine at the beginning of 1951, as well as increasing Soviet control over most of its activities, The Polish Merchant Marine consists of at least 59 vessels, either owned or under charter -- a 40 percent increase since September 1950. Twelve of these ships have been identified in commerce with Communist China.

There is little likelihood, however, that Poland will be able to increase the number of its ships plying Far East routes, for since June 1951, bunkering facilities have been denied Polish ships at most refueling stations. Only Socony, whose facilities are temporarily limited by the Iranian oil crisis has offered to bunker Polish ships at Port Said and Suez.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Coal trains to West Berlin are stopped by East Germans:

The Soviet-supervised East German Reichsbahn suddenly refused to permit the movement of extra coal trains to Berlin on 17 August, stating that the facilities were needed to move the harvest, and that Berlin has enough coal. These trains had been carrying over 15,000 tons of coal a week from the Ruhr to West Berlin, by agreement between the East and West Germans.

Comment: This move may be a Soviet retaliation to the West's action in bringing legal East-West German trade to a halt on 3 August. The retaliation was probably deferred until the close of the Berlin Youth Festival. In January of this year, the East Germans closed the Mittelland canal lock, through which Ruhr coal had previously moved, and since that time coal shipments to Berlin have been difficult. West Berlin has a coal stockpile sufficient for three months.
