5. Airline service between India and "Red" China under consideration:

New Delhi reports indicate that air service between India and China may be established soon. According to the plan now under consideration, an Indian company (either the Bharat or Himalayan Airline) would operate the air service and receive subsidies from the Chinese Communist Government to cover expected deficits. The Government of India is reportedly favorably inclined to this plan. The US Embassy in New Delhi nevertheless believes that the Government of India might be induced to withhold its approval if prompt representations were made by the US.

Comment: Either of the Indian companies mentioned has limited capabilities, and would need considerable support and subsidy from the Communists in order to operate over the difficult air route between the two countries. The Chinese Communists' willingness to subsidize the proposed airline indicates the value that they attach to the facilitation of air traffic between the two countries.

NEAR EAST

6. Anglo-Iranian Oil Company willing to suggest resumption of royalty advances:

The spokesman of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company's mission that is now negotiating the oil dispute with Iran has informed US Ambassador Grady that he believes the time is ripe for the AIOC to agree to advance the five million pounds recently requested by the Iranian Finance Minister. He would also favor the resumption of royalty payments, which he feels should never have been discontinued. He has informed Ambassador Grady, however, that the Iranians have now indicated that any such advance must be 20 million pounds and not five million. Grady comments that this is merely an attempt at bargain on the part of Iran.

Comment: The Iranian Government badly needs the money. The AIOC's monthly advance of two million pounds, made in accordance with an agreement with ex-Prime Minister Razmara, was discontinued in April when the Iranian Finance Minister informed the company that the sums already advanced under this agreement were considered by Iran as a settlement of past claims against the company. The Iranians may hesitate to accept the British offer unless the sum is larger than five million or unless it can be defined as a settlement of past debts.
