[PAGE 01]
20 April 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

DIA review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. USSR ANNOUNCES NEW ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY FOR
NONMILITARY USES

3. ICELANDIC POLITICIANS SEEN "CONFUSED" ON NATO
BASE PROBLEM

4. DAUD SUGGESTS US AND USSR SHARE WORK ON KABUL
AIRPORT

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. USSR ANNOUNCES NEW ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
FOR NONMILITARY USES

The creation of a Chief Directorate
for the Use of Atomic Energy puts
the Soviet program to exploit atomic
energy for peaceful purposes on a
plane more nearly equal to that of the program for nuclear
weapons production

The new chief directorate, which is at-
tached to the Council of Ministers of the USSR, is charged,
among other duties, with administering the Soviet foreign
"atoms for peace" program. Under this program, the
USSR has already concluded agreements for nuclear assist-
ance with Communist China, the European Satellites, Yugo-
slavia and Egypt. Moscow has also made overtures to India,
Pakistan and Norway.

The impetus for creation of the new organ-
ization may have arisen from a need to co-ordinate the in-
creasing number of competing military and civilian demands
made on the Soviet supply of fissionable material. The chief
directorate may also resolve at the highest administrative
levels the problems arising from the extension of atomic
energy activities into a growing number of Soviet ministries.

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. ICELANDIC POLITICIANS SEEN "CONFUSED" ON NATO
BASE PROBLEM

Danish deputy foreign minister
Christiansen, who has just returned
from a visit to Reykjavik, reports
that he found a wide range of views
among Progressive and Social Democratic politicians re-
garding the Keflavik air base. All expressed a desire to
maintain strong NATO affiliations, but revealed divergent
views on the question of the Soviet threat and the problem
of maintaining an air base without troops.

Christiansen stated that "influential"
people in Iceland want to defer action until after the June
parliamentary election, when prospects for a moderate
settlement might be better. Icelandic foreign minister
Gudmundsson is reported to have told a Danish editor that
any action is unlikely before a year and a half, and that then
the situation might be radically changed.

Comment
There is still a danger that the pres-
sures of the election campaign and wide-
spread chauvinism may force the government to take some
steps toward revision of the defense agreement with the United
States even before the June elections.

The Icelandic foreign minister is attend-
ing the semiannual meeting of Scandinavian foreign ministers
in Copenhagen, where he intends to discuss the question of the
base with his Norwegian and Danish counterparts. They can
be expected to discourage him from any drastic action.

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. DAUD SUGGESTS US AND USSR SHARE WORK ON
KABUL AIRPORT

Afghan prime minister Daud promised
on 17 April that he would personally see
to implementation of an American offer
to develop Afghanistan's aviation. Daud
told the American chargé in Kabul that the job of reconstruct-
ing the key Kabul airport had been committed "in principle"
to the Soviet Union, but offered to let the US share in its con-
struction.

The prime minister added that he has
always preferred American aid and friendship and that he
would welcome US projects even in northern Afghanistan be-
cause there must be "no zones of influence" within the country.

Daud gave every indication that he considers
Soviet assistance to be politically harmless.

Comment
Daud probably will encourage unrestricted
competition between the Soviet bloc and the
United States in the belief that expanded ties with both sides
will ensure Afghanistan's independence as well as its economic
development.

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 19 April)

Egypt and Israel agreed to enforce a
cease-fire on their borders, effective at 6 p.m. on 18 April,
according to an announcement by UN secretary general Hammar-
skjold. The agreement includes a prohibition on shooting or
movement across the demarcation line by regular or irregular
forces. While serious and immediate causes of friction should
be alleviated by this development, an atmosphere of watchful
waiting prevails.

The possibility of trouble on the Jordan border is raised by an Israeli
charge that a water pipeline near the Jordan border was blown up
in three places on 18 April, the second sabotage incident in this
sector in three days. Meanwhile, Jordan claimed a member of
the Home Guard was killed in a clash with an Israeli patrol inside
Jordan.

Tel Aviv, despite the release of a small number of individuals
from active duty, units called up during last week's crisis have
not been demobilized. Roadblocks and patrols remain in effect.

The immediate public reaction in Israel to
the Soviet announcement of readiness to assist in efforts toward
an Arab-Israeli peace was mixed, according to the American em-
bassy in Tel Aviv. While there was some guarded hope that the
development represented a break in recent Soviet support of the
Arabs, and favored prospects for peace, most comment favored
reservation of judgment pending concrete evidence of Soviet good
faith.

The Egyptian press hailed the Soviet state-
ment as further isolating British policy in the Near East and

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9

[PAGE 10]
countering prospects for unilateral Western intervention in the
Near East crisis. The reaction among Palestine Arab refugees,
however, was unfavorable. Refugee leaders in Lebanon charac-
terized the statement as a "stab in the back" and accused the
USSR of deceit. Members of the Lebanese parliamentary for-
eign affairs committee also expressed dissatisfaction with the
statement since it recognized the existence of Israel. The Syrian
minister of defense also criticized the statement, commenting
that the great powers should realize that the Palestine question
is the concern of the Arabs alone.

Aviv, all 12 of the Mystere IV jet fighters from France now appear
to have arrived in Israel.

20 Apr 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
