East Germany Completes Most of Steps to Facilitate
Interzonal Trade

On 24 April 1958 the East Germans imposed an additional tax of about 70 cents a ton, based on carrying capacity, on West German and West Berlin barges using East German waterways. They explained that West Germany's construction of a dam on the Elbe River near Hamburg would necessitate extensive work on adjacent East German waterways to regulate the water level. The East German decision to abolish these additional tolls on 1 May was announced on 20 April, thus, in effect, meeting a West German deadline; Bonn had threatened to take retaliatory measures unless East Germany moved to reduce the tolls by 21 April. The smaller original tax for barges using East German rivers and canals and locks on these waterways will be continued.

In announcing the abolition of this tax, Neues Deutschland alleged on 21 April that the West German Government had pledged that further work on the Elbe River dam would not result in changes in East German waterways. The West Berlin press notes, however, that revenue from the increased barge tolls has amounted to approximately $17,500,000--considerably in excess of the $12,500,000 originally asked by the East Germans in 1958 as damages and costs to offset the rise in the Elbe water level after construction of the dam.

One other technical concession remains to be negotiated: that is to determine how much Bonn must pay for badly needed repair work on a bridge on the southern Autobahn near Hof. So far, East Germany's compliance with the terms of its December commitments has been secured only by Bonn's delay in delivering certain products badly needed by the East Germans.

Meanwhile, Neues Deutschland on 24 April attacked West Germany for interfering with interzonal trade, notably because it has issued revocable licenses for certain products exchanged under the trade pact. Such licenses, it alleged, cause "unbearable insecurity" in the execution of East German commercial contracts with West German firms. The editorial also declared

3 May 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
