10. Austrian Foreign Minister looks with favor upon reopening of treaty talks:
Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber has welcomed the US suggestion that negotiations be resumed on the Austrian treaty, on the grounds that the continuity of four-power treaty efforts should not be interrupted altogether. He believes that there is not at present any urgency for a meeting of the deputies, but that it might be important to hold a session in September, depending on developments of the next few weeks.

Comment: In June of this year Gruber hoped for agreement on the Austrian treaty at a Big Four meeting, and therefore regarded the deputies' sessions as unnecessary. Now, with no prospect of a Big Four meeting, Gruber has changed his attitude.

11. Soviet motives in Berlin trade restrictions:
US officials in Berlin feel that the success of Soviet restrictions on Berlin trade, which were originally related to immediate problems, may have influenced the USSR to continue the restrictions as a means to wider economic and political objectives. These officials foresee a tenacious Soviet campaign to retain and develop the present harassing restrictions, and estimate that the USSR could resist the effect of present and proposed Allied economic countermeasures for another two months. If, however, broader objectives appear feasible, the USSR would be willing to persist much longer.

Comment: The use of a limited air lift to relieve the large backlog of stalled goods is in prospect, and some commercial air freight shipments on a small scale have already been made. Nevertheless, a firm Allied stand on the issue continues to be delayed by French reluctance to extend present countermeasures for fear that the "bluff would be called" by the USSR. Present countermeasures now include the refusal to approve the new interzonal trade pact and the institution of partial embargo of shipments to East Germany. French officials fear that Allied countermeasures will so discourage the USSR over the possibility of a restoration of normal trade that it will be willing to incur the economic loss involved
