[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
10 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev's foreign travel plans mark intensification of his "personal diplomacy". 1

II. ASIA-AFRICA
India Government negotiating with British firms for purchase of ground-to-air guided missiles and long-range radar. 2
Indonesia--Growing differences reported between President Sukarno and Army Chief of Staff Nasution. 3
Burma--U Nu states he will continue Ne Win government's domestic and foreign policies. 4
Iraqi Communist party "orthodox" faction suffers setback in effort to achieve legal status; splinter faction licensed. 5

III. THE WEST
Cypriot independence indefinitely postponed following stalemate in negotiations over size of British bases. 6
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Premier Khrushchev's travel plans--his 20-day Asian trip beginning today, French trip in March, and the summit in May--offer ample opportunity for the personal diplomacy which has characterized the Soviet leader's conduct of foreign policy. Khrushchev also has accepted an invitation to visit Guinea, and probably would like to extend this trip, which is unlikely to take place before midsummer, to include Ghana, Ethiopia, and some of the newly independent African states. He may well include at least stopovers in Cairo and Baghdad. While these visits are designed to expand foreign contacts and project a favorable image of the USSR in these areas, Moscow probably also hopes partially to offset the impact of President Eisenhower's recent trips.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India: The Indian Government has been negotiating with British firms for the purchase of "Bloodhound" ground-to-air guided missiles and long-range radar equipment. Indian defense officials, who reportedly set aside funds for such equipment last year, evidently feel that as a result of the increased Chinese Communist military threat along the northern frontier India's air-defense capabilities must be strengthened. Nehru told Congress party legislators on 8 February that more would have to be spent on defense because of the Sino-Indian dispute, and was quoted by party sources as saying the government could no longer afford to postpone purchase of certain defense equipment.

i
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia: Several reports are circulating in Indonesia of growing differences between President Sukarno and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution. Sukarno is said to be considering further steps, including cabinet changes, to diminish the army's political influence, possibly by granting a few more concessions to the Communists. Such developments would be in line with Sukarno's usual tactics aimed at preventing either the army or the Communists from becoming too powerful. These reports apparently stem both from Sukarno's recent moves to re-emphasize the civilian role in government and from the continuing efforts of Communists and possibly other leftists to prejudice Sukarno against the chief of staff.

Burma: U Nu, the prospective premier, has stated that he plans to maintain the Ne Win government's domestic and international policies. Although his party's popular and parliamentary majority is overwhelming, he says that he favors two-party democracy in Burma and that the "Stable" party opposition provides a non-Communist alternative to the Communist-dominated National United Front, which won almost one third of the popular vote in 1956 but has made an inconsequential showing thus far in the current balloting. U Nu plans to continue the American aid projects in Burma, but prefers loans to grants. Recognizing General Ne Win's supra-political stature, U Nu notes that, should his government again become inefficient and corrupt, "there is the possibility of the army's taking over again."

Iraq: The "orthodox" faction of the Iraqi Communist party has suffered a setback in its efforts to achieve legal status as a political party. The party's application was not accepted by the Interior Ministry, probably at Qasim's orders, ostensibly because of objections to the phraseology in the application form. After complying with the ministry's objections, the party resubmitted its application. However, the Qasim regime may interpose further objections in an effort to give a boost to the Communist splinter faction led by Daud Sayigh, whose application, along with those of the National Democratic and Kurdish parties, reportedly has been approved.

10 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Cyprus: The 8 February announcement of the indefinite postponement of Cypriot independence, which had been scheduled for 19 March, follows a breakdown in negotiations between British and Cypriot representatives. The major stumbling block is the question of size of the two bases Britain wishes to retain. Archbishop Makarios apparently feels he can win further concessions which he believes are needed to pacify his critics on Cyprus. There is little likelihood of a renewal of widespread violence, but a prolonged stalemate will result in new bitterness toward Britain by both Greek and Turkish Cypriots and possibly in occasional acts of violence.

10 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Serious Differences Reported Between Sukarno and Indonesian
Chief of Staff

Reports have circulated in Indonesia for several weeks that there are growing differences between President Sukarno and Army Chief of Staff Nasution. Sukarno is said to be considering cabinet changes, to be effected some time after early March, which would diminish the army's political influence and reduce the power of General Nasution, who is also minister of defense. Sukarno may be planning the inclusion of Communists in his cabinet.

These reports apparently stem both from Sukarno's recent moves to re-emphasize the civilian role in government and from the persistent efforts of Communists and possibly other leftists to prejudice Sukarno against Nasution. Other contributing factors are Sukarno's recent appointments of Communists to regional posts and his long-standing policy of keeping any one element from becoming powerful enough to challenge his own position.

First Minister Djuanda told the American ambassador in late January that cabinet shifts are expected in the near future, but that there was "absolutely nothing" to press stories of disagreement between Sukarno and Nasution. Colonel Sukendro, deputy army chief of staff for special affairs, told the American army attaché on 4 February that although Sukarno and Nasution disagreed on major issues, he did not feel their differences were serious.

Although firm evidence is lacking to support or refute the reports, Sukarno clearly is emphasizing a gradual return to civilian authority from Indonesia's three-year "state of war" as well as occasional political concessions to the Communists, which will probably include attempts to bring them into the cabinet. Regardless of Sukarno's motives, his actions probably will diminish the influence of the anti-Communist Indonesian Army.

10 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
U Nu Plans Continuation of Current Burmese Policies

Former Premier Nu says that when he resumes the premiership in April he plans to continue the domestic and foreign policies of Premier Ne Win. He has stated that he will continue the American grant-aid projects for university and highway construction, although he believes that grants undermine, rather than build, relations between recipient and donor. He says he approves Ne Win's border agreement and friendship treaty with Communist China and expects no difficulty in completing the final boundary treaty.

Nu plans to continue Ne Win's domestic reforms and intends no negotiations or new amnesty offers to the Communists or ethnic insurgent groups. He plans no coalition with his former deputies in the "Stable" party but hopes, instead, that it will become the loyal opposition in parliament. However, this elected none of its leaders and is expected to have a maximum of only 30 members in the 250-seat lower house of parliament, while the "Clean" party and affiliates will have about 200 seats. Before the Anti-fascist People's Freedom League split into "Clean" and "Stable" factions, the Communist-dominated National United Front, which drew one third of the popular vote in 1956, was the only alternative, but in these elections it has made an inconsequential showing.

In the past, Nu's frequently expressed good intentions were not matched by his government's performance, and he proved himself an inefficient administrator who failed to check corruption in his regime. In addition, Nu has been less wary of relations with the bloc than is Ne Win. He concedes that if this government has faults of his last one, "there is the possibility that the army may take over again."

10 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Iraqi Political Parties

The Iraqi Interior Ministry has reportedly accepted the applications for legal status of three political parties, including a Communist splinter faction led by Daud Sayigh, but has sent back the original application of the orthodox Iraqi Communist party for revision.

Rejection of the orthodox Communists' application, probably on Qasim's orders, was based on use of the word "revolutionary" to describe the party; the ministry also demanded an explanation of the term "Marxism-Leninism." The application has now been resubmitted, omitting the word "revolutionary" --now apparently pre-empted by Qasim to describe his own regime--and describing Marxism-Leninism not as a dogma but a scientific theory guiding the party.

Iraqi law gives the Ministry of Interior another 30 days to accept or reject the revised application, and in any event, parties do not attain full legal status until their programs have been published in the official gazette. The Qasim regime may continue to interpose obstacles to discredit the orthodox faction and thus boost the faction led by Sayigh, who has a long record of deviation from the party and has been preaching an Iraqi brand of Communism much closer to Qasim's view of what the Iraqi Communists should be.

Applications for licenses by the socialistic National Democratic party and the United Democratic party of Kurdistan have met with no objection during the 30 days since they were made. Sayigh's splinter group, despite the withdrawal of several founding members, has called for a "National Front." If the orthodox Communists eventually are denied a license they may attempt to take over the Sayigh faction, which has little organization or following. In any case, the Iraqi Communists cannot be considered as seriously weakened.

10 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Cyprus

British termination on 8 February of talks in Nicosia with Cypriot officials and its unilateral postponement of independence for Cyprus for an indefinite period beyond 19 March have been criticized by both Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders. Greek Cypriots continue to back Archbishop Makarios on the size of the military bases to be retained by Britain after independence. Turkish Cypriot newspapers have expressed considerable apprehension of a return to violence on the island.

While the latest postponement will create new bitterness on Cyprus, it is unlikely to lead to widespread unrest unless the British fire Cypriot laborers working on British bases or apply other economic pressure. If the deadlock is protracted, however, individual acts of violence cannot be precluded.

Except for the extent of the bases, recent negotiations have largely resolved outstanding problems--such as administration of the base areas and financial aid to Cyprus from Britain. On these issues, London has made substantial concessions since mid-January.

Makarios apparently hopes that the difficulties created for the local British administration by changes in the timetable for independence will help him obtain further concessions. British officials, however, particularly military leaders, have refused to consider a further reduction in the total of about 120 square miles they demand for the bases.

10 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
STAT
