West German Socialist Leaders Approve Brandt Candidacy

The executive committee of the Social Democratic party (SPD) on 19 July endorsed West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt as the party's new standard-bearer and chancellor candidate in the 1961 West German national election. The committee also named a shadow cabinet which--along with Brandt's candidacy--must be formally ratified at the SPD national convention in November. These actions--so far in advance of the convention--suggest that the Social Democrats feel it may take some time to convince the German electorate of the sincerity of their new foreign policy line supporting a strong Germany in NATO. The shadow cabinet represents a good cross-section of the party, both ideologically and geographically, and is probably intended to assure the voter that all shades of opinion will receive consideration in a new government. The principal weakness of the previous leadership was its inflexibility and devotion to narrow class doctrines.

Brandt's nomination also indicates that he and Deputy Chairman Herbert Wehner have joined forces to control the party. So far they reportedly have been able to quell rank-and-file opposition to their course.

Wehner's recent pronouncements on foreign policy were closely coordinated with Brandt in every detail. He also stated that Wehner has endeavored to work closely with Brandt and is extremely careful to avoid clashing with him. Wehner's strong support of Brandt is prompted by his belief that the SPD's only hope of winning in 1961 lies in having the dynamic young mayor as party standard-bearer.

One of Brandt's close advisers, the Berlin Senate's representative in Bonn, Guenter Klein, has raised the question of whether Brandt can return to Berlin as mayor should he fail to win the chancellorship. Klein feels this would be difficult because Brandt would have become too deeply committed in West German politics to withdraw, and that if he did withdraw and return to West Berlin, Wehner would probably gain control of the party and become its leading contender for chancellor in 1965.
