[PAGE 01]
14 April 1951
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

USSR

1. Collective farms buying milk in order to meet deliveries under the plan
(page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Sino-Viet Minh action predicted (page 4).

NEAR EAST

3. Iranian Prime Minister anxious about current situation (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Possible intensification of Soviet effort to weaken Austrian police (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
USSR

1. Collective farms buying milk in order to meet deliveries under the plan:

Comment: Collective farms deliver their produce to the Ministry of Procurement, which in turn allots it to consumers, including cooperative stores. In this case, the farms would have had to buy more than twice the amount of milk they produce and then turn it over to the State, in order to meet deliveries under the plan. This practice (which may be an isolated instance) produces plan fulfillment on paper, despite inadequate supplies.
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

2. Sino-Viet Minh action predicted:

Viet Minh plans to launch a limited offensive before 20 April against the northern line of the French defense perimeter in Tonkin. The attacking force will include 2,000 Chinese Communist troops and will attempt to cut French supply lines. Other action, probably in the nature of feints, will be undertaken west of Hanoi and along the Tonkin coast.

Meanwhile, French officers in northwest Tonkin have told the US Military Attache that the column which crossed the northwest border two weeks ago consists of one battalion of trained Chinese troops, which are either provincial or regular Chinese Communist forces or Chinese Nationalists retreating before Chinese Communist forces. Elements of a Viet Minh regiment have been identified nearby, and the US Military Attache is therefore inclined to interpret the incursion as part of a joint Chinese Communist-Viet Minh effort to divert French troops from the Delta defenses.

Comment: that the Viet Minh is planning a series of minor attacks on the northern perimeter of the Delta, but no evidence is available to indicate definitely that the Chinese Communists would commit a small force in a limited action so near the center of French control in Tonkin. A Chinese Communist broadcast of 11 April charging the French and puppet troops with repeated intrusions into Chinese territory might be used to justify the presence of Chinese Communist troops in Indochina. A joint plan, which included the threat of Chinese Communist operations in northwest Tonkin and was designed to disperse French forces and to affect French morale, is quite plausible; a French force of more than battalion strength has already been transferred by air from the Delta to confront the incursion across the border.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST

3. Iranian Prime Minister anxious about current situation:

Iranian Prime Minister Ala has told US Ambassador Grady that members of the Majlis are disturbed about the current US-UK discussions in Washington and fear that the US might be induced to join the UK in forcing a solution to the problem of oil nationalization. He added that the Shah and the Iranian Government are disturbed by reports that the British are stirring up tribes in the south against Tehran and may even go so far as to supply them with arms. The government has reportedly also heard rumors to the effect that the British may send troops into Abadan if they think that the oil company's properties are in danger. Prime Minister Ala stated that such action might serve as an appropriate excuse for the USSR to move into Azerbaijan under the 1921 USSR-Iranian treaty. Ambassador Grady outlines what he believes to be the UK solution to the present difficulties, (i. e., dissolution of the Majlis, the appointment of Seyid Zia as Prime Minister, and government by decree for an indefinite period while the oil issue is settled) and states that radical political moves should be discouraged as long as Ala continues to make the progress he is making.

Comment: For some time, the Iranian Government has feared British intrigue among the southern tribes, particularly because the UK has traditionally attempted to consolidate its position with these once-independent tribes as an additional protection for its oil installations.
[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Possible intensification of Soviet effort to weaken Austrian police:

Comment: Soviet attempts to neutralize or control Austrian police officers, particularly those in Vienna, have been intensified in recent months. The sudden dismissals of Communist police in late March afforded the Soviet element with an excellent opportunity for an attempt to intimidate or "pack" the east zone police. Such efforts, however, have occurred periodically during the Soviet occupation and this latest attempt is probably part of a long-range Soviet effort, rather than one aimed at precipitating an immediate showdown with the government.
