[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

8 February 1960

Copy No. C

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Indonesia: Peiping is following up its promise, made in a People's Daily editorial of 27 January, to send ships to Indonesia to bring back Overseas Chinese who want to leave as a result of anti-Chinese measures. Four chartered ships have left Canton for Djakarta, and additional passenger vessels will be diverted from other runs to carry returnees as far as Hong Kong. Although only a few hundred Chinese had left Indonesia up to the end of January, a monthly exodus of several thousand is expected after completion of transportation arrangements by late February.

Communist China - USSR: The speech to the Warsaw Pact conference by the senior Chinese Communist observer, Kang Sheng, reflects Peiping's continuing reservations about Khrushchev's policy of detente with the West. While expressing perfunctory approval of "peaceful coexistence" as a basis for bloc foreign policy, Kang indicated doubt about the possibility of any real East-West understanding and said that the United States' actions "fully prove that its imperialist nature cannot be changed." He explicitly extended Peiping's 21 January refusal to be bound by any international disarmament agreement to include "all other international agreements." The Chinese clearly desire participation in world councils, but it is unlikely that this statement is intended as a bid for Chinese attendance at the 10-nation disarmament conference in March or at the summit in May. In claiming that Chinese Communist armed forces are now "less than half their original size," Kang suggested that Peiping is not considering reductions of these forces.

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Venezuela: The Venezuelan Government has requested an emergency meeting of the Organization of American States (OAS) on 8 February to consider Dominican activities in the Caribbean. This action is likely to encourage the already strong opposition to Trujillo among the Dominican people. Venezuelan President Betancourt holds the Dominican dictator partly responsible for the plotting and terrorism which recently has plagued the Venezuelan regime. Venezuelan charges against Trujillo at the OAS meeting are expected to include "incendiary" radio broadcasts, aid to conspirators, infiltration of "mercenaries" into Venezuela, and flagrant violation of human rights within the Dominican Republic.

8 Feb 60
DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping to Repatriate Overseas Chinese From Indonesia

Peiping is following up its promise, made in a People's Daily editorial of 27 January, to send ships to Indonesia to bring back Overseas Chinese who want to leave as a result of anti-Chinese measures. Four chartered ships--the Heinrich Jessen, the Hoi Wong, the Taipochong, and the Fook On--have left Canton for Djakarta, and additional passenger vessels will be diverted from other runs to carry returnees as far as Hong Kong. These arrangements are probably intended to demonstrate to Chinese residents throughout Southeast Asia that they will not be neglected by their motherland.

Although only a few hundred Chinese had left Indonesia up to the end of January, a monthly exodus of 10,000 to 12,000 is expected after completion of transportation arrangements by late February, according to the US Army attaché in Djakarta. Indonesian Army sources estimate that no more than 300,000 of Indonesia's 3,000,000 Chinese residents will want to return to Communist China. An Indonesian official has commented that even if a million were to return there would still be too many remaining.

The Chinese Communist Embassy in Djakarta is reported to have stated that the bulk of the returnees will be settled in Fukien Province. Other sources indicate that some will go to estate farms on Hainan Island off the coast of Kwangtung Province. Chinese Communist authorities are apparently attempting to create a favorable impression on returnees by providing elaborate facilities for their reception.

8 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
