[PAGE 01]
7 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
American officials in Hong Kong feel basic Communist motive in Sino-Indian border and Laotian situations is to reverse setbacks of the past year.
Soviet ambassador returning to Tehran; USSR may have decided to relax propaganda pressure on Iran. (TOP SECRET DAUNT)
USSR--Tyura Tam Missile Test Range activity on 6 September.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Communist pressure increasing in Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces; South Vietnam and Thailand not yet prepared to intervene openly in Laos.
India - Communist China: no Chinese Communist border intrusions since 26 August (TOP SECRET DAUNT); Dalai Lama may go to UN.
Japan--Kishi fears effects of visit to Peiping by former Prime Minister Ishibashi.
UAR propaganda charges Moscow with interference in UAR internal affairs.
Algerian rebels investigating possibility of hospitalizing their wounded in the US.

III. THE WEST
Belgian Government weakened by dispute over Congo independence issue.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China: American officials in Hong Kong speculate that a basic motive of the Communists in the Sino-Indian border and Laotian situations is to reverse setbacks in the past year which were greater than they are willing to accept. Increased Chinese military activity on the Sino-Indian border stems in part from a determination to consolidate Communist control over Tibet--an intention particularly evident in mop-up operations against Khamba rebels north of Assam. Communist activity in the Laotian situation, the officials feel, is an effort to restore losses sustained at the time of Vientiane's expulsion of the Pathet Lao from the government.

The officials discount the possibilities that the current tension in Asia is (1) part of a bloc effort to provide Khrushchev with a bargaining lever in his talks with President Eisenhower, (2) a deliberate Chinese move to embarrass the USSR because of China's opposition to an East-West rapprochement, or (3) a Chinese-sponsored external diversion for domestic purposes.

USSR-Iran: Khrushchev's remarks to the Iranian ambassador may indicate that the USSR has decided to relax the intensive propaganda pressure against the Iranian Government which followed the break-off of the Soviet-Iranian talks on a nonaggression pact last February.

Khrushchev said Soviet Ambassador Pegov--absent from his post since 20 March--"must return to Iran at once." Soviet officials previously had insisted that Tehran must take the initiative toward improving relations. The Iranian ambassador, who will return home to report directly to the Shah on his talk, recommended that nothing be done about confirming the 1927 Soviet-Iranian treaty until Pegov returns and Soviet propaganda attacks are halted.
[PAGE 05]
USSR: the Soviet Union probably attempted to launch a space vehicle from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range on 6 September 1959, with an intended time of launch of about 0100 GMT (2100 EDT, 5 September). The operations were abruptly canceled for undetermined reasons some two to three hours prior to scheduled launch.

The intended time of launch coincided with the time estimated to be optimum for launching a lunar probe vehicle. The next few days are still considered to be within the acceptable period for the USSR to make a new attempt. The time of attempted launch and the optimum time for launching a lunar probe may have been only coincidental, and the possibility of other types of space ventures should not be excluded.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: There are continuing reports that Communist pressure is increasing in both Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces. (South Vietnamese and Thai officials have indicated that neither is prepared at this time to intervene openly in Laos without US backing, but their views may change if the situation continues to worsen. Saigon, however, probably would like to introduce some forces and materiel into southern Laos covertly. Vientiane is holding in abeyance appeals to SEATO and the US for active military support, in case its request for UN intervention fails) The chief of the North Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's Information Department stated on 5 September that Vientiane's request for a UN Emergency Force is an "American move to interfere more deeply in Laos and prepare war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam."

India - Communist China: (There are press reports that the people of Ladakh and Sikkim are becoming panicky. An Indian message of 3 September, however, states that there have been)
[PAGE 06]
Gno Chinese Communist military intrusions into Indian territory since 26 August.)

(In an apparently conciliatory move toward Nepal, Peiping has invited representatives to Lhasa to discuss continuance of traditional trade. Peiping appears anxious to minimize the seriousness of the frontier situation. The staff of a Hong Kong newspaper reportedly has been told that publication of any stories on India's northeast frontier must await a formal statement from Peiping; tension over Sikkim and Bhutan was an "unfortunate mix-up" and not a prelude to hostilities.)

The bloc's first extensive comment on the situation is a Prague broadcast of 4 September which denies Indian charges of Chinese "territorial expansionism" and states that Premier Chou En-lai views negotiations as the "only means" for solving border questions.

(The Indian Parliament on 4 September turned down a resolution suggesting that India raise the Tibetan issue in the United Nations. The Dalai Lama, who is still seeking a sponsor, has indicated that he will go to New York personally to plead his cause if necessary. Although the Dalai Lama cannot officially present a case in the UN, he probably could get an unofficial hearing as a world religious leader.)

Japan: (Ambassador MacArthur reports that Prime Minister Kishi is clearly worried over the proposed trip to Peiping by former Prime Minister Ishibashi--particularly its effect on Japanese policy toward Communist China. Since the visit is primarily to "make headlines," Kishi is virtually certain that Ishibashi, on his return, will make harmful proposals urging closer economic and cultural ties with Peiping. He also fears that Ishibashi, who is in bad health, will be easily)

UAR-USSR: The controlled UAR press and radio have accused Pravda and Moscow radio of a "flagrant intervention" in the internal affairs of the UAR. These charges stem from recent Moscow rebroadcasts of anti-UAR articles in the Iraqi Communist press. Damascus radio threatened to retaliate by republishing Khrushchev's "eloquent and fluent admissions of crimes committed against humanity" during the Stalin regime--apparently a
[PAGE 07]
reference to Khrushchev's secret speech at the 20th party congress in February 1956. UAR propaganda has also accused the Soviet Union of an attempt to isolate Iraq from the other Arab countries and of encouraging Communist agents in the Arab world. These renewed public recriminations, the first since last March, apparently have been brought about by Communist criticism of the UAR's continuing anti-Communist campaign.

Algeria: The Algerian rebels are investigating the possibility of sending seriously wounded soldiers to the United States for hospitalization, according to an intercepted rebel message. The Algerian spokesman at the UN has reportedly been contacted by a representative of "an American veterans' organization" who would assist in obtaining hospitalization in either the United States or Western Europe. The European satellites and more recently the USSR have accepted groups of Algerian wounded; similar action by the US, however, would be strongly opposed by France.

III. THE WEST

Belgium: The resignation of Congo Minister van Hemelrijck, which followed the refusal of the cabinet to approve his plan for a rapid evolution of self-government in the Belgian Congo, has further weakened the shaky Social Christian-Liberal party coalition of Premier Eyskens. Friction within the coalition over various issues has been growing since its formation in November 1958, and Eyskens adjourned Parliament in early July to avert a coalition crisis. The opposition Socialist party, which favors a more liberal Congo policy, is trying to exploit the resignation and may decide to push for new parliamentary elections.
[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 09]
