LATE ITEM

*International Communism: Although full analysis depends upon receipt of the complete text, judging from the 4,000-word Soviet summary, the 20,000-word statement which was hammered out in the three-week-long meeting of world Communist leaders in Moscow in November, seems to represent a tactical accord to present a facade of unity despite continuing evidence of Sino-Soviet disagreement. In dealing with the fundamental issues in dispute between the Soviet and Chinese parties, the summary suggests that the statement in most cases either contrives awkward formulations which conjoins the Soviet and Chinese positions on a given issue or relies on ambiguities which blur or evade the issue.

The summary reaffirms a number of positions which the Soviet and Chinese parties have long agreed on. It reiterates confidence in the growing strength of the Communist world and the comparable disintegration of capitalism. It denounces imperialism in general, with specific emphasis on American imperialism, and condemns Western policies everywhere as aggressive. In contrast, the world Communist movement is presented as a unified behind the concept of "peaceful coexistence," but the summary does not indicate whether the Soviet or Chinese interpretation of this concept is to prevail. For example, the summary reiterates the long-standing Sino-Soviet agreement that general war can be averted, but it does not deal with the disagreement on the important question of whether, as the Chinese contend, local wars should be expected and even, at times, encouraged. Similarly, the summary blurs the questions of policy toward the governments of underdeveloped countries and the "liberation" movements there. The summary is very ambiguous on the key question of discipline of the world Communist movement--permitting the Soviet party to continue to condemn "dogmatism and sectarianism" as a serious danger and the Chinese party to attack "revisionism" under the guise of denouncing Yugoslavia.

The statement reaffirms the adherence of all parties to the declaration written at the conclusion of a similar meeting in Moscow in 1957, and even uses that declaration as a framework for the discussion.

The 1957 declaration, however, was in fact relied upon by both Moscow and Peiping, emphasizing differing formulations in the declaration, in support of their differing positions on both domestic and foreign policy. Soviet and Chinese editorial interpretation of this latest statement should soon make clear whether--as seems likely--Moscow and Peiping will again present their agreement differently.
