Moscow Secures Cambodian Support on
International Questions

In a joint communiqué published on 3 December following discussions between Prince Sihanouk and Soviet officials in the USSR, Moscow succeeded in identifying long-standing Cambodian positions with Soviet views on foreign policy. Agreement was expressed on the necessity for universal disarmament, the admission of Communist China and Mongolia into the United Nations, and the need to adapt the UN to the "new conditions" which exist. Only Sihanouk's support for Khrushchev's plan to modify the UN structure is a new position for Cambodia. The statement, capitalizing on Sihanouk's apprehensions over the critical Laotian situation, also advocated support for the Souvanna Phouma regime.

While no mention was made of Sihanouk's hopes for a Cambodian-Laotian neutral zone, the anti-Western flavor of the communiqué contained in such expressions as "concern over foreign intervention" in Laos and a call for the liquidation of military bases on foreign soil appears to bear out other indications that Cambodia's relations with the West are again cooling. Sihanouk's position may be partly influenced by his desire for bloc assistance in financing Cambodia's ambitious five-year development plan, for which about a third of the cost is being sought from foreign sources.

The communiqué included a Soviet offer to construct as a gift a technical school in Cambodia, a project previously suggested by Sihanouk to the US for US consideration. The statement indicates that the USSR responded favorably to Sihanouk's overtures for increased economic assistance and that it is probably ready to extend credit and technical aid for specific projects which may be discussed in future talks. Moscow's only aid project in Cambodia is a gift hospital which was completed according to schedule last August. Sihanouk will probably play up domestically the USSR's response to his overtures and may make similar requests for assistance, including aid for his proposed Phnom Penh - Sihanoukville railroad, during his visit to Peiping.
