Laos: A showdown may be approaching between Captain Kong Le and the Souvanna Phouma government following Kong Le's apparent refusal to abide by the cease-fire reached between Souvanna's military commanders and General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. While Souvanna has publicly rebuked Kong Le, his ability to bring Kong Le into line is still open to serious question.
(Page 2)

Morocco-France: Moroccan Acting Deputy Premier Abdelkhalek Torres--the ranking executive in Morocco in the absence of both the King and the crown prince--reportedly will order military action against the French Army in Algeria if alleged recent border violations continue. Torres is said to have the King's permission for such extreme action if necessary. Torres is reported to believe that a Moroccan military counteraction would create an international incident on the basis of which Morocco could request the intervention of UN forces. Such intervention is the avowed aim of the Algerian rebels and seems to be the motive underlying Tunisian President Bourguiba's interest in "close union" of the Tunisian and Algerian rebel governments. (Page 4)

Republic of the Congo: Katanga President Tshombé's refusal on 30 September to attend the forthcoming political round-table conference in Leopoldville appears designed to emphasize Katanga's political independence of the Congo. In Leopoldville, Mobutu is continuing his efforts to discredit Lumumba by emphasizing the ousted premier's dependence on foreign support. However, his charge that Lumumba successfully solicited a loan from Communist China is unsubstantiated.

Lumumba continues to have the active support of UAR, Ghanaian, and Guinean representatives in the Congo.

instructed the UAR ambassador to urge that Lumumba "emphasize that he is prime minister, especially while the General Assembly is in session, by making a large number of declarations, statements, and press conferences and other similar acts within his power."

Lumumba reportedly told the press yesterday he would not
1 Oct 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
