[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
18 October 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 03]
SUMMARY

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]FAR EAST
1. China receives heavy power plant equipment from the USSR (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. General Nagib states opposition to Moslem Brotherhood (page 3).
3. Socialists reportedly plan armed revolt in Syria (page 4).
4. Communist strength and activity in Iraq increasing[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
5. Yugoslavia presents bleak picture of food needs (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. France opposes Austrian Foreign Minister's visit to Bonn (page 5).
7. De Gasperi expected to make strong pronouncement on Trieste issue (page 6).
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

1. China receives heavy power plant equipment from the USSR:

Comment: There has been little evidence of imports of heavy power plant equipment from the USSR. The shipments mentioned suggest that a significant increase in China's power-generating capacity is taking place, probably in Manchuria. The latter area's power supply was reduced one fourth by the UN bombing of the Suiho power plant in June.

NEAR EAST -- AFRICA

2. General Nagib states opposition to Moslem Brotherhood:

General Nagib has expressed his opposition to the Moslem Brotherhood, which he labelled "fanatic." Nagib also would place Egypt on the side of the West because it was impossible to be neutral in the present world situation.

Comment: This is the first clear-cut statement of opposition to the anti-Western Moslem Brotherhood attributed directly to Nagib, whose relationship to the Brotherhood is a highly controversial issue. The views expressed are generally consistent with Nagib's current conduct of foreign affairs.
[PAGE 05]
3. Socialists reportedly plan armed revolt in Syria:

Akram Hawrani, leader of the Arab Socialist Party of Syria, is planning with other parties an armed revolt against Colonel Shishakli's military regime, which the Socialists believe is weak and ready to fall. The revolt is to begin with a student strike and demonstration on 1 November, to be followed shortly by armed resistance.

Comment: There is no other evidence of any Hawrani-sponsored coup. Although Shishakli can probably still deal effectively with any disorders that may develop, he is aware of increasing opposition and appears anxious to return the cloak of constitutional government to Syria. Shishakli's emissaries had made repeated attempts at a reconciliation with the politically powerful Hawrani. Hawrani refused to collaborate unless Shishakli withdrew completely from political activity and permitted him a free hand to implement his reform program.

4. Communist strength and activity in Iraq increasing:

Factions within the party are now coordinated, and are concentrating their efforts on recruiting students. The present strength of the Iraqi Communist Party is estimated at 12,000.
[PAGE 06]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Comment: The Communist Party has been outlawed in Iraq since 1938. However, in 1947 a well-organized covert party was discovered and suppressed. The activities described in this report closely follow the pattern of operations of other Soviet missions[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Yugoslavia presents bleak picture of food needs:

According to an official report presented to the American Embassy, the Yugoslav Government needs to import 1,180,000 tons of grain and is unable to pay for 680,000 tons of this total. The report shows corn production as only 71 percent of that in the drought year of 1950, and only 37 percent of that in the normal year of 1951.

Comment: The need, as presented, is approximately 2.5 times the amount received under the 1950 food aid program. From available information, both the crop loss and the import needs are much exaggerated in the Yugoslav figures, with even the government's own previous figures showing a far less pessimistic picture.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. France opposes Austrian Foreign Minister's visit to Bonn:

The French Foreign Ministry has urged the American and British Governments to discourage Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber from making his proposed visit to Bonn. The British Foreign Office is inclined to agree that the visit at this time would be "highly undesirable."
[PAGE 07]
American officials in Vienna believe that in going to Bonn Gruber expects to "steal the thunder" of extreme rightists whose pan-German line is endangering the position of the conservative People's Party in western Austria.

Comment: This French move presumably reflects the chronic concern in Paris over closer Austro-German relations. Gruber's tendency toward independence in conducting Austria's foreign relations may be contributing to this concern.

7. De Gasperi expected to make strong pronouncement on Trieste issue:

The American Embassy in Rome reports that Premier de Gasperi is "taking a serious risk" in continuing to absorb public criticism on the Trieste issue. He will probably feel impelled to make a strong statement along nationalistic lines at the conclusion of the current parliamentary debate on the Foreign Ministry's appropriation bill.
