[PAGE 01]
21 July 1959
Copy No. C 63
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
21 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev cancels his Scandinavian
tour.
Gromyko rejects Hammarskjold's ef-
forts to persuade USSR to moderate
its propaganda attacks on Iran.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
South Korean Army chief who has
led anticorruption drive may soon
be replaced.
India's foreign-exchange reserves
continue to decline.
Singapore's left-wing government
moving effectively to consolidate
its position.

LATE ITEM
Iraq--Army moves to impose tighter
controls on Communist dominated
Popular Resistance Force.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
21 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Khrushchev's decision to cancel his Scandinavian
tour, which he had planned for August, was accompanied by
the unconvincing explanation that the decision was due to crit-
icism in the Scandinavian press and the hostile views of cer-
tain political leaders. He has never before canceled a sched-
uled trip outside the bloc. Khrushchev has appeared tired on
several occasions recently and may have been advised by his
physicians to moderate his strenuous schedule. Moreover,
Scandinavian opposition to the Soviet-proposed nuclear-free zone in the Baltic and the decision of the Scandinavian coun-
tries to proceed with plans for a "little free-trade area" prob-
ably made the visit appear less worth the effort than when it was planned. The note to Sweden expressed the hope that the
trip could be rescheduled, "perhaps in a year."
(Page 1)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]USSR-Iran: Gromyko has rejected Hammarskjold's efforts
at Geneva to get the USSR to agree to moderate its radio prop-
aganda attacks on Iran. Gromyko declared that direct talks
with the Iranians would be of no use unless Tehran first gave
assurances that it would be more "flexible" regarding Iranian
defense plans and US military aid. According to Hammarskjold,
Gromyko indicated that Soviet leaders are fully convinced that
the US-Iranian defense pact will inevitably lead to the establish-
ment of American bases in Iran[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Korea: Song Yo-chan, chief of staff of the South Korean
Army since last February, is to be replaced shortly, according
to information from the defense minister. Although President
[PAGE 05]
Rhee is believed to have backed Song's vigorous anticorruption
drive in the army, a number of generals he removed and their
political backers may have succeeded in persuading the
President that Song's exposures of inefficiency and corruption
are undermining the army's prestige.
(Page 4)

India: India's foreign-exchange reserves have declined
steadily during the past four months and on 3 July had dropped
to $399,600,000, as compared with $1.6 billion in the spring of
1956. The present level is equivalent to less than three months'
imports. The principal cause of the decline has been the fail-
ure of Indian exports to recover from the 1958 export slump.
The foreign-exchange gap is likely to increase somewhat dur-
ing the remainder of the Second Five-Year Plan (1956-61), since
exports are not expanding as had been anticipated.
(Page 5)

Singapore: Since taking office on 5 June, the left-wing
government of Singapore has moved swiftly to consolidate its
position and prevent the development of effective opposition.
The government party has been particularly active in labor
unions and youth groups, where pro-Communist party extrem-
ists recently released from jail have their greatest following.
The party is also limiting pro-Western influence, as evi-
denced by the recent ban on USIS material in community centers.
(Page 6)

LATE ITEM
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Iraq: As a consequence of the violence in Kirkuk, Iraqi
army headquarters in Baghdad has moved quickly in an effort
to impose tighter controls over the Communist-dominated Pop-
ular Resistance Forces (PRF). It has ordered the discharge of
the current class of reserve officers which includes many pro-
Communists, and has ordered certain units to turn in their[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]
[PAGE 06]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]weapons to the army.

Cairo's reports of air bombings and continued fighting in
Kirkuk appear false. All was quiet and that PRF members there
were "completely stripped of arms, ammunition, and identity
cards." The curfew during daylight hours was lifted the same
day[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's Scandinavian Visit Canceled

The official explanation that an "unfavorable atmosphere"
caused Khrushchev to cancel the Scandinavian tour that had been planned in detail for 9-27 August appears to be
incomplete, although the real reasons remain obscure.

The pace of Khrushchev's recent activities could have proved
too strenuous and he may have been advised to moderate his sched-
ule. According to the press, sources close to the Danish prime
minister stated that the Soviet authorities arranging the visit
repeatedly stressed that the program should not be too crowded.
Signs that he has begun to tire more easily than heretofore be-
gan to appear early this year.

Ambassador Thompson has recently noted a tendency for
Khrushchev to drag his left leg. However, Governor Harriman who made a deliberate attempt to test Khrushchev's physical con-
dition during the ten hours he spent with him on 23 June, did
not observe any peculiarities in Khrushchev's walk and has re-
ported he appeared in good health.

Moscow may consider that recent statements by Scandinavian leaders strongly opposing the Soviet-proposed nuclear-free zone
in the Baltic area, as well as the plans of the Scandinavian coun-
tries and Finland to open negotiations on 20 July for a little free-
trade area, have made a visit at this time inopportune. The So-
viet notes delivered in Moscow to the three Scandinavian coun-
tries and Finland on 19 July cited Scandinavian press criticism
of the visit and the "hostile" view of certain political leaders
toward Khrushchev's tour. Moscow charged that Swedish news-
papers "had been permitted to make insulting attacks on the USSR
and the Soviet premier personally," and the official Danish paper
was quoted as saying that the invitation had been issued "out of sheer courtesy."

Pravda stated on 19 July that the USSR was unalterably opposed
to the formation of the "Outer Seven" market area, alleging that
[PAGE 08]
such "NATO-dominated closed economic organizations" are
"controlled by the US." Finland was particularly warned
against participation in a trade group with "an obvious polit-
ical slant."

The cancellation leaves Moscow free to indulge in the
tactic of a bid for an early summit meeting--possibly during
Vice President Nixon's forthcoming visit to the USSR. Al-
though the Soviet leaders would probably expect the Western powers to reject a bid for a mid-August meeting on the grounds
of insufficient time for preparation, they may believe that such
a move would increase pressure in the West, particularly on London during this crucial pre-election period, for agreement
to hold a top-level meeting in the near future.

The Soviet note expressed the hope, however, that future
conditions would allow the trip to be rescheduled, "perhaps in
a year."
[PAGE 09]
Moscow Again Refuses to Stop Propaganda Attacks on Iran

Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, in rejecting UN Sec-
retary General Hammarskjold's efforts at Geneva to obtain a
Soviet agreement to moderate radio propaganda attacks on
Iran, indicated to Hammarskjold that Soviet leaders are fully
convinced that the US-Iranian defense pact will inevitably lead
to the establishment of US bases in Iran. Gromyko declared
that direct talks with the Iranians would be of no use unless
Tehran first gave "assurances" that it would be more "flexi-
ble" regarding Iranian defense plans and American military
aid.

The secretary general's approach to Gromyko follows a
plan worked out in mid-June with Iranian Foreign Minister
Abdoh before he left New York. (TOP SECRET DAUNT) Be-
fore Hammarskjold met with Gromyko, he sent him detailed
Iranian complaints against Soviet propaganda, including in-
formation on the location in the southern USSR of the clandes-
tine "National Voice of Iran." The letter indicated that Iran
desired to normalize relations with the USSR and was pre-
pared to do so once the propaganda broadcasts ceased, and
it contained the secretary general's offer to act as intermediary.
Moscow's new rebuff suggests that Soviet leaders still believe
their propaganda can compel Tehran to take the "first step"
to repair relations. The Shah, however, continues to main-
tain a policy of giving no concessions, despite some domestic
pressures to appease the USSR.

Meanwhile, after less than two weeks in office, Foreign
Minister Abdoh has resigned--on grounds of health--rather
than become a scapegoat for a possible failure of Iran's policy
toward the USSR. Prime Minister Eqbal has asked the Iranian ambassador to
Japan, Abbas Aram, to accept the post of foreign minister if
his "health is favorable."
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Korean Army Chief May Be Relieved of Command

South Korean Army Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Song Yo-chan,
who was appointed on 23 February 1959, will be relieved of
his command shortly, according to the minister of defense. It
had been assumed that Song would retain his office until after
the 1960 presidential election.

Although President Rhee is believed to have backed Song's
vigorous anticorruption drive in the army, ousted generals
and their political backers may have succeeded in persuading
the President that Song's exposures of inefficiency and corrup-
tion are undermining the army's prestige. Song had reassigned
51 general officers, placed 13 on reserve status, and court-
martialed several. Some of the general officer reassignments
probably resulted from evidence uncovered in the anticorrup-
tion drive.

Former Chief of Staff General Paek Son-yop, whom Song
replaced last February, reportedly has been circulating rumors
to discredit Song. In addition, Song's reported interest in re-
ducing the amount of funds available to the army for political
purposes may have aroused Liberal party opposition.

Such a rapid change in the key position in the military forces
would have an unsettling effect on the officer corps, especially if
the new chief of staff follows the pattern of others by seeking to
place his followers in key positions. A possible candidate for
Song's position would be Lt. Gen. Yu Chae-hung, the present
commander of the First Army.
[PAGE 11]
India's Foreign-Exchange Reserves Again Declining

India's foreign-exchange reserves declined $55,600,000
between mid-March and 3 July, when they amounted to only
$399,600,000 or less than the cost of three months' imports.
The reserves, which previously had declined from nearly $1.6
billion in April 1956 to $374,700,000 in October 1958, had in-
creased slowly from October to March as a result of stringent
import restrictions.

These figures do not include the $247,000,000 gold re-
serve used for currency backing. While import curbs have
recently been relaxed slightly to provide a better supply of
industrial raw materials, the principal factor causing the
decline is the failure of Indian exports to recover from the
1958 export slump. This slump originally was attributed to
world-wide recession, but it now appears that India's major
exports--tea, jute goods, cotton textiles, and metallic ores--
have been priced out of some of their previous markets. In
addition, several other commodities previously exported have
found more profitable markets within India.

India's need for foreign aid is likely to increase during
the remainder of the Second Five-Year Plan (1956-61), since
its exports for the plan period appear unlikely to reach an-
ticipated levels.
[PAGE 12]
Left-wing Singapore Government Moves to Consolidate
Its Position

Since taking office on 5 June, the left-wing People's Ac-
tion party (PAP) government of Singapore has embarked on
an ambitious program apparently designed to assure tight
control over a wide range of political, economic, and cul-
tural activities. The government's program will make it
extremely difficult for the already demoralized moderate
and conservative groups to develop any type of effective
opposition. At the same time, opportunities are being pro-
vided to the PAP's pro-Communist extremists, many of whom
were recently released from jail, to increase their
influence in Singapore's labor and youth organizations,
where they have long had their greatest following.

The PAP government plans legislation to foster devel-
opment of a unified labor movement which it can control.
In the youth and recreation fields, the government has
ousted the leaders of many community centers and appar-
ently plans to bring them all under direct government con-
trol. The most prominent and popular pro-Communist in
the PAP, Lim Chin Siong, reportedly is taking an active
interest in youth centers in addition to his labor union ac-
tivities.

Other government moves include a proposal to establish
a National Cultural Organization, which presumably would be
used to pressure private cultural groups to support PAP ob-
jectives; pressure on newspapers to take a progovernment
line; and plans to gain control of all government patronage
by packing the Public Service Commission.

Meanwhile, the government has acted to limit Western
influence by such measures as banning USIS materials in
community centers. It is also said to be planning to give
further publicity to alleged American financial support--
actually provided by Nationalist China--of a high official of
the previous government.
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 14]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
21 July 1959
Copy No. C 63
