EASTERN EUROPE

6. Demonstrations on 20 March in Trieste not expected:
The Italian Foreign Ministry, which has been investigating the possibility of riots in Trieste on 20 March, expects no demonstrations and will do all it can to assure that none take place.

Comment: Neo-Fascist elements inspired a demonstration on 8 March last year, but largely as a result of stringent security precautions, none occurred on 20 March, the anniversary of the 1948 Anglo-American-French declaration calling for the return to Italy of all of the Free Territory.

The American political adviser in Trieste reported a few days ago that a check of all available intelligence in Trieste had disclosed no plans for organized demonstrations, but that there were indications that some neo-Fascist elements wish to "do something."

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French and German comments on Saar prospects:
Following his 9 March talks with Chancellor Adenauer on the Saar, French foreign minister Bidault told Ambassador Dillon in Paris that he sees no "insuperable difficulties" to a final settlement. On the other hand, according to West German officials in Paris, Bidault and Adenauer at their 9 March meeting did not negotiate on a settlement beyond agreeing that the Council of Europe's plan, which each wanted to modify in a different way, would serve as a basis for future discussions.

Bidault considers the economic problem the largest remaining difficulty; other major differences are the duration of the agreement and what international authority would control a Europeanized Saar.

Bonn government leaders say that a Bundestag majority vote could be secured for the Council of Europe's plan, and American officials in Paris believe that the final compromise will likely be close to its present terms.

8. Bidault sees French EDC ratification in early May:
Foreign Minister Bidault told Ambassador Dillon in Paris on 11 March that he and Premier Laniel had decided the EDC debate should begin in early April, but that he did not expect a final vote before the opening of the Geneva conference. Bidault foresees a comfortable majority for the treaty if he succeeds, as he hopes, in getting Socialist
