[PAGE 01]
14 July 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Moscow offers Indian Communists support for agitation on Kerala but cautions against violence.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Jordan taking steps toward re-establishment of relations with Iraq.
Algerian rebel representative requests UN General Assembly president to act as go-between on proposal for settlement with French.
Indonesia--Army influence further strengthened by additional cabinet appointments.

III. THE WEST
Cuban-backed landings on Haiti, aimed at Dominican Republic, may be imminent.

LATE ITEMS
Iraq--Comment on Qasim's new cabinet.
Honduras--Armed forces attempting to restore order in wake of recent abortive coup attempt; further clashes seen likely.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - Indian Communist party: Moscow, in a communication of 3 July to the Indian Communist party (CPI), has reportedly "advised" it not to adopt a drastic program of violent tactics throughout India in retaliation for pressures on the Communist government of Kerala State. Moscow is said to have promised to support Indian Communists in undertaking "widespread agitation" instead--presumably non-violent. The Soviet directive, which appears credible in view of current CPI statements and Moscow's recent efforts to avoid offending Nehru, strengthens the hand of the "moderate" CPI leaders. The chronic conflict between advocates of a "peaceful, parliamentary" approach to winning power and the faction favoring a hard policy, however, is likely to continue.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Jordan-Iraq: King Husayn has sent word to the Iraqi Government via the Turks that Jordan would be willing to resume diplomatic relations if Qasim expresses regret over the murder of King Faysal and agrees to send certain Hash-emite family heirlooms to Jordan. Jordan is also interested in re-establishing normal relations with the UAR, and probably regards renewal of ties with Iraq as a useful balance.

Algeria-France: The Algerian rebel representative in New York has approached UN General Assembly President Malik with a request that Malik use his good offices with the French to seek an Algerian settlement. Malik stated that the

[PAGE 05]
rebel proposals appear reasonable enough to justify further efforts and that the time might be ripe for mediation, provided the United States was prepared "to put its shoulder to the wheel." The Algerian rebel government, whose military prospects have deteriorated lately, probably hopes that the threat of a favorable UN vote on the Algerian resolution this fall will soften French opposition to a negotiated settlement.

Indonesia: The appointment of 25 deputy ministers, announced by President Sukarno on 12 July, further strengthens army representation in the new government and proportionately reduces leftist influence. Of the 25, four are leftists but the remainder are moderates; five are army officers. Sukarno had named the 10 members of the "inner cabinet" on 9 July. The Communist party has published a criticism of foreign policy and an expression of doubt in the cabinet's ability to solve national problems.

III. THE WEST

Caribbean: Landings on the north coast of Haiti by several hundred insurgents from Cuba may be imminent, according to information obtained from both the Haitian consul in Santiago de Cuba. A Cuban-backed invasion of Haiti would be primarily to open a new front against Dominican President Trujillo and would probably provoke Dominican intervention in Haiti. The Haitian ambassador in Havana says Cuba now has five military attaches or assistants in Haiti, presumably to coordinate opposition activity in the capital with the landing forces.

14 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEMS

*Iraq: Baghdad Radio on 13 July announced the reorganization and enlargement of Qasim's cabinet to include four new members. Three of these, according to their backgrounds, are extreme leftists. Biographical information is not sufficient to determine whether the three are aligned with the Communist party. One of the three, Iraq's first woman cabinet minister, is president of a Communist-dominated women's rights organization. Qasim has retained all members of the previous cabinet, although some have been shifted to newly created posts.

*Honduras: A showdown between the armed forces and violently antimilitary elements of the ruling Liberal party became a serious threat on 13 July in the wake of the abortive military coup of the previous day. Excited mobs of civilians in the capital, armed by Liberal leaders to help defend the government, clearly threaten the authority of the armed forces. In an effort to end the threat, the army on 13 July issued orders to clear the streets and leave the maintenance of order to the military. Further clashes seem likely, both in the capital and in outlying areas, where the Liberal party also controls sizable groups of armed civilians. Hon-duran Communists, meanwhile, are attempting to blame the attempted coup on the American embassy.

14 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow "Advises" Indian Communists on Current Tactics

The Soviet Communist party has reportedly directed the Indian Communist party (CPI) not to adopt a "drastic program" of violent tactics throughout India in retaliation for pressures on the Communist regime in Kerala State. This information, contained in a 3 July message,

appears credible in view of subsequent CPI statements and recent Soviet efforts to avoid offending Nehru. The message contained an offer of Soviet aid for the Indian Communists in undertaking "widespread agitation"--presumably nonviolent. Such aid might include covert financial help and propaganda assistance from nonbloc Communists as well as bloc countries.

Moscow's directive appears to have sidetracked a change in tactics planned by the CPI executive late in June. The central committee, under pressure from extremist leaders, had reportedly decided to adopt a program of "maximum force feasible under the constitution" throughout India if the Kerala regime were ousted. The CPI has since announced, however, that it will stage nationwide "demonstrations" on 21 July to support the Communists in Kerala. Separate civil disobedience campaigns against Congress party governments in such states as West Bengal, Bombay, and Punjab are also planned, exploiting popular local issues in cooperation with other opposition groups.

Temporarily at least, Moscow's directive apparently strengthens the hand of the moderate faction which advocates a "peaceful parliamentary" approach.

Anti-Communist demonstrations continue in Kerala on a daily basis. Both Congress and Communist state leaders have made further trips to New Delhi to present their opposing cases to government leaders. While the government's formal decision on intervention in Kerala will not be made until later this month, top Congress party figures apparently anticipate intervention some time in August, by which time the "formalities" necessary to establish a legal basis for President's Rule will have been completed.

14 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian Rebels Seek Intermediary for Negotiations With French

The Algerian rebel spokesman in New York, Abdelkader Chanderli, has asked UN General Assembly President Malik to be the go-between for a negotiated settlement with France. Chanderli outlined proposals which Malik described to a member of the American delegation as sufficiently reasonable to provide a basis for further exploration. Malik volunteered that the time appeared ripe for mediation if the United States was "prepared to put its shoulder to the wheel."

During the past year the rebels have dropped their demands that any settlement must recognize Algeria's "right" to independence, and have become less insistent that any negotiations with the French include discussion of political issues and not merely of a cease-fire. To date, however, they have balked at holding negotiations in Paris without preliminary talks in a neutral country.

The rebels, who have indicated confidence that they can secure a UN resolution in favor of Algerian independence, doubtless hope that the threat of such a vote will lead to a softening of the French position. France's improved military prospects in Algeria, however, make it unlikely that De Gaulle will go beyond his standing offer to hold cease-fire talks in Paris.

14 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
Indonesian Cabinet Virtually Completed

President Sukarno virtually completed his cabinet on 12 July with the naming of 25 deputy ministers whose activities will be directed by Sukarno and the ten other ministers of the "inner" cabinet. The deputies, like the previously announced ministers, are primarily a conservative group. Seven of them are either army representatives or under army control; four are former permanent secretaries general of ministries; and at least eight are civilian technicians or functional representatives with relatively conservative political backgrounds. Three of the new appointees are leftists of varying shades, including one pro-Communist, one of national Communist sympathies, and a former official of a Communist-dominated organization. A fourth deputy, who is also a minister in the "inner" cabinet, has a national Communist background.

The total cabinet complex, including the inner cabinet and seven ex officio ministers, has 43 posts, two of which are not yet filled. Some of the 36 persons so far named hold more than one post. It remains to be seen whether the "inner" cabinet can maintain itself as a streamlined governing organization or whether it will become entangled in the routine administrative affairs of the deputies.

The Communist party announced on 12 July that it will support the program of the new cabinet but will criticize "any wavering action" which is contrary to the "people's wishes." It had earlier published a criticism of foreign policy and an expression of doubt regarding the cabinet's ability to solve national problems.

14 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
  Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
  Scientific Advisor to the President
  Director of the Budget
  Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
  Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
  Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
  Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
  Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
  The Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
  The Counselor
  The Director, International Cooperation Administration
  The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
  The Secretary of Defense
  The Deputy Secretary of Defense
  Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
  The Secretary of the Army
  The Secretary of the Navy
  The Secretary of the Air Force
  The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
  Commandant, United States Marine Corps
  The Director, The Joint Staff
  Chief of Staff, United States Army
  Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
  Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
  Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
  Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
  Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
  Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
  Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
  Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
  Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
  The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
  The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
  The Chairman
National Security Agency
  The Director
National Indications Center
  The Director
United States Information Agency
  The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
