in East-West tensions, had been increasingly concerned over the lack of progress in nuclear test-ban negotiations at Geneva.

UAR: A mobilization exercise is planned for next month. The scope and type of exercise is not clear but is probably connected with current UAR efforts to unify the forces of both regions. It may be only a headquarters exercise. However, if large-scale troop movements take place, Israel may take similar measures which would increase tension.

Cuba: Delegations from the Sino-Soviet bloc and most Latin American countries are now in Cuba or en route there for May Day demonstrations which will feature celebrations of the Castro regime's recent victory. Jesus Soto, Communist leader of the Cuban labor confederation, is reported in the Cuban press to have said on 24 April that Cuba would be proclaimed "the first socialist democratic republic in America" on 1 May. (Backup, Page 5)

*Dominican Republic: An attempt to depose Dominican dictator Trujillo is planned for some time within the next two weeks, according to information given the US Consulate by a knowledgeable dissident source. The consulate considers the information accurate, but notes that the opposition has been "historically long on planners and short on actors." If the plan succeeds, the consulate believes the US Government may receive an urgent call for assistance in the form of diplomatic recognition of the new authorities and "possibly even military help in keeping order."

A plan, probably related to the revolt attempt, is under way to assassinate Trujillo between 29 April and 2 May. The dissident group is not believed to have made adequate plans for controlling the situation after the dictator's removal, but believes immediate action is necessary to avoid discovery of the plot. Although opposition to Trujillo continues to grow in almost all sectors of the population as police atrocities continue, police surveillance and terrorism have prevented effective planning by the dissidents.

29 Apr 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii
