in West Berlin exports as demanded by Soviet Zone officials; (b) to send a letter of protest to the head of the Soviet Control Commission; and (c) to instruct the West Berlin commandants that if the situation is not improved by 12 June, all shipments from western Berlin to the Soviet Zone are to be stopped. Francois-Poncet, the French High Commissioner, expressed fear of provoking the USSR into imposing a new blockade of Berlin and stated that he would have to consult his government before agreeing to all-out countermeasures against Soviet interference with West Berlin trade. The UK High Commissioner felt that vigorous countermeasures now were all the more necessary "if a blockade were developing."

Comment: Tightening of Allied controls on West German exports to the Soviet Zone, given as one of the reasons for East German failure to achieve production targets in key industries in connection with the Five Year Plan, may be the reason for Soviet pressure on West Berlin trade. This pressure could constitute a Soviet bargaining point in the current attempt to negotiate a favorable trade treaty between East Germany and the Federal Republic. Stoppage of shipments from West Berlin to the Soviet Zone may be difficult to effect in view of the attitude of the Berlin City Council, which has already yielded to Soviet pressure in order to prevent further deterioration of the West Berlin economy. The Soviet attitude toward reimposition of a Berlin blockade is not likely to be determined solely by East German economic considerations.

7. MacArthur hearings diminish Portuguese confidence in US leadership:

US Ambassador MacVeagh reports that, although the Portuguese press has not commented adversely on the current US joint congressional inquiry into General MacArthur's dismissal and foreign policy, private conversations with Portuguese Government officials and other influential individuals clearly show that the inquiry is having an adverse effect on public confidence in US leadership. A growing belief that US foreign policy is degenerating into a mere appendage of internal politics carries with it misgivings concerning US dependability as the mainstay of the West against Communist aggression. MacVeagh considers that this belief, taken in conjunction with the pessimistic appraisal by informed Portuguese opinion of the resistance capabilities
