[PAGE 01]
22 April 1953
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
INFORMATION SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Soviet official agrees on necessity of Korean truce (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Viet Minh accompanying Laos invasion with increased activity in Tonkin delta (page 3).
3. Cambodian King reportedly may abdicate in protest against French policy (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on Pakistani Prime Minister's statement on relations with India (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Shah reportedly refuses to dissolve Majlis at Mossadeq's request (page 5).
6.

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet official agrees on necessity of Korean truce:
During Ambassador Bohlen's presentation of credentials, Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin expressed complete agreement that a truce in Korea was essential to any future improvement in the world situation. Neither Pushkin nor Klementi Voroshilov, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, commented on Bohlen's statement that the United States could never accept any agreement which would involve the forcible repatriation of prisoners.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Viet Minh accompanying Laos invasion with increased activity in Tonkin delta:
Governor Tri of Tonkin has expressed considerable apprehension over the fact that Viet Minh operations in Laos are apparently being accompanied by a serious revival of activity in the delta. He referred specifically to a strong guerrilla attack on 21 April against a town near Haiphong.

Comment: An increase in guerrilla activity in the delta has in the past accompanied Viet Minh offensives. If French reinforcements are sent to Laos from the delta, the latter's security, which has never been particularly strong, can be expected to grow proportionately weaker.

[PAGE 04]
3. Cambodian King reportedly may abdicate in protest against French policy:
The King of Cambodia believes that French plans for administrative reorganization in Indochina will lower his status within the French Union, and he may abdicate unless France makes political concessions. The King resents the cool treatment accorded him in Paris recently by Minister of Associated States Letourneau.

Comment: The King spoke out strongly against the French in a recent press interview in New York, in contrast to his usual practice of endorsing French policy.

Abdication at this time, when the Viet Minh threat to his country has sharply increased, might be interpreted in Cambodia as a repudiation of the policy of cooperation with France and would facilitate efforts of the Viet Minh to extend its influence.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on Pakistani Prime Minister's statement on relations with India:
The 20 April statement of Pakistan's new Prime Minister regarding Indo-Pakistani relations was more likely intended to cause future embarrassment to India than to improve relations between the two countries. By stating that he is prepared to give Nehru the respect due the leader of a more important nation, by saying that he would not stand on ceremony, by agreeing to visit New Delhi if invited, and by even expressing a willingness to discuss common defense with India, Prime Minister Mohammad Ali has put the onus on India for the failure of any future negotiations between the two countries.

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Shah reportedly refuses to dissolve Majlis at Mossadeq's request:
The Shah has reportedly refused to do so on the grounds that such action would be unconstitutional unless there were new elections. Mossadeq had allegedly taken the position that elections were impossible at present because of public unrest.

Comment: On 20 April Mossadeq's supporters in the Majlis announced that the parliamentary elections suspended last May were to be completed.

Mossadeq could gain significant strength as a result of these elections. Under the new electoral law, approximately 90 additional deputies are authorized, and Mossadeq's supporters probably would be able to manipulate the elections in many districts.

6.

[PAGE 06]
