[PAGE 01]
6 May 1953
Copy No. 60

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Mossadeq proposes new plan for arbitration of Anglo-Iranian dispute (page 3).
2. Iranian minister of court seeks US views on change in monarchy (page 3).

LATIN AMERICA

3. Bolivia gains support in tin crisis (page 4).

****
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Mossadeq proposes new plan for arbitration of Anglo-Iranian dispute:

Prime Minister Mossadeq asked Ambassador Henderson on 3 May if President Eisenhower would be willing to arbitrate the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. Mossadeq said that he was prepared to ask the Majlis for full authority for President Eisenhower to decide on the compensation Iran owes the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, provided the British gave him similar authority.

Henderson told Mossadeq that it would not be easy to induce Great Britain to try to find a solution so long as he remains prime minister.

Comment: It is not likely that Mossadeq could persuade the Majlis to accept a plan which denies it the right to veto any decision which it does not like.

2. Iranian minister of court seeks US views on change in monarchy:

In a conversation with a US Embassy officer on 3 May, Acting Minister of Court Amini stated that the differences between the shah and Mossadeq should be settled as they benefit only the Tudeh. He asked what US policy is toward Iran, particularly Mossadeq, and what the American attitude would be toward the elimination of the monarchy or the replacement of the shah.

Comment: Amini may have been seeking some assurance on behalf of the shah that the United States would not support an attempt to remove him. On the other hand, Amini is a member of the previous Qajar dynasty, which the present shah's father overthrew, and he may be supporting Mossadeq in the latter’s desire to eliminate the shah.

Amini reportedly had been maneuvering for his present post for some time, and he is an intimate of some of the shah's enemies.

[PAGE 04]
LATIN AMERICA

3. Bolivia gains support in tin crisis:

Comment: The decision of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation in March to discontinue purchases, together with the drop of almost 25 percent in world tin prices during the past month, has greatly diminished the La Paz government's chances of survival. About half of Bolivia's tin has normally been marketed in the United States.

Bolivia maintains that tin is the "source of life" of its people, and that any tin questions cannot be dealt with on a purely commercial basis, but are also political. A prolonged delay in settling the problem could result in economic chaos, and lead to the accession of an even more extremist government.
