[PAGE 01]
18 February 1961
Copy No. C
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Congo: Reprisals against whites in Kivu Province. (Page 1)
2. UAR apparently preparing anti-US campaign. (Page 1)
3. Ghana may ask Soviet assistance for Volta River Project. (Page 3)
4. Angolan authorities ask Lisbon for arms; revolt in Malange area of northern Angola. (Page 5)
5. King Savang will reaffirm Laotian neutrality in broadcast on 19 February. (Page 6)
6. Demonstration against US - South Korean aid agreement scheduled for 19 February in Seoul. (Page 7)
7. West Berlin officials skeptical on new East German pass procedures. (Page 7)
8. Liberal ministers resign from Belgian cabinet. (Page 7)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

Congo: Reprisals against whites apparently are increasing in Kivu Province, where the administration was taken over on 16 February by Christophe Gbenye, who was minister of interior in Lumumba's government and apparently served as the premier's hatchetman. The international borders of Orientale and Kivu provinces were closed at his order on 15 February, however, some European refugees are managing to get through to Ruanda-Urundi. There are about 1,000 Belgians in Orientale and 400 in Kivu, together with a few whites of other nationalities. A member of Gizenga's "mission" in Cairo suggested that Gizenga, through payments to Leopoldville President Kamitatu, seek to form "an important nucleus combatants." The representative also recommended that the Gizenga group's representative in New York--who allegedly has already received $42,000 from Guinea's Sekou Toure--be furnished an additional $28,000 for lobbying purposes.

Soviet delegate Morozov showed a completely inflexible attitude toward negotiations for a peaceful solution in the Congo. He denied that there existed any grounds for compromise between what he termed "the forces of liberation" in Africa and the "colonialists and their puppet regimes." (Backup, Page 1)

UAR: The UAR appears to be trying to counter Western criticism of its activities on behalf of the Gizenga dissidents by initiating a campaign of accusations against the US. The UAR-controlled Middle East News Agency on 17 February stated that
[PAGE 05]
the UAR Foreign Ministry had asked Ambassador Reinhardt to seek explanation from Washington of the "clear fallacies" in statements attributed to Secretary Rusk on UAR interference in the Congo. Foreign Minister Fawzi on the same day stated that the UAR will soon "unmask" those who interfere. Cairo radio on 16 February charged the US with "participating with Belgian imperialism" in spending thousands of dollars on Mobutu.

The UAR Foreign Ministry asked its embassy in New Delhi to gather information on Ambassador Timberlake's alleged "spending of money against Nehru's government" while serving in Bombay in 1948-50.

Ghana: Nkrumah's regime is reported to be so aroused against the West that it has decided to issue a public statement inviting the USSR to finance and supply technical assistance for the huge Volta River power-aluminum project. The report went so far as to state that the Nkrumah regime would reject any further technical aid from the United States. it acquires some plausibility in view of Nkrumah's highly emotional and anti-American approach to the Congo situation. Soviet President Brezhnev now is in Ghana on a visit arranged on short notice as an addendum to his state visit to Guinea. Nkrumah may make some announcement on the Volta project, during his scheduled appearance before the Ghanaian parliament on 21 February. A Western consortium's negotiations concerning the project now are in the final stages. (Backup, Page 3)

Angola: Local authorities in Angola are requesting arms to be distributed in case of need to isolated citizens or militia groups. A Portuguese government official in Lisbon states that the natives in the Malange

18 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
area of northern Angola have been in revolt since 1 February because of resentment over ill treatment by Belgian-Portuguese diamond and cotton combines which control the area, and that troops recently flown to Angola from Portugal were for use in this area rather than in Luanda.

the Angolan governor general suggests to Lisbon that journalists be prevented from coming to Angola "by every possible means in view of the action which we may be forced to take." (Backup, Page 5) (Map)

Laos: King Savang will make a broadcast on 19 February reaffirming Laos' neutrality and appealing for internal unity and noninterference from abroad, according to General Phoumi. Formal invitations to Burma, Cambodia, and possibly Malaya to form a neutral nations commission in Laos will either be contained in the King's speech or issued at a follow-up press conference to be held on the same day by the Boun Oum cabinet. General Phoumi's mission to Phnom Penh to consult with Prince Sihanouk and to induce Souvanna Phouma to return presumably will be undertaken within a few days of the King's speech. Whether Souvanna can be persuaded to become associated in any capacity with the Boun Oum government is doubtful. (Backup, Page 6) (Map)

South Korea: Growing domestic criticism of the recently negotiated US - South Korean bilateral aid agreement is becoming a serious problem for the Chang Myon government. Charges of American interference in South Korean internal affairs are being fanned by the conservative opposition, leftist groups, nationalistic student elements, and some sections of the press. Student opposition to the agreement appears to be led by a small group which has sponsored public forum discussions on unification with the North and a neutralist solution to Korea's difficulties. A large scale student demonstration

18 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
against the aid agreement is reportedly scheduled for 19 February in Seoul. Such activities may improve the climate for North Korean overtures for the withdrawal of American troops from the South and unification on terms favorable to Pyongyang. (Backup, Page 7)

Berlin: West Berlin government officials are taking a skeptical view of the new, "simplified" procedures--announced by the East Germans on 15 February--for the issuance of passes to West Germans entering East Berlin. The officials point out that while the new procedures mean less inconvenience for the individual, the East Germans are continuing to exercise illegal controls over free movement within the city and in effect to demonstrate sovereignty over East Berlin. Mayor Brandt announced publicly on 16 February that any pass requirement is incompatible with four-power Berlin agreements. The change in procedures was only a minor technical concession in response to Bonn's insistence that the East Germans fulfill their commitment to relax the intersector travel controls in return for Bonn's agreement on 29 December to reinstate its trade agreement with East Germany. The West German cabinet met on 16 February to consider the situation.

Belgium: Resignation of the Liberal party ministers from Premier Eyskens' Social Christian (Catholic) - Liberal coalition government appears to be a tactical move in preparation for the national elections expected to take place on 26 March. Eyskens' cabinet would have resigned next week in any case, but by this move the Liberals may hope to avoid the onus of recent developments in the Congo and thus enhance their electoral prospects. The Liberals, who represent conservative business interests, had demanded cuts in the social welfare services as part of the government's recently enacted austerity program, a move which would also have been embarrassing

18 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 08]
to Eyskens and the Social Christian party, which includes a large Catholic labor organization. Both the Social Christians and the Liberals are expected to make gains in the elections at the expense of the Socialist party, which has lost popular support as the result of the recent strike violence.

18 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 09]
Situation in the Congo

Anti-white disturbances have been reported in several parts of the Congo, the most serious in Bukavu, capital of Kivu Province. The degree to which Gizenga and his lieutenants are involved is not clear. However, the closing of the border suggests that Orientale and Kivu authorities wish to maintain close control over Europeans either to use them as hostages or to assure their continued presence to maintain key administrative and economic activities.

According to press reports, Anicet Kashamura, Gizenga's pro-Communist lieutenant who had headed the Kivu administration since December, has been removed from office and sent back to Stanleyville. His successor, who apparently was a close associate of Lumumba but has had little following of his own, urged Gizenga to "play the whole range of politics in order to retain the members of parliament"--possibly a reference to dissension which might occur among Kashamura's followers in Stanleyville.

In his 15 February outline of a plan of action, Gizenga's associate in Cairo proposed that he travel from the UAR to West Africa to investigate, among other things, the possibility of smuggling arms through former French Equatorial Africa. He stated that by using a borrowed passport he might be able to reach Leopoldville, where he could deliver funds--possibly as much as $70,000--to the pro-Lumumba provincial governor, who could use "them to bribe the police, the army, and the legislature. He added that Thomas Kanza, who leads the Gizenga faction's "delegation" in New York, needed additional funds for "corruption, boycott agents, liaison agents, transportation of materials, etc."

In Leopoldville, UN representative Dayal on 15 February publicly blamed the United States Government for the chaotic situation in the Congo. He charged that the United States had failed to support the ouster of Belgians from Katanga, and he disparaged the quality of the American transport aircraft--principally C-119s and C-47s--supplied to the UN.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 10]
Dayal reportedly has asked the UN in New York to obtain a fleet of twelve C-130s to be used as airlift for a standby "fire-brigade" battalion which would be moved to trouble spots.

Press reports indicate that Colonel Trinquier, the French officer who reportedly had agreed to serve as chief of the Katanga armed forces, was "persuaded" to turn down the assignment at the last minute by official French pressure.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 11]
Ghana's Neutralism Increasingly Favorable to Communist World

Although there has been no change in Ghana's established policy of "positive neutrality," the Nkrumah regime has over the past 18 months moved away from exclusive reliance on the West and become progressively more receptive toward contacts and tactical collaboration with the Sino-Soviet bloc. Since last summer this shift has accelerated greatly as a result of what Nkrumah and other top Ghanaian leaders regard as Western--especially US--responsibility for the frustration of Accra's pro-Lumumba Congo policy. Following the ousting from the Congo of Ghana's chief diplomatic representative and the seating of the Kasavubu delegation in the UN last November, Nkrumah was reliably reported as being in a "rage" against the US, which he then, for the first time, publicly accused of abetting Belgian "attempts to regain control over the Congo." A vitriolic, at times scurrilous, anti-American campaign drawing heavily upon bloc propaganda materials was launched by the government-controlled press and continued at a high pitch until just prior to the inauguration of the new US administration. At the same time, more extreme Ghanaian leaders--such as labor chief John Tettegah--instituted a policy of shunning contacts with American representatives in Ghana.

Meanwhile, Nkrumah, encouraged by influential leftist officials in his own regime, has become increasingly receptive toward involvement with the bloc. Since last August, Ghana has accepted a $40,000,000 Soviet economic aid credit, purchased six Soviet IL-18 aircraft on favorable terms, and entered other agreements providing for trade, technical assistance, and cultural cooperation with the USSR and some of its European satellites. In December a protocol was signed with the USSR specifying a wide range of development projects to be carried out by the Soviet Union over the next several years. In addition, various plans for Soviet-Ghanaian cooperation in the military field reportedly are also under active consideration. As a result of these arrangements, the number of Soviet technicians in Accra has already risen

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 12]
above 100 and more are expected as individual projects get under way. That these expanded ties reflect a basically softer attitude toward the USSR is strongly suggested by such private Nkrumah statements as his recent assertion that there is more "democracy" in the USSR than in any other country.

The recent announcement of Lumumba's death has again provoked bitter and unrestrained denunciations of Western "imperialists" in Ghanaian newspapers, but at least initially specific attacks were focused on Belgium, Hammarskjold, and NATO with little reference to the US except for an uncomplimentary allusion to former President Eisenhower. In fact, President Kennedy's and Ambassador Stevenson's expressions of regret were given greater prominence than Moscow's.

On the other hand, Nkrumah did name the US as one of Belgium's allies which "must answer questions" regarding the arming of Lumumba's adversaries, and the US Embassy was a principal target of the regime-sponsored demonstrations in Accra on 15 February. On 16 February Nkrumah presented Ambassador Russell with an aide-memoire taking strong exception to President Kennedy's press conference interpretation of the constitutional role of Congolese President Kasavubu. These developments may presage an early revival of an all-out campaign against the US. However, the aide-memoire and the related press announcement released on 17 February were couched in essentially legalistic terms and neither they nor the atmosphere of the ambassador's interview with Nkrumah contained any hint of an impending major shift in Ghana's aid policies such as would be involved in the substitution of Soviet for Western aid in connection with the $350,000,000 Volta project.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 13]
CABINDA
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

LUANDA
MALANGE
LOBITO
BENGUELA

ANGOLA

FEDERATION OF RHODESIA & NYASALAND

SOUTH WEST AFRICA
BECHUANALAND

0 100 200 300
STATUTE MILES
SELECTED RAILROADS

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page
[PAGE 14]
Situation in Angola

Serious disorders have been occurring in the Malange administrative district of Angola since 1 February when some 200 native rail workers went on strike,

subsequently natives attacked Portuguese patrols in the area--in one encounter 1,000 natives armed with knives and spears "showed no fear of Portuguese guns."

agitators from outside Angola were able to exploit discontent among the natives by using witchcraft. He added that "the ease with which the witch doctors dominate the natives is extremely dangerous. Therefore we must admit the possibility of terrorism breaking out in any part of Angola." In the Malange district the populace reportedly believed absolutely that they would not have to work in the future and "that the white man's arms shot water."

The official Portuguese policy of blaming Communist groups rather than African nationalists for the Angolan disorders

In recommending that journalists be excluded, he said, "We are trying to avoid any analysis of the racial and nationalist aspects in order to place emphasis on the control of leftist international organizations and the outside agitation."

There is said to be a very strong feeling among the Portuguese military that immediate steps must be taken to satisfy "completely justified" grievances of the Malange natives against Belgian-Portuguese commercial interests controlling the area, and some of them are described as willing to back any responsible governmental authority or figure who will ensure prompt action. They reportedly fear that failure to act at once will have far-reaching political repercussions in Portugal.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
[PAGE 15]
LAOS

Government forces
Antigovernment concentrations
Kong Le/Pathet Lao forces
Main route number
Road
Trail
Chinese Nationalist Irregulars

0 25 50 75 100 Miles
0 25 50 75 100 Kilometers

International boundaries and names are not necessarily those recognized by the U.S. Government.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page
[PAGE 16]
Situation in Laos

General Phoumi, in briefing to Ambassador Brown on 16 February plans for the King's speech and his own mission to Phnom Penh, stated that the question of reorganization of the government had not yet been decided. Much apparently depends on whether Souvanna agrees to participate in an expanded government. Numerous politicians from various geographic regions of Laos stand ready to participate.

Tension between the French and Laotians arising from the incident in Vientiane involving the AFP correspondent who has been hiding out in the French Embassy appears to be abating. Laotian troops which had surrounded the embassy have been withdrawn, and Boun Oum has expressed regret for this diplomatic impropriety. However, a new and possibly more serious incident may develop at Seno military base. In a follow-up to its "symbolic take-over" of Seno earlier in the month by occupation of two vacant buildings, the Laotian Government, through local military authorities, has requested the French commander at Seno to yield certain other buildings. Paris has instructed the latter to refuse and to oppose force by force. Although expressing willingness to negotiate with Laotian officials on differences concerning the Seno base, the French have stated they will not do this under duress.

Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces defending the western approaches to the Plaine des Jarres area reportedly have forced the retreat of forward elements of the government force inching its way along Route 7 a few miles from the Phou Khoun crossroads. Enemy tactics still appear in general to be defensive, but the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces might exploit any significant local success to regain control of the junction with Route 13.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 6
[PAGE 17]
Opposition to South Korea - US Aid Agreement

The April revolution generated national pride in South Koreans, particularly among young people who expected a quick improvement in their political and economic situation. Although the ouster of Rhee improved United States - South Korean understanding, the new nationalism is sensitive to any alleged infringements on Korean sovereignty. South Koreans have been particularly sensitive over the administration of the United States aid program and over the lack of a status-of-forces agreement which would give them jurisdiction over off-duty American military personnel.

Much of the criticism by students, opposition legislators, and the press appears to be based on misinformation. Ignoring the existing situation, one legislator has argued that free import privileges for US aid mission personnel would permit a flood of foreign luxury goods that could disrupt the nation's economy. Another has speculated that a secret annex to the agreement contains terms more disadvantageous than those made public. A leftist politician, prominent in the most extreme overt political opposition, has led the formation of a "joint struggle committee" to oppose the agreement. Although there is no evidence as yet that student opponents of the agreement are Communist directed, they are an obvious target for Communist subversive efforts, particularly where, as in the present instance, their activities can be disguised as nationalistic protests.

Prime Minister Chang has publicly expressed his confidence that the legislators will agree there are no unfavorable aspects in the agreement once they fully understand the situation. However, should public opposition to the aid agreement continue to increase, Chang might become reluctant to force the assembly to ratify it. Chang's party has a majority, but many members are reluctant to support what they feel to be an unpopular measure.

Since the revolution and the almost total demoralization of the national police, any public agitation raises the prospect that demonstrations will get out of hand. Although

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7
[PAGE 18]
police promptly dispersed a small group of students who assembled in Seoul's Pagoda Park on 14 February to debate the assistance agreement, it is questionable how effective they would be against a large demonstration.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 8
[PAGE 19]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 20]
18 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
