II. ASIA- AFRICA

Laos: Officials of the British Foreign Office have suggested to American representatives the advisibility of negotiating a deal with the Communists to restore the "sanitized" status of Laos along the line of the 1954 Geneva settlement. The French have already begun an apparently well-coordinated campaign to depreciate the military aspects and to advocate some concessions to the Laotian dissidents by the Phoui government to "stabilize" the situation. Skirmishing in Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces apparently continues, and small-scale attacks on Laotian Army units have occurred in central Laos within the past week. (Page 2)

*Iraq: The announcement in Baghdad that Brigadier Tabaqchali has been sentenced to death for his association with the Mosul revolt last spring is likely to result in a further increase in political tension in Iraq and might possibly trigger a nationalist, anti-Communist coup attempt. Tabaqchali, by his defiance of the pro-Communist court president, Colonel Mahdawi, has become a symbol of resistance to Communist pressure. Prime Minister Qasim must still approve the sentence before it can be carried out, and his decision may not be forthcoming for some time. Anti-Communist elements might feel, however, that they cannot afford to await Qasim's decision, since they have come to regard his actions as highly unpredictable.

Iraq: Iraq is shifting its patronage of Western educational institutions to those of the Communist bloc. During the coming school year, a record number of government-sponsored students will be sent abroad, and it is expected that the Communist bloc, which had only 12 Iraqi students last fall, will receive many times that number this year, with a commensurate reduction in the number of students sent to Western countries. About 425 scholarships have been offered by bloc countries for the coming year, and "bargain rate" educational costs in bloc countries provide an additional incentive for Iraq to send many of the 2,000 government-backed scholars to the bloc. (Page 3)

17 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF
