Czech Efforts to Strengthen Ties With UAR

Czechoslovakia, in a move designed to strengthen its economic ties with Cairo, recently offered additional economic aid to the UAR.
Czechoslovakia offered up to $28,000,000 in industrial credits to be repaid in eight years at 3-percent interest. The UAR, however, requested that a $70,000,000 Czech line of credit be extended for use during Cairo's five-year economic development plan. Further negotiations on the matter are tentatively scheduled to take place in Cairo next month.

Since 1955, Prague has provided Egypt and Syria with more than $30,000,000 in economic credits, all of which were extended prior to the formation of the UAR. A $56,000,000 Czech line of credit reportedly was offered Egypt in late 1957, but Prague did not follow up the offer after the creation of the UAR. The current Czech offer of economic aid probably developed from discussions held in Cairo during August when a Czech ministerial delegation visited the UAR. Since then both Czech and UAR news media have reported Czech intentions to participate in the UAR industrialization program.

The recent negotiations in Prague also concerned ways to improve Czech-UAR trade relations. The UAR expressed dissatisfaction with the Czech practice of re-exporting Egyptian cotton, and Prague promised to prevent this in the future. Czechoslovakia, for its part, voiced displeasure with Cairo's policy of granting discounts to Western purchasers of cotton. The trade talks are due to resume in Cairo shortly, when Czech negotiators are to contract for imports--including cotton--from the UAR for fiscal year 1959-1960.

The discussions in Prague also involved the supply of spare parts for the arms and military equipment previously supplied by Czechoslovakia. This problem will be worked out after the cotton-pricing question has been resolved. The talks also touched upon financial arrangements connected with "past and future" military agreements.

17 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
