FAR EAST

2. Viet Minh use 105-mm guns:

The advance headquarters of Viet Minh forces in the Hoabinh area reported to the Viet Minh general headquarters on 23 February that "our 105-mm and 75-mm artillery" shelled French units.

Comment: The use of 75-mm artillery by the Viet Minh and the receipt from China of 105-mm guns have been confirmed. This is the first time that the use of 105's has been credibly reported by any source, including French Intelligence.

3. Comment on new Indonesian Defense Minister:

The new Indonesian Cabinet, which was announced on 1 April, appears to differ from its predecessor primarily in the presence of the Sultan of Jogjakarta as Minister of Defense. The Sultan is a non-party strongman and one of the most popular political figures in Indonesia. He allegedly refused to serve in the last government because, while serving in previous ministerial posts, he was prohibited from adopting forceful measures to suppress widespread lawlessness -- the country's major internal problem. He presumably would not have accepted the Defense portfolio without promises of non-interference in a "get tough" policy aimed at restoring internal security.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Afghanistan plans to proceed with oil explorations near Soviet border:

The Afghan Minister of Mines on 20 March informed the French Ambassador in Kabul that his government was fully aware of political complications which might arise from the exploitation of oil deposits in northern Afghanistan close to the Soviet border. The government planned to avoid them for the moment by prospecting only in areas at least fifty kilometers from the frontier.

The Minister remarked that, if oil resources were successfully exploited, the Afghan Government would establish a national development company with purely Afghan capital. Its primary function would be to supply the 30,000 to 40,000 tons of oil used in the country annually. If surplus oil were produced, it would be sold to any country desiring it, though much of it would have to be exported to the Soviet Union because of geographical considerations.
