[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

28 December 1957

Copy No. 138

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

STATE review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. INDONESIA SEEKING ARMS FROM YUGOSLAVIA AND
SOVIET BLOC

2. JAPANESE-INDONESIAN SHIP AGREEMENT

4. POSSIBLE NEW SOVIET HEAVY BOMBER
(page 6).

6. FRANCE SUGGESTS MOROCCAN MEDIATION FOR CEASE-
FIRE IN ALGERIA

7. CHINESE COMMUNISTS PURGE TOP PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS
IN CHEKIANG

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. INDONESIA SEEKING ARMS FROM YUGOSLAVIA
AND SOVIET BLOC

Comment on:

Indonesia apparently has definitely
decided to turn to Yugoslavia and the
Communist bloc for arms.

Indonesia is
proceeding with plans to purchase mil-
itary equipment from Yugoslavia, Czecho-
slovakia, and Poland.

Indonesia had dropped negotiations for
the cash purchase of arms, explaining
that materiel will be obtained on credit
from Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia. American Ambassa-
dor Riddleberger in Belgrade assumes that a 27 December
visit to Tito by the Indonesian ambassador and a group of
high-ranking Yugoslavs was the beginning of arms negotia-
tions. Colonel Jani, Indonesian deputy army chief of staff,
will head a purchasing mission to Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia,
and Poland, according to the American Embassy in Djakarta.

The Indonesian army has long been eager
to re-equip its forces. Although most army leaders would
prefer to purchase equipment from the West, political pres-
sures have increased to accept arms from the bloc. The
army is believed to be chiefly interested at present in small
arms, ammunition, and army transport vehicles.

Communist China has offered
credit for arms purchases from Communist bloc countries.

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. JAPANESE-INDONESIAN SHIP AGREEMENT

Comment on:

Japanese shipowners and an Indonesian
government mission in Tokyo have
reached agreement on general terms
for the lease of Japanese ships totaling
75,000 tons for Indonesia's vital inter-
island shipping traffic. A formal agreement was scheduled
to be signed on 27 December.

The agreement authorizes the transfer by
mid-February for a minimum of six months of 26 freighters
of 2,000 to 4,000 tons. Small tankers of up to 5,000 tons will
be transferred in a second stage, and large ocean-going ves-
sels will be considered still later. Indonesian crews will be
used whenever possible, but the ships will have Japanese mas-
ters and officers. Charterage fees are to be paid in advance in
pounds sterling.

The Japanese ships will replace about half
of the Dutch tonnage which has been withdrawn from Indonesian
waters and thus ease the critical shipping shortage which has
created serious food dislocations. Although Japan probably will
be the major supplier of ships to Indonesia, Djakarta is looking
to other areas, including the Communist bloc, to overcome its
remaining shipping deficiencies.

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. POSSIBLE NEW SOVIET HEAVY BOMBER

Comment on:

Additional information on the long-
distance flight described in the 24
December issue of Red Star indicates
that the heavy bomber involved may
have been a new Soviet aircraft. The
article stated that "even for persons accustomed to being
the first to see what is newly created in aviation, this air-
plane is surprising by the perfection of its form and its colos-
sal size."

The flight was described as the first long-
distance test of this aircraft, following numerous short test
flights. The bomber flew an unspecified record distance with-
out aerial refueling, at altitudes above 39,000 feet carrying
"tens of tons" of fuel rather than "ten tons" as first reported.
The "many hours" required for the flight suggest subsonic speed.

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. FRANCE SUGGESTS MOROCCAN MEDIATION FOR
CEASE-FIRE IN ALGERIA

Comment on:

On instructions from Paris, the French
Embassy in Rabat recently sounded out
the Moroccan Government on the possi-
bility of Moroccan mediation to bring about
a cease-fire in Algeria, according to a source close to French
Foreign Minister Pineau. Premier Gaillard has obtained cab-
inet approval for this limited response to last month's Moroccan-
Tunisian offer of good offices to settle the conflict. Recent
French-Tunisian difficulties--particularly over the arms ques-
tion--ruled out acceptance of Bourguiba as an intermediary, at
least for the present.

Because Moroccan officials insisted that
Tunisia must be kept informed, Gaillard did not follow up his
embassy's approach immediately. Pineau, however, may go
to Rabat soon to discuss cease-fire negotiations. Pineau's
confidant told the American Embassy in Paris on 24 December
that the chances for negotiation of a cease-fire are "not bad."
He claims an FLN military leader was recently in Rabat and
"undoubtedly" discussed such a move.

Gaillard is probably reluctant to take any
step now which might prejudice Council of the Republic action
on the Basic Statute for Algeria recently voted by the National
Assembly. There is already some fear that Minister for Algeria
Lacoste and influential conservatives may influence the upper
house to amend or vote down the statute, thereby throwing it back
to the assembly.

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 10]
7. CHINESE COMMUNISTS PURGE TOP PROVINCIAL
OFFICIALS IN CHEKIANG

Comment on:

Four members of the Chekiang com-
mittee of the Chinese Communist
party--at least two of whom were prob-
ably party secretaries and one of whom
was concurrently governor of the prov-
ince--have been "expelled from the party as "rightists," ac-
cording to a Peiping broadcast of 26 December. The removal
of these men from their government posts can be expected to
follow in due course.

The attack on these provincial party lead-
ers is an indication that a drastic weeding out of the party
called for by Secretary General Teng Hsiao-ping and other
party spokesmen is picking up speed. This move follows a
resurgence of publicity during the past week concerning the
danger of permitting rightists to remain in the party.

The purge is expected to claim up to 5
percent of the approximately 12,700,000 party members, and
may even reach two or three members of the central com-
mittee in its final stages.

28 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
