6. Possibility of Italian concessions on Trieste:

Italy is more anxious than Yugoslavia to reach a settlement on the Trieste issue in the opinion of the US Embassy in Rome. The state of Italian public opinion and the vulnerability of the Italian Government on this issue leave Premier De Gasperi little freedom of action. The embassy estimates that under any compromise the Italians would insist on obtaining all the predominantly Italian coast towns in the Yugoslav Zone B, but would probably be willing to make economic or other concessions to Yugoslavia.

Comment: A settlement of the Trieste boundary along ethnic lines would give the Italians the city of Trieste plus coastal cities in Zone B, where the Yugoslav Government has strongly indicated it would make no concessions.

The economic concessions mentioned might involve formal relinquishment of the former Italian mercury and bauxite mines in Zone B, already under de facto Yugoslav control. Trade concessions Yugoslavia in connection with certain imports levied in the port of Trieste might also be involved.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. British Foreign Office supports suspension of Czech overflight rights in Germany:

The Foreign Office has now conditionally agreed to the suspension of the Czechoslovak State Airlines' right to fly over Western Germany, as part of the effort to secure the release of AP correspondent William Oatis. The UK insists that France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and possibly Switzerland concur in the action and that the Czech Government first be given warning that the rights will be suspended if Oatis is not released within a certain time to be specified.

The Foreign Office will assist the US in obtaining the concurrence of these interested countries. US Embassy London believes this is the most that can be obtained from the Foreign Office at this moment.

Comment: Great Britain, like France, had previously declined to agree to tripartite suspension of the overflight right, expressing the general belief that that particular weapon should be saved for possible future use in case of more vital importance to the West.

The French have reacted to the latest American overtures by suggesting that there should be agreement on a general program including conditions for re-establishment of the flights. The Belgians have indicated that they will not oppose suspension, the Dutch interests in the flights are not so great as to presage isolated opposition, and the Swiss attitude is unknown.
