[PAGE 01]
7 December 1959

Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Pakistan - Communist China: The Pakistani Government may have suggested to Peking negotiations for formal demarcation of the border between Pakistani-held Kashmir and Sinkiang. Earlier indications that Pakistani officials were considering such an approach are supported by a 24 November press report quoting "informed" sources in Rawalpindi that diplomatic discussions have already been opened. Pakistani authorities have played down reports of Chinese "incursions" into northern Kashmir but have tightened security measures on the Sinkiang frontier. President Ayub's government probably hopes that by initiating negotiations it can forestall any serious incidents while gaining Chinese recognition of the "traditional" border. Peking may display willingness to discuss the Pakistani border but is unlikely to commit itself to a formal settlement.

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

Belgium: The Belgian representative to NATO warns that his government not only will not meet NATO targets calling for a 10-percent increase in Belgian defense expenditures, but that, starting in February, it plans to reduce expenditures by withdrawing one third of the Belgian troops now in West Germany, decreasing regular army manpower, and making other cuts. The president of the Belgian joint chiefs committee recently resigned in protest. The Belgian representative feels that his government is weak and under pressure over the Congo issue, and that it therefore is likely to persevere in its intention to cut military costs.
(Page 2)

France - West Germany: Accounts of the talks between de Gaulle and Adenauer on 1 and 2 December indicate that while the two leaders reached agreement on Berlin, disarmament, and a summit conference agenda, De Gaulle did not alter his position on NATO in any important respect. De Gaulle left Adenauer "considerably reassured" on France's basic commitment to NATO, but the French position of refusing further integration of forces

7 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
and of withholding the Mediterranean fleet apparently was maintained. De Gaulle also indicated his desire to have NATO coverage extended to Africa. Most responsible press reaction in both France and West Germany has expressed concern for the solidarity of NATO, despite official reassurances.

7 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Belgian NATO Program in Danger

The resignation on 30 November of General Jacques de Dixmude, president of the Belgian joint chiefs of staff, is in keeping with other indications that the future of the Belgian military program is in jeopardy. According to the chief of the Belgian NATO delegation, the government is weak and under pressure, due to the Congo situation, and is very likely to cut defense costs despite the opposition of the minister of war and the military. This would necessitate withdrawing one third of the Belgian troops in West Germany, decreasing the number of regular soldiers, and making other reductions as well. These moves, he feels, would set a bad example to other NATO members--particularly the Dutch, who are under popular pressure for similar reductions.

The impending cutback in Belgium's military effort is causing concern in NATO quarters. Although Defense Minister Gilson had requested an increase in the 1960 budget, the cabinet compelled him to reduce his estimates by $10,000,000; and further cuts by the cabinet, Parliament, or both, are likely. Pressure to reduce the defense budget has been growing because of over-all budgetary problems and the feeling that Belgium is contributing to the defense of the West by increasing its expenditures in the Congo. Earlier this summer, Finance Minister van Houtte stated that Brussels would not be able to attain its goals under the NATO minimum essential force (MC-70) requirements, and that it would be impossible to comply with SHAPE recommendations for a 10-percent increase in the defense budget.

Another cause for the dissatisfaction within the Belgian defense forces--which reportedly has caused two other generals to resign--is the belief that the politically inspired volunteer program threatens the effectiveness of existing forces. The coalition government formally reduced the military service term to 12 months, in keeping with campaign pledges in the 1958 election.

7 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Adenauer - De Gaulle Talks Indicate No Basic Change
In French Position on NATO

The French-German talks on 1 and 2 December, particularly those between French President de Gaulle and West German Chancellor Adenauer, left the chancellor "considerably reassured" as to De Gaulle's attitude toward NATO, according to briefings given the American Embassy in Paris. De Gaulle reportedly agreed with Adenauer that the United States is necessary to European defense, and stated that NATO organizations should be "preserved." However, a French Foreign Ministry spokesman's press conference remark that France would not ask for "immediate, profound changes" and that the French position on withholding the Mediterranean fleet from NATO control and opposition to integrated air forces had been maintained suggests no basic change in De Gaulle's position. De Gaulle is said to have stressed to Adenauer his view that the changed situation since NATO was formed requires "transformation" of the alliance in the direction of extending its coverage to the Mediterranean and Africa.

The two leaders reportedly agreed that any summit conference agenda should involve disarmament, aid to under developed countries, and the German question--including Berlin. On disarmament, De Gaulle apparently again mentioned the French plan--recently advanced at the UN--for controlling missiles and launching ramps as a first step. He rejected any form of disengagement in Europe. Both men also agreed that the legal basis of Berlin should not be altered and that no steps should be taken toward recognizing the East German regime. During the talks both French and Germans apparently expressed disquiet as to the US position on Berlin and indicated that clarification would be sought at Western meetings later this month.

Most of the responsible press reaction in both countries has taken the line that although De Gaulle and Adenauer agreed on Berlin, disarmament, and the summit agenda, they failed to agree on the role each should play in NATO or on the future of the alliance in the defense of Europe.

7 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
