Rejection of De Gaulle Constitution Likely in Several French African Territories

The French West African territory of Guinea is virtually certain to reject the new French constitution in the referendum on 28 September, following the advocacy of such a course by Sekou Toure, its leftist-oriented African premier. Niger, another of the eight West African territories, and French Somaliland in East Africa appear increasingly likely to follow suit, and still further defections from the projected new French community may follow. Guinea has a population of about 3,000,000; Niger some 2,450,000; and Somaliland approximately 50,000; the percentage of resident Europeans is negligible except in Somaliland.

In a speech on 14 September, Toure, who is also the leader of the more radical wing of the powerful African Democratic Rally--the stronger of the two principal interterritorial African political parties--asserted that as of 29 September Guinea would be an independent country. French authorities have indicated, however, that certain additional formalities would have to be observed before the independence of any area voting against the new constitution would be recognized.

Despite De Gaulle's threat to cut off the subsidies on which all French Tropical African territories except the Ivory Coast depend--especially for their development budgets--Toure is apparently still hopeful that Paris can be induced to continue its assistance programs. He is reported to have proposed the negotiation, immediately after the referendum, of conventions whereby France would handle Guinea's defense, foreign affairs, and finances. He is also said to have given assurances that Guinea would respect international commitments affecting it, especially those involving foreign investments which, with US participation, have been expanding in recent years.

If French financial aid should not be continued, the territories opting for immediate independence will inevitably feel compelled to look for other sources. Such an eventuality would provide the Soviet bloc and the UAR with new opportunities.
