UAR May Protest Israeli Dredging in Demilitarized Zone

UAR Army Commander in Chief Amir has ordered the Syrian delegation to the Israeli-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) to request a meeting of the MAC so that the UAR can protest a finding by the UN chairman of the MAC which will permit the Israelis to proceed with Jordan River dredging operations within the demilitarized zone.

the subject had been discussed with UN Under-Secretary Bunche, and suggested that an MAC meeting not be held "at present until the situation with Bunche crystallizes." However, an Israeli Foreign Ministry official has stated the work will begin during the first week in October.

The UAR decision to request an MAC meeting overruled the contrary advice of the head of the Syrian delegation, who observed that "our legal objections are weak" and that a meeting resulting in a vote by the UN Chairman in support of the Israeli plan would only make the Israeli position "more legal... than it is now," enabling "the Jews to exploit the situation to the utmost." Amir, however, decided that "complete silence by us..." will give rise to tendentious propaganda, and we will be accused of giving the Jews a free hand to work in the demilitarized zone." The UAR is as sensitive to adverse propaganda by other Arab states on Palestine matters as it is to Israeli exploitation of these issues.

Amir nevertheless forbade the use of UAR armed forces to prevent the Israeli operations because of "the international political situation." In June, after the Israelis first informed the MAC of their intentions regarding further work on the Jordan River channel, Cairo interpreted the Israeli plan to be part of a unilateral attempt to divert the river channel. There was no reference to a possible diversion project.

The work which the MAC chairman has approved is to be a continuation of work already completed north of the Banat Yaqub bridge--an area which is also within the demilitarized zone--to a point 300 meters south of the bridge. The proposed diversion point in Israel's controversial river diversion project is only 1,500 meters south of the bridge. The Israelis contend that their channel improvements--which involve widening and straightening as well as dredging the channel--are part of the Lake Hula drainage program, but they acknowledge that such improvements would increase the annual average movement of water in the river and thus be of benefit to any ultimate diversion plan.
