The Situation in Laos

The American Embassy in Vientiane reports indications that Laotian Army commanders representing the Souvanna Phouma government and the Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee are beginning to carry out their pledge, given to the King in Luang Prabang on 28 September, to "work toward the reunification of the army command structure and to present a common front toward the Pathet Lao.

Progress in this direction seems especially noticeable in the Second Military Region, which has jurisdiction over Sam Neua and Xieng Khouang provinces. Following the ouster of the pro-Savannakhet commander of that region on 28 September by his subordinate in Xieng Khouang, both sides apparently agreed to install General Amkha, who had been acting as Vientiane garrison commander, as temporary commander of the Second Military Region. He was ordered to launch a united effort, involving both pro-Vientiane and pro-Savannakhet elements, against the Pathet Lao in Sam Neua. According to press reports, the pro-Savannakhet garrison which abandoned Sam Neua town on 28 September and subsequently established itself at Muong Peun has declared its loyalty to Vientiane. It is presumably at Amkha's disposal for whatever action he chooses to take.

The actual military situation in Sam Neua remains obscure. The embassy reports no indications of any fighting after 28 September. Pathet Lao propaganda has hailed the "liberation" of Sam Neua town from the "traitorous" Savannakhet group. Pathet Lao guerrilla units may be in control of the town, although the area is nominally under the Souvanna government.

Tentative progress toward reunification of the army command structure could be quickly undone by Premier Souvanna's order calling for dismissal from the army of General Phoumi and 26 other pro-Savannakhet officers. This order is a follow-up of a previous warning issued by Vientiane that all officers must declare their loyalty to the Souvanna government by 30 September. The order now is before the King for signature.
