1. USSR MAY PLAN REDUCTION OF TROOPS IN
EAST GERMANY

"Usually well-informed political circles
in East Berlin" are predicting that Soviet
troops will be withdrawn from East Germany
by stages throughout the year, according to the West German
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. The timing would depend on
how quickly the East German armed forces are established.

East Berlin sources were quoted as saying
that East Germany would keep its contingents small and rely
primarily for defense on the Warsaw treaty, which provides
for assistance from the Orbit in case of attack. They said the
withdrawal of Soviet troops would put the Western powers with
troops in West Germany politically on the defensive and would
make it clear that East Germany is no longer an occupied coun-
try without sovereignty, thereby improving prospects for a
rapprochement between the two German states.

Comment
The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung is a
reliable newspaper, and the author of this
story has good sources in the East and has frequently proved
to be accurate. In the present instance, however, the story
may be aimed at encouraging the USSR to take a step that would
facilitate rapprochement between the two Germanies. The cred-
ibility of the story is enhanced by a suggestion in the new Soviet
disarmament plan that the four powers with troops in Germany
"take urgent steps to reduce those forces to a figure to be de-
termined by each of them at its own discretion." Although the
USSR has often proposed withdrawal of all troops from Germany
and at the November foreign ministers meeting suggested a
50-percent reduction, this latest proposal is the first one which
hints at a unilateral reduction.

The main purpose of a reduction of Soviet
troops would be to inspire demands for a reduction of Ameri-
can forces in Europe. The USSR could substantially reduce its
400,000 ground force troops in East Germany without endanger-
ing its control of the zone, even though no rapid build-up of
East German armed strength is likely.
