[PAGE 01]
137
14 March 1958

Copy No.

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 MARCH 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR now calling for foreign ministers’
meeting prior to summit conference;
still desires procedural issues only be
discussed.

Seven small Soviet cargo ships south-
bound in East China Sea may be for
Indonesia; first ship could arrive by
15 March.

Soviet-Yugoslav relations likely to
become more strained.

Reports of unidentified submarine
contacts in West Atlantic continue
at higher than normal level.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia - Amphibious attack on Cen-
tral Sumatra west coast may be launched
17 March.

Egyptian and Syrian attacks on Saud,
linking him with the US, continue at
high pitch.

Egypt may shortly base naval ships in
Yemeni waters.

Tunisia - President Bourguiba angered
over new French note.

Egypt intensifies covert activities in
Sudan to overcome setback from Suda-
nese parliamentary elections.

Nationalist China breaks off trade nego-
tiations with Japan in protest against
Tokyo-Peiping trade agreement; threatens
to recall ambassador.

New Indian finance minister, Morarji
Desai, is one of ablest Indian adminis-
trators.

III. THE WEST

Britain now plans to reduce its troops
in West Germany to 45,000.

Foreign policy crisis brewing in West
Germany.

Colombia - Congressional election on
16 March may be marked by violence.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 MARCH 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Summit--Soviet view: Moscow is now publicly calling
for a foreign ministers’ meeting in preference to "secret"
diplomatic preparations for a heads-of-government con-
ference, apparently in the hope of clinching Western agree-
ment to summit talks without prior substantive preparation.
On 10 March, Khrushchev argued that diplomatic prepara-
tions--which were previously supported by the USSR--might
"torpedo" a summit meeting, whereas public opinion could
"assess" a foreign ministers’ session. He repeated the So-
viet view that the foreign ministers should confine them-
selves to procedural issues. (Page 1)

Soviet ships for Indonesia: Seven small Soviet general
cargo merchant ships are southbound in the East China Sea.
The secrecy surrounding the movements of these ships sug-
gests that the USSR is quickly fulfilling its agreement to
provide Indonesia with vessels for interisland shipping. The
first of these ships could arrive in Indonesia as early as
15 March. (Page 2)

Yugoslavia - USSR: Yugoslav-Soviet relations are
likely to take a marked turn for the worse. In preparation
for their April party congress the Yugoslavs have published
a new party program, aggressively reaffirming their inde-
pendent road to socialism and implicitly criticizing Moscow.
Such a "revisionist" program will undoubtedly be a target
of the new international Communist journal which has just
been established in Prague. (Page 3)

[PAGE 05]
Unidentified submarine contacts: Reports of un-
identified submarine contacts in the western Atlantic
continue at a higher than normal level.
(Page 4)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: an amphibious
attack is planned on the Padang area of the west coast of
Central Sumatra for 17 March and will be concentrated
near the town of Pariaman, 30 miles north of Padang.
(Page 5) (Map)

Watch Committee conclusion--Indonesia: There is no
evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily in-
volved in the Indonesian situation. The Djakarta govern-
ment is proceeding with military measures to subdue the
dissidents, but an early resolution of the issue is unlikely.
The general situation continues to favor the Communist
position on Java and exploitation by the Sino-Soviet bloc.

Saud vs. Nasir: Egyptian and Syrian attacks on King
Saud, linking him with the United States, continue at a high
pitch. Saudi Crown Prince Faysal is alleged to have asked
Nasir to spare the Saudi royal family in the course of Nasir’s
denunciation of King Saud. Saud’s UN ambassador, Ahmed
Shuquaire, who may secretly aligned himself with Nasir in
the Saudi-UAR dispute, recommended strongly to Saud on
11 March that Shuquaire be appointed the King’s emissary to
effect a reconciliation with Nasir. If Saud accepts the offer,
Nasir may have an excellent source of intelligence on Saud’s
intentions. (Page 6)

Egypt - Yemen: Yemen’s affiliation with the United
Arab Republic may be followed shortly by dispatch of
Egyptian naval ships to be based in Yemeni waters. Yemen

14 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
is constructing a "military area" on the coast at the
southern entrance to the Red Sea.
artillery pieces have been brought
into the coastal area, where emplacements were observed
last summer. In mid-February a Soviet survey team is
reported to have visited the area for the purpose of laying
out a military installation.
(Page 7) (Map)

Tunisia - France: President Bourguiba has publicly
and privately displayed angry frustration at a recent "Paris
note implying continued Tunisian subservience to France in
matters of defense and foreign affairs." This attitude is re-
flected in his implicit rejection on 11 March of Premier-Gail-
lard’s counterproposal presented by the good offices mission
and in his reiteration that France must publicly accept the
principle of Tunisian sovereignty over Bizerte. Gaillard is
equally adamant that France cannot relinquish its claim to
Bizerte. (Page 8)

Sudan - Egypt: Egypt is maneuvering to minimize the
setback to its interests which it suffered in the recent Suda-
nese parliamentary elections. Nasir has instructed his agents
in the Sudan to provide money for the pro-Egyptian National
Unionist party (NUP), to obtain adherents from among the
"independent" candidates elected, and to try to bring together
the NUP and the People’s Democratic party, which has been
pro-Western Prime Minister Khalil’s principal coalition
partner. (Page 9)

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: A deliberate
initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered un-
likely in the near future. Serious incidents could arise, how-
ever, from continuing border tensions, inter-Arab political
frictions, or the possible formation of a Palestinian state in
Gaza.

Taiwan - Japan: The Chinese Nationalists abruptly broke
off trade negotiations with Japan on 13 March because of a

14 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
recently signed Japanese - Communist Chinese trade agree-
ment. They have lodged a strong protest with the Japanese
Foreign Ministry, and Chiang Kai-shek has sent Prime Min-
ister Kishi a personal letter of protest. Taipei plans to re-
call its ambassador to Tokyo if these steps are not effective.
(Page 10)

New Indian finance minister: Morarji Desai, newly ap-
pointed Indian finance minister, is generally regarded in
India and elsewhere as one of the most likely candidates for
the prime ministership when Nehru dies or retires. He has had
virtually no financial experience but is one of the ablest admin-
istrators in the country. V. K. Krishna Menon, who aspired
to the Finance Ministry, presumably could not overcome strong
objections from other cabinet ministers. (Page 11)

III. THE WEST

Britain: London now plans to reduce its troops in Germany
to 45,000, and Foreign Secretary Lloyd has warned that a com-
plete British withdrawal could occur if Germany refuses to con-
tribute to the cost of maintaining British forces. Britain now has
63,500 troops in Germany and is conditionally committed to
keeping 55,000 there in the coming year. The planned reduction
to 45,000 would heighten Continental suspicions of British inten-
tions toward defense of the Continent.

West Germany: A major foreign policy crisis may result from
the German unification proposals of Bundestag President
Gerstenmaier, who has enlisted support of Germany’s leading
publisher for a plan to neutralize and unite Germany. Gersten-
maier’s position reflects mounting Protestant opposition to the
relatively inflexible stand on negotiations adopted by the Ade-
nauer-led Catholic wing of the Christian Democratic Union. A
reconciliation of views between Gerstenmaier and Adenauer re-
mains doubtful.

14 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 08]
Colombia: The 16 March congressional elections, the
first since last May’s overthrow of the Rojas dictatorship,
may be marked by considerable violence, despite the mili-
tary junta’s precautionary measures.
(Page 14)

14 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF v

[PAGE 09]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Actively Calling for Foreign Ministers’ Session

Soviet party chief Khrushchev told Polish jour-
nalists on 10 March that a foreign ministers’ meeting is
a "better" way to prepare for summit talks than "secret"
negotiations through diplomatic channels. He said Mos-
cow is looking to "public opinion" to force the West into
a heads-of-government conference, and argued that the
progress of a foreign ministers’ meeting can be "fol-
lowed by the public." Khrushchev reiterated, however,
that the foreign ministers should confine themselves to
the preparation of an agenda and other procedural mat-
ters for a heads-of-government conference.

Premier Bulganin’s letters to President Eisenhower
in January and February had flatly opposed a meeting of
foreign ministers on the grounds that it might raise "addi-
tional obstacles" to summit talks. After the West ap-
peared willing in early February to prepare for a summit
meeting either through diplomatic channels or in a for-
eign ministers’ session, Moscow in its aide-memoire of
28 February said it would accept the principle of such a
meeting in response to Western "wishes." In his inter-
view on 10 March Khrushchev rationalized the Soviet
about-face by maintaining that, if a foreign ministers’
meeting fails, the Soviet Government will have been proven
"right" in pointing out the "miserable chances" of this
method of preparation for a heads-of-government meeting.

Moscow almost certainly will exploit the Khrushchev
interview as a concession to Western views and as a demon-
stration of the Soviet Union’s flexibility and interest in bring-
ing about a summit conference.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 10]
Soviet Merchant Ships Possibly En Route to Indonesia

The routes taken by seven small Soviet merchant
ships moving independently from the Soviet Far East
through the East China Sea suggest that these vessels
are en route to Indonesia. It is estimated that the first
of these vessels will arrive in Indonesian waters by 15
March.

The USSR agreed on 11 March to provide ten small
merchant vessels under its $100,000,000 loan to Indo-
nesia. In its offer to supply vessels for interisland
shipping to replace Dutch ships withdrawn from Indo-
nesia, the USSR informed Djakarta that it would be will-
ing to supply suitable vessels from its Far Eastern mer-
chant fleet on ten days’ notice.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 11]
Yugoslav-Soviet Relations

The uneasy state of Yugoslav-Soviet relations will be
further strained as a result of Belgrade’s publication of its
party program--an aggressive statement of its views on
the "development of socialism" which is to be the basis for
discussions at the Yugoslav party congress in April. While
neither Moscow nor Belgrade would favor the reopening of
polemics, mutual sensitivities over differences on "socialist
development" are such that an open theoretical debate could
quickly degenerate into an exchange which would again dis-
rupt Yugoslav-Soviet relations.

The new international Communist theoretical journal
established in Prague on 11 March will undoubtedly be used
by Moscow to counter forms of "revisionism," such as
enunciated in the Yugoslav program, to tighten international
Communist ties and to coordinate activities of the various
parties more closely. Belgrade and Warsaw have stead-
fastly opposed the re-establishment of any such publication.
Those "fraternal" parties--such as the Polish, Yugoslav,
and the Italian--which did not attend the meeting, will be
free to adhere or participate in any manner they consider
appropriate in the publication or its work.

The new journal apparently is not to be the organ of a
revived Cominform. It will probably carry less authority
than the old Cominform journal, a weekly newspaper sup-
porting a central organization which embraced all the satel-
lite Communist parties.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 12]
Unidentified Submarine Contacts in the West Atlantic

American and Canadian antisubmarine forces have
reported a large number of unidentified submarine con-
tacts in the western Atlantic well outside US territorial
waters from Nova Scotia to Cape Canaveral since 5 March.
Two of these contacts have been evaluated as probable sub-
marines and 12 have been evaluated as possible submarines.

It is likely that many of these contacts were made on the
same targets at different times and places. The greatly
increased surveillance effort of the past several weeks also
could be expected to produce a high number of reports.

At present eight contacts off Nova Scotia, Nantucket,
Cape May, and Cape Canaveral, are under investigation.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Indonesia

An amphibious attack on the Padang area of Central
Sumatra is set for 17 March.

The attack will be launched immediately
north of Pariaman, a town approximately 30 miles north
of Padang.

Although Djakarta army leaders hope for a quick
defeat of the Sumatrans and are counting on defections
among the dissidents, they believe they will need three
months to gain complete control over major centers and
towns in the area.
army
leaders expect at least some of dissident leader Hussein’s
supporters to retire to the jungle and to begin a long peri-
od of guerrilla warfare.

President Sukarno, meanwhile, has charged that the
Central Sumatran rebellion was being "manipulated by
foreign powers" in an effort to "drag Indonesia, or part
of it, into one of the world blocs."

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 15]
Saud-Nasir Dispute

The Egyptian and Syrian press have continued their
heavy assault on King Saud’s plotting against Nasir and
the UAR, accompanied by an increased tendency to por-
tray Saud as having acted with American support. The
basis for further sharp attacks has been prepared with
the announcement that the investigation of Saud’s conspir-
acy in Syria has been completed and that indictments
have been drawn up for a forthcoming trial.

Nasir’s use of the conspiracy as a basis for attack-
ing the institution of monarchies may have aroused mis-
givings among even pro-Egyptian members of the Saudi
royal family. While passing through Lebanon last week
on his way to Egypt and Europe, the Saudi interior min-
ister allegedly stated that his father, Crown Prince
Faysal, had appealed to Nasir not to attack the Saudi
royal family in the course of his denunciation of the
Saudi plot. Faysal’s presumed concern was to prevent
the undermining of the Saudi dynasty, in which he would
succeed his brother.

Meanwhile, Saud’s minister of state for UN affairs,
Ahmad Shuqayri, who has headed the Saudi delegation to
the Geneva conference on laws of the sea, appears to
have reconsidered his previously expressed desire to
resign. Shuqayri, a Palestinian who is now a Syrian
citizen, earlier advised Nasir of his desire to resign
out of disapproval of Saud’s role in conspiracy against
Nasir. Nasir advised Shuqayri to act as he saw fit, and
Shuqayri has now asked Saud for permission to come to
Riyadh, offering to serve as an intermediary between
the King and UAR authorities. Shuqayri might also serve,
however, as a pro-Egyptian observer in the Saudi court.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 16]
SAUDI ARABIA
YEMEN
YEMENI GUN EMPLACEMENTS
MOCHA
PERIM I. (UK)
WESTERN ADEN PROTECTORATE
ADEN COLONY (UK)
FRENCH SOMALILAND
GULF OF ADEN
SHIBAM
EASTERN ADEN PROTECTORATE
MUKALLA
14 MARCH 1958

[PAGE 17]
Egypt May Send Naval Vessels to Yemen

The Imam of Yemen has apparently used his coun-
try’s affiliation with the United Arab Republic (UAR) to
have Egyptian naval vessels stationed in Yemeni waters.
On 6 February the Imam requested his son, Crown Prince
Badr, to consult with Nasir about obtaining two patrol
craft to patrol the Red Sea "between Aden and Salif." On
8 March, after a talk with Nasir, the crown prince in-
formed his father that Nasir had promised "to expedite
the sending of the ships." The Egyptian vessels would
also support Nasir in his dispute with King Saud and warn
the Saudis against attempting to interfere in Yemen.

Yemen is with Soviet and Egyptian help developing
a "military area" on the coast at the southern entrance
to the Red Sea, athwart the vital tanker route to Western
Europe.

artillery pieces, probably Soviet 122-mm. guns, have
been brought to this area, where emplacements were
first observed under preparation last summer. In mid-
February, moreover, a Soviet survey team visited the area for the purpose of
laying out a military installation, including an airstrip,
barracks, and fortifications.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 18]
Tunisian President Again Bids for Anglo-American Backing

President Bourguiba has privately and publicly displayed
angry frustration at a recent note from Paris implying that
Tunisia remains subject to French control in matters of de-
fense and foreign affairs. This attitude is reflected in his re-
jection on 11 March of Premier Gaillard’s counterproposal
to the good offices mission that France might evacuate some
of its troops but could not relinquish its claim to the base at
Bizerte. In his 11 March conversation with the good offices
mission, Bourguiba was distraught and at times incoherent.
While Bourguiba will accept an early partial evacuation, he
also demands that France publicly acknowledge the principle
of Tunisian sovereignty over Bizerte.

Bourguiba intimated that essentially he desires Anglo-
American backing in his controversy with France. He made
this point more forcefully in a radio speech on 13 March in
which he demanded that the United States and Britain "make
up their minds... and say which side is right." He also can-
celed celebrations to commemorate the second anniversary of
Tunisian independence on 20 March, and indicated a willing-
ness to order military action against the French troops.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8

[PAGE 19]
Nasir Attempts to Counteract Setback in the Sudan

President Nasir has moved to counteract the setback
to Egyptian political influence in the Sudan represented by
the recent election success of Prime Minister Khalil’s
pro-Western Umma party. He has ordered the payment of
funds to the Umma’s major rival, the pro-Egyptian National
Unionist party (NUP), for use in buying the allegiance of
"independents" elected to the new parliament. He has also
ordered the start of an effort to "amalgamate" the NUP with
the People’s Democratic party (PDP), the Umma’s chief
support in the coalition now planning to form a new govern-
ment.

The uncertain loyalties of a considerable number of
newly elected representatives, as well as the unofficial
nature of the announced returns, make present estimates of
relative party strengths only tentative. It appears, however,
that Khalil will need the support of about 20 members outside
his own party in order to control a bare majority in the 173-
member house and ensure his continuance as prime minister.
He is counting on the support of most of the estimated 25
PDP and 18 Southern Liberal party (SLT) members and will prob-
ably be backed by some of the approximately 25 "independents."
Nothing less than a mass defection from the coalition could
give control to the NUP core of 44-45 members.

It is unlikely that Nasir’s efforts to win or buy opposition
to the coalition will prevent Khalil’s retention of the premier-
ship and control of a house majority, but a significant accre-
tion of pro-Egyptian strength could hinder his freedom of ac-
tion.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9

[PAGE 20]
Nationalist China Protests Japan-Communist China
Trade Agreement

Nationalist China’s decision to break off trade nego-
tiations with Japan is intended to induce the Japanese Gov-
ernment to withhold approval of the trade agreement pri-
vately signed with Communist China on 5 March. If this
move fails, the Nationalists intend to withdraw their am-
bassador from Tokyo. The Kishi government probably
will attempt to assure the Nationalists that closer trade
relations with mainland China do not constitute recogni-
tion of the Peiping regime.

The sharp Nationalist reaction probably stems from
fears that neutralism, which ultimately will contribute to
international isolation of the Nationalist Government, is
developing in Japan. Foreign Minister Yeh revealed his
anxiety about Japan’s China policy last summer to American
officials and mentioned his alarm at the growing commercial
relations between Japan and Communist China. Yeh has
instructed the Chinese Nationalist Embassy in Tokyo to pro-
test any permission for the Chinese Communist trade mis-
sion to fly the Communist flag.

Japan is the major recipient of Taiwan’s sugar and rice,
the main source of Nationalist China’s foreign exchange. Two-
way trade last year totaled $141,000,000. Even if the custom-
ary barter agreement between Taiwan and Japan is not con-
cluded this year, individual contracts may be negotiated to
continue the flow of goods. The Nationalists may seek to re-
strict this trade to bring pressure on Japan, but only as a
last resort.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10

[PAGE 21]
New Indian Finance Minister Appointed

Sixty-two-year-old Morarji Desai, who became Indian
finance minister in a general cabinet shuffle announced on
13 March, is a moderate socialist and a devout Hindu. He
has risen rapidly since 1956 from the post of chief minister
of Bombay State, through the Commerce and Industry Min-
istry, to the important Finance Ministry. His new appoint-
ment is a promotion, but the post is one of the most dif-
ficult in the Indian cabinet. Desai, despite a lack of financial
experience, may prove successful in his new job because of
his widely recognized administrative talents and the fact that
basic Five-Year-Plan financial policies are already fairly
well established.

Despite his promotion, Desai may have lost a covert
battle for power with his senior in age and experience, Home
Minister Pant. Apparently both men recognized the com-
plexities of Indian financial problems and felt that the Home
Ministry was a better steppingstone to the Prime Ministry.
Desai, therefore, is rumored to have tried to force Pant
into the Finance Ministry.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 11

[PAGE 22]
III. THE WEST

Britain Plans Further Cuts of Forces in Germany

Britain’s present plan to maintain on the Continent
five brigade groups totaling 45,000 men from 1959 to 1961
represents a further reduction of 10,000 from the number
the WEU Council approved in January for the coming year.
British planners regard this as the appropriate proportion
for the Continent of the total future armed forces of 375,-
000 by 1962.

Foreign Secretary Lloyd told German Foreign Minister
Brentano on 6 March in Rome that failure to solve the sup-
port cost problem would force a complete or major with-
drawal of British forces from Germany. That warning, and
British press speculations on a 35,000-man reduction, ap-
pear to reflect the Treasury view that even the 45,000 may
be more than London can afford.

The present plans and threats of complete withdrawal
will intensify European suspicions of Britain’s long-term in-
tentions toward defense of the Continent and thus indirectly
further impede London’s efforts to establish a European free-
trade area. General Norstad has warned the British that
such an advance decision on the cut would subject Britain
to criticism from its allies for acting before approval of
this year’s special study of minimum forces essential to
NATO over the next five years, and would also adversely
affect the Western position in any negotiations with the USSR.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 12

[PAGE 23]
Foreign Policy Dispute Continues in Bonn

The president of the West German Bundestag, Eugen
Gerstenmaier, one of the leaders of Chancellor Adenauer’s
Christian Democratic Union (CDU), has sought the support
of Germany’s leading publisher Axel Springer for a unifica-
tion plan which would neutralize Germany.
Gerstenmaier
already has secured approval of a top Social Democratic
party official. The support of Springer, a strong neutralist
recently returned from Moscow, would provide an outlet
in publications having the widest circulation in Germany.
An early appearance of the plan in the Springer publications
would provide added ammunition for the opposition parties’
new campaign against atomic weapons and for a nuclear-free
zone.

The CDU Bundestag faction held a stormy session on
11 March. When Adenauer attempted to reimpose a strong
discipline on policy statements, one of Gerstenmaier’s sup-
porters walked out of the meeting. Since Gerstenmaier’s
plan departs markedly from the government position on non-
recognition of East Germany and freedom of alliances for
united Germany, Chancellor Adenauer will have difficulty
in compromising with Gerstenmaier’s views. Several CDU
deputies are convinced, however, that Gerstenmaier will
be forced to back down, in view of the increasing number of
deputies who are adopting a more negative attitude toward
his proposals.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 13

[PAGE 24]
The Colombian Congressional Elections

With the approach of the 16 March Colombian con-
gressional elections, the first since the overthrow of the
Rojas dictatorship last May, the political situation is be-
coming increasingly restless. A recent increase in
violence and banditry resulting in more than 300 killings
a month in the provinces, a week-long student strike in
Medellin, and a three-hour riot in Bogota between moder-
ate and rightist Conservatives over the selection of a
unity presidential candidate presage further violence dur-
ing the elections. The government is still considering the
suspension of elections in areas of the greatest unrest
and has banned all political meetings or demonstrations
before 17 March.

The congressional elections will be carried out in
conformity with the plebiscite which overwhelmingly ap-
proved the constitutional amendment establishing a parity
of Liberals and Conservatives in the government for 12
years. The conduct of the elections will to a degree fore-
cast the possibility of bipartisan political cooperation and
prospects for political stability. Junta member General
Ordonez has admitted that the presidential election sched-
uled for 4 May could conceivably be postponed if the
political parties cannot agree on a joint presidential candi-
date.

14 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 14

[PAGE 25]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 MARCH 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Soviet ships for Indonesia: Seven small Soviet general
cargo merchant ships are southbound in the East China Sea.
The secrecy surrounding the movements of these ships sug-
gests that the USSR is quickly fulfilling its agreement to
provide Indonesia with vessels for interisland shipping. The
first of these ships could arrive in Indonesia as early as
15 March. (Page 2)

Yugoslavia - USSR: Yugoslav-Soviet relations are
likely to take a marked turn for the worse. In preparation
for their April party congress the Yugoslavs have published
a new party program, aggressively reaffirming their inde-
pendent road to socialism and implicitly criticizing Moscow.
Such a "revisionist" program will undoubtedly be a target
of the new international Communist journal which has just
been established in Prague. (Page 3)

Watch Committee conclusion--Indonesia: There is no
evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily in-
volved in the Indonesian situation. The Djakarta govern-
ment is proceeding with military measures to subdue the
dissidents, but an early resolution of the issue is unlikely.
The general situation continues to favor the Communist
position on Java and exploitation by the Sino-Soviet bloc.

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: A deliberate
initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered un-
likely in the near future. Serious incidents could arise, how-
ever, from continuing border tensions, inter-Arab political
frictions, or the possible formation of a Palestinian state in
Gaza.

Egypt - Yemen: Yemen’s affiliation with the United Arab
Republic may be followed shortly by dispatch of Egyptian
naval ships to be based in Yemeni waters. Yemen
is constructing a "military area" on the coast at the
southern entrance to the Red Sea.
artillery pieces have been brought
into the coastal area, where emplacements were observed
last summer. In mid-February a Soviet survey team is
reported to have visited the area for the purpose of laying
out a military installation. (Page 7) (Map)

Colombia: The 16 March congressional elections, the
first since last May’s overthrow of the Rojas dictatorship,
may be marked by considerable violence, despite the mili-
tary junta’s precautionary measures. (Page 14)
