[PAGE 01]
State Department review completed

29 March 1952
Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

1.

FAR EAST

2.
3. North Korean Air Force increases activity at Sariwon (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Prime Minister reportedly will remain in office (page 5).
5.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. French weigh possibilities of new Berlin blockade (page 6).
7. French Cabinet seen safe until June (page 7).

LATIN AMERICA

8. Possible military coup in Colombia (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. North Korean Air Force increases activity at Sariwon:

United Nations aerial reconnaissance on 24 March disclosed that two airfields in the Sariwon area, 35 miles south of Pyongyang, had been repaired and that their runways were operational.

Comment:

The enemy's unwillingness, thus far, to provide adequate jet fighter coverage this far south would seem to rule out Sariwon's utility as an operational Communist airfield. It is possible, however, that the Communists are seeking to establish operational air installations within North Korea either in anticipation of a cease-fire or in preparation for a renewed offensive.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Prime Minister reportedly will remain in office:

Prime Minister Mossadeq apparently has decided not to resign when the Majlis meets, according to Minister of Court Ala.

Mossadeq, in conversation with Ala, spoke as though he intended to remain in office indefinitely, and indicated that he will abandon efforts to revive Iran's oil industry and concentrate on balancing the national budget without the oil income.

The Shah has left Tehran for a ten-day rest. According to Ala, the Shah had been counting on Mossadeq's voluntary resignation.

Comment: Mossadeq recently told a special Iranian Senate committee that he intended to concentrate on the Iranian budget and would in particular attempt to collect taxes from those merchants and landlords who had so far evaded payment.

Meanwhile, Iran's financial situation is steadily growing worse, and the funds available to the government for the month ending 21 March barely covered government salaries and wage commitments.

5.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. French weigh possibilities of new Berlin blockade:

the Russians are planning a blockade of Berlin, possibly extended this time to include the air corridors to the city.

French Foreign Office officials, while not unduly disquieted believe that there is a possibility of some sort of blockade, but do not think it would be extended to air communication.

Comment: While a blockade now could serve as pressure on the West to agree to a four-power conference on the whole German question, such a move appears unlikely at this time.

Although the USSR can now by-pass the Western sectors of Berlin by rail, the canal by-pass will not be completed before fall. Combined, these two projects are designed to reduce vulnerability to Allied retaliation. A blockade now might also destroy the appeal of the current Soviet campaign for unification and a peace treaty.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
7. French Cabinet seen safe until June:

French Premier Pinay has been so successful in obtaining public support for his "stability-without-sacrifices" program that his budget proposals will probably be approved by the Assembly early in April, in the opinion of the American Embassy in Paris. He would then be assured tenure until June, because of public pressure that he should be given time to apply his program.

Most of the deputies expected to vote for his budgetary program have serious doubts, however, that it is practical enough to avert a collapse later in the year, should his "confidence" policy fail. The Embassy considers that, in this event, pressure for cutting French commitments in Indochina would rise.

Comment: Most competent observers have been pessimistic on Pinay's chances of success. While the French public's unprecedentedly active interest in the recent government crisis may temporarily avert a parliamentary showdown over partisan issues, there is no evidence that his "climate of confidence" is a satisfactory substitute for financial reform.

LATIN AMERICA

8. Possible military coup in Colombia:

President Gomez and President-designate Urdaneta both fear that extreme rightists in Colombia may attempt a military coup.

Increased dissatisfaction with government policy in coping with guerrilla activities has reportedly led a group of high army officers, headed by Commander of the Army Colonel Mariano Ospina Rodriguez, to plan a revolt.

The government now plans to purge the armed forces of officers whose loyalty to the present regime is doubtful.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
Comment: Despite heavy governmental expenditures for anti-guerrilla action, insurgent strength has increased in personnel, organization and arms, and has seriously lowered the prestige of the present administration. The government's counter-measures can be expected to avert any immediate threat, but political instability will continue because of increased army dissatisfaction with failure to suppress guerrilla activities,

Some individual Communists have been reported cooperating with guerrilla bands, which in general, support the Liberal Party. To date there has been no indication that the Communist Party has adopted cooperation as a policy.

- 8 -
