Iraq: Qasim's announcement that the period during which political parties should refrain from activity will end before 6 January 1960, and that following this an elected "national council" will be created, appears intended to remove the force of Communist criticism and pressure for open political action now. The announcement is likely to be regarded by the various political elements as an invitation to strengthen their organizations and mass following, as well as to try to obtain control of key government departments. This may lead to intensified factionalism rather than to the political truce which Qasim seems to hope for. (Page 3)

Ethiopia- UK: The Ethiopian Government plans a strong protest to the United Kingdom over press attacks on Haile Selassie, apparently originating from British Somaliland. This may lead to a new deterioration in Ethiopian-British relations, coming just after the Emperor's acceptance of a 400,000,000 ruble credit ($100,000,000 at the official rate) from Moscow. The reaction in Addis Ababa to the Soviet credit is generally one of elation because of the anticipated Soviet help for easing Ethiopia's economic difficulties. However, some top officials reportedly fear the Emperor has gone too far. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

West Germany - France: Bonn is seeking to gain support for France in the UN debate on Algeria this fall. Following up a personal letter from Chancellor Adenauer to Greek Prime Minister Karamanlis, the West German ambassador in Athens urged the Greek Government to demonstrate NATO unity by supporting the French position. The Greeks are unlikely to agree, in view of their policy on Cyprus and their Middle East interests, but the German action is evidence of willingness to make an effort on behalf of France. This may indicate that Bonn has shelved its long-standing policy of staying out of colonial controversies and has begun a more active role in support of France, in return for French diplomatic support for the West German position on reunification. (Page 5)

16 July 59
DAILY BRIEF
