II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Belgian NATO Program in Danger

The resignation on 30 November of General Jacques de Dixmude, president of the Belgian joint chiefs of staff, is in keeping with other indications that the future of the Belgian military program is in jeopardy. According to the chief of the Belgian NATO delegation, the government is weak and under pressure, due to the Congo situation, and is very likely to cut defense costs despite the opposition of the minister of war and the military. This would necessitate withdrawing one third of the Belgian troops in West Germany, decreasing the number of regular soldiers, and making other reductions as well. These moves, he feels, would set a bad example to other NATO members--particularly the Dutch, who are under popular pressure for similar reductions.

The impending cutback in Belgium's military effort is causing concern in NATO quarters. Although Defense Minister Gilson had requested an increase in the 1960 budget, the cabinet compelled him to reduce his estimates by $10,000,000, and further cuts by the cabinet, Parliament, or both, are likely.

Pressure to reduce the defense budget has been growing because of over-all budgetary problems and the feeling that Belgium is contributing to the defense of the West by increasing its expenditures in the Congo. Earlier this summer, Finance Minister van Houtte stated that Brussels would not be able to attain its goals under the NATO minimum essential force (MC-70) requirements, and that it would be impossible to comply with SHAPE recommendations for a 10-percent increase in the defense budget.

Another cause for the dissatisfaction within the Belgian defense forces--which reportedly has caused two other generals to resign--is the belief that the politically inspired volunteer program threatens the effectiveness of existing forces. The coalition government formally reduced the military service term to 12 months, in keeping with campaign pledges in the 1958 election.
