Adenauer - De Gaulle Talks Indicate No Basic Change In French Position on NATO

The French-German talks on 1 and 2 December, particularly those between French President de Gaulle and West German Chancellor Adenauer, left the chancellor "considerably reassured" as to De Gaulle's attitude toward NATO, according to briefings given the American Embassy in Paris. De Gaulle reportedly agreed with Adenauer that the United States is necessary to European defense, and stated that NATO organizations should be "preserved." However, a French Foreign Ministry spokesman's press conference remark that France would not ask for "immediate, profound changes" and that the French position on withholding the Mediterranean fleet from NATO control and opposition to integrated air forces had been maintained suggests no basic change in De Gaulle's position. De Gaulle is said to have stressed to Adenauer his view that the changed situation since NATO was formed requires "transformation" of the alliance in the direction of extending its coverage to the Mediterranean and Africa.

The two leaders reportedly agreed that any summit conference agenda should involve disarmament, aid to under developed countries, and the German question--including Berlin. On disarmament, De Gaulle apparently again mentioned the French plan--recently advanced at the UN--for controlling missiles and launching ramps as a first step. He rejected any form of disengagement in Europe. Both men also agreed that the legal basis of Berlin should not be altered and that no steps should be taken toward recognizing the East German regime. During the talks both French and Germans apparently expressed disquiet as to the US position on Berlin and indicated that clarification would be sought at Western meetings later this month.

Most of the responsible press reaction in both countries has taken the line that although De Gaulle and Adenauer agreed on Berlin, disarmament, and the summit agenda, they failed to agree on the role each should play in NATO or on the future of the alliance in the defense of Europe.
