[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Mossadeq apparently abandons hope for US aid in Anglo-Iranian oil dispute (page 4).
4. Mossadeq continues to strengthen his position (page 4).
5. Pakistani Foreign Minister worried over delay in Suez talks (page 5).

7. Comment on Greek-Turkish-Yugoslav treaty (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
8. Tougher Yugoslav attitude toward Satellites reported by French Ambassador (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
10. Dutch and Belgians to grant Czech requests for landing rights in mid-March (page 8).

LATIN AMERICA
11. Chile and Argentina may bring Deception Island controversy before OAS (page 9).
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Mossadeq apparently abandons hope for US aid in Anglo-Iranian oil dispute:
Prime Minister Mossadeq told the Indian Ambassador in Tehran on 23 February that he could not particularly blame the United States for backing Britain in the oil dispute as the two countries were compelled to cooperate "for global reasons."

The Indian Ambassador also informed Ambassador Henderson that Mossadeq's attitude indicated that the Prime Minister would reject the latest proposals for settling the oil dispute or possibly make counterproposals.

Comment: Iranian tactics in the oil dispute have been based on the hope of getting the United States to persuade Britain to settle on terms favorable to Iran. Mossadeq's statement appears to indicate that for the present at least he has abandoned this hope.

4. Mossadeq continues to strengthen his position:
The Tehran Police Chief has confirmed the arrest of retired General Zahedi for "anti-government activity," the American Embassy
[PAGE 05]
reported on 25 February. Unconfirmed rumors state that others, including former Prime Minister Ali Mansur and General Hejazi, a senator, have also been arrested.

Comment: Zahedi has often been mentioned as a possible successor to Mossadeq. He and Hejazi were under arrest briefly last September for implication in a plot to overthrow Mossadeq.

These arrests, following the Shah's virtual capitulation to Mossadeq, are probably designed to demonstrate that the Prime Minister's control of the government is fully restored.

5. Pakistani Foreign Minister worried over delay in Suez talks:
Pakistani Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan, now in Cairo, is concerned over the "stiffened attitude" of the British toward the forthcoming Suez Canal base talks, according to Ambassador Caffery. Zafrullah Khan believes that Britain's delay in beginning negotiations is losing the good will created by the recent Sudan agreement.

Comment: Zafrullah Khan's concern in the matter may reflect his fear that delay in achieving an Anglo-Egyptian agreement on the Suez base issue will further postpone discussion of MEDO, which Pakistan wishes to join.

The impatience of Egypt to begin Suez discussions with the British has been confirmed not only by statements of the army leaders but also by a recent warning from the pro-West Egyptian Foreign Minister on the dangers inherent in delay.
[PAGE 06]
7. Comment on Greek-Turkish-Yugoslav treaty:
The Greek-Turkish-Yugoslav Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation initiated on 25 February provides a framework for common action in the event of unprovoked aggression and for continued examination of common security problems.

Ambassador Peurifoy in Athens reported on 23 February that the Greek Foreign Minister had assured him that all "contingent military plans" would be coordinated with the United States prior to their approval by the contracting parties. Peurifoy commented that American objections to specific military commitments in the original draft had been met.
[PAGE 07]
EASTERN EUROPE

8. Tougher Yugoslav attitude toward Satellites reported by French Ambassador:
According to the French Foreign Ministry, its Ambassador in Belgrade believes that Yugoslavia has adopted an increasingly "tough and truculent" attitude toward its Satellite neighbors and may be considering some adventure against Albania.

The Ambassador commented that this pattern of behavior seemed to be based on a feeling of greater security resulting from Yugoslavia's increasingly close connections with the West, and on the assumption that in the event of Soviet aggression Western support will be automatic.

Comment: While Yugoslavia is engaged in covert operations in Albania and with certain Albanian refugees, there is no firm evidence that it plans any overt moves against Albania at this time.

Yugoslavia's already bad relations with its Satellite neighbors have become more strained during the past few months. Contrary to the French Ambassador's estimate, however, Yugoslavia's desire for alliances with NATO powers and its attacks against alleged Italian efforts to isolate it demonstrate a feeling of insecurity.
[PAGE 08]
WESTERN EUROPE

10. Dutch and Belgians to grant Czech requests for landing rights in mid-March:
Belgium and the Netherlands have decided to grant landing rights to the Czech airline in mid-March. The Dutch Foreign Ministry states that if France rejects the Czech requests to use Paris as the terminus, as seems likely, the airline could designate Brussels instead.

Comment: In late 1951 Czechoslovakia made its initial proposal for a circuitous Prague-Paris route, via Copenhagen, Amsterdam and Brussels, largely in order to circumvent the ban on Czech overflights of West Germany. Denmark has already approved the request.

Although Belgium and the Netherlands postponed granting the Czechs landing rights, they had indicated to American officials that they could not legally refuse the requests.
[PAGE 09]
LATIN AMERICA

11. Chile and Argentina may bring Deception Island controversy before OAS:
Chile has formally demanded that Britain replace the Chilean installation on Deception Island which it recently dismantled. The Chilean Government said that it was considering submitting these "violations of American security" to the Organization of American States under the 1947 Rio de Janeiro Treaty.

A similar statement by the Argentine Foreign Minister demanding the replacement of Argentina's weather station on the island was published in Buenos Aires on 23 February.

Comment: Deception Island is in the South Shetland group in the Antarctic area where British, Argentine, and Chilean territorial claims overlap. It is included in the region covered by the Rio de Janeiro Treaty, which states that an "attack by any state against an American state shall be considered as an attack against all. . ."
