III. THE WEST

New Problems in British Guiana Likely

The recent moves by Cheddi Jagan, minister of trade and industry in the colonial government and Communist leader of the People's Progressive party, the dominant political group in British Guiana, suggest that there will be a cooling of his working relationship with colonial officials. Jagan is visiting Cuba from 4 to 7 April on the way home from the constitutional conference in London. He conferred at length on 4 April with Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, a high-level Cuban Communist who is influential in the Castro regime, and with major government leaders. This is the first such contact between British Guiana and Cuba and may lead elements in the Castro government to support Jagan.

The constitutional talks broke up on 31 March over arrangements for transitional measures toward internal self-government, and Jagan said that he would strive for early independence, which the British had refused to discuss until 1963. Although Britain's proposal to introduce internal self-government in August 1961 was received favorably, the Guianese delegation objected to making this advance contingent on satisfactory interim arrangements involving partial retention of British control over the police and internal security and provision for safeguarding the future of British officials in the local civil service.

The Guianese also opposed allowing the governor to retain the constitutional right to issue decrees in an emergency, but London believes it should retain certain controls because Jagan--who will probably become the first prime minister--is a Communist. Meanwhile, Jagan's control over the People's Progressive party may be challenged at the forthcoming party congress by those critical of his and his wife's autocratic domination of party councils. He probably will be able to fend off any such attack. Despite his desire to press independence demands, he does not wish to prejudice chances for much needed foreign investment by attempting to go too far too fast.
