[PAGE 01]
25 August 1959
Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS have no objection to declassification and release.

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

France-Libya: The French Ministry of Defense has notified the US air attaché of plans for additional French Air Force reconnaissance flights over Libya to observe suspected Algerian

i
[PAGE 05]
rebel activity. The overflights, set for 26 August and 2 September, are to follow the same routes as those of 29 July and 5 August which apparently went unnoticed by the Libyan Government.

Brazil: Riots protesting the shortage of basic foods and the continuing increase in the cost of living may erupt in the industrial Sao Paulo area. The illegal Communist party is probably ready to participate actively in any public disturbances. State police would have difficulty in controlling any large-scale riots and might have to summon army help.

25 Aug 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Brazilian Economic Unrest May Lead to Riots

Social unrest over the cost of living and shortages of staple foods has mounted in the past week in industrial Sao Paulo and could lead to strikes and riots which would probably be exploited by the Communists, according to the American Consulate General. Sao Paulo states officials are concerned over the situation, and the governor reportedly conferred with President Kubitschek on 14 August about security measures. The police would probably have difficulty controlling a mass demonstration and might have to summon army reinforcements.

The cost of living in Sao Paulo increased over 17 percent in the first five months of the year and probably rose even more in July and August as a result of the food shortages. The federal government's emergency program to control prices and increase food production, instituted last March, brought some temporary relief but has not yet had a major impact on the situation.

A business recession in Sao Paulo and extensive unemployment in the construction industry are probably contributing to the unrest. The American Embassy has reported growing public impatience in Rio de Janeiro with shortages and price increases, and demonstrations have occurred in other cities.

The press has reported an announcement by the Brazilian Federal Price Control Agency that the government may take over foreign-owned meat-packing firms in an effort to relieve the current shortage of meat. This threat is probably intended partly to divert attention from other more serious basic shortages, as well as to force the meat-packing companies to resume operations under government price controls.

Protests over the cost of living and the business recession will probably reinforce President Kubitschek's reluctance to adopt an austerity program as a basis for reopening loan talks with the International Monetary Fund. Brazil's dollar receipts were unexpectedly high in July, but a new foreign-exchange crisis is likely within a few months.

25 Aug 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
