Communist and Castro Influence Dominant in Latin American Peace Congress

An attack on the US position in the Canal Zone would be enthusiastically supported by delegates to the conference, as well as by observers who are attending from most Communist countries, including China. The Panamanian demand for sovereignty may be used as part of a campaign against US retention of the naval base at Guantanamo.

Thelma King has a long record of involvement in subversive political activity, and her current plotting with other irresponsible Panamanian politicans has contributed to the instability of the Chiari government. Reportedly subsidized by Castro, she has been successful in arousing support for him among student and other groups.

The conference seems to be the fruition of Communist efforts to convene a Latin American "people's congress," originally set for April 1959 when Castro's prestige was at its height. Designed to promote anti-US and pro-Castro sentiment, its agenda includes such topics as anti-imperialism, anticolonialism, defense of national resources, and disarmament, as well as support of the Cuban revolution.

A secretariat drawn from Communist-front peace groups in several Latin American countries has been in Mexico since December working out details of the meeting. Programs to arouse interest have been held recently among student, labor, and cultural groups in various countries, particularly in Mexico. Cardenas--whose widespread popularity in Mexico gives him some influence in the Lopez Mateos government--and other conference organizers have met several times recently with the Soviet ambassador to Mexico, Bazykin, and two Venezuelan delegates called on the envoy soon after their arrival on 16 February.

Bazykin plans to leave soon on a Latin American tour probably designed to explore possibilities for increasing Soviet diplomatic and economic ties. Several countries, including Panama, have delayed issuing visas requested by him, and Colombia has actually refused to grant a visa, saying the "time is not appropriate for such a visit."
