I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow "Advises" Indian Communists on Current Tactics

The Soviet Communist party has reportedly directed the Indian Communist party (CPI) not to adopt a "drastic program" of violent tactics throughout India in retaliation for pressures on the Communist regime in Kerala State. This information, contained in a 3 July message, appears credible in view of subsequent CPI statements and recent Soviet efforts to avoid offending Nehru. The message contained an offer of Soviet aid for the Indian Communists in undertaking "widespread agitation"--presumably nonviolent. Such aid might include covert financial help and propaganda assistance from nonbloc Communists as well as bloc countries.

Moscow's directive appears to have sidetracked a change in tactics planned by the CPI executive late in June. The central committee, under pressure from extremist leaders, had reportedly decided to adopt a program of "maximum force feasible under the constitution" throughout India if the Kerala regime were ousted. The CPI has since announced, however, that it will stage nationwide "demonstrations" on 21 July to support the Communists in Kerala. Separate civil disobedience campaigns against Congress party governments in such states as West Bengal, Bombay, and Punjab are also planned, exploiting popular local issues in cooperation with other opposition groups.

Temporarily at least, Moscow's directive apparently strengthens the hand of the moderate faction which advocates a "peaceful parliamentary" approach.

Anti-Communist demonstrations continue in Kerala on a daily basis. Both Congress and Communist state leaders have made further trips to New Delhi to present their opposing cases to government leaders. While the government's formal decision on intervention in Kerala will not be made until later this month, top Congress party figures apparently anticipate intervention some time in August, by which time the "formalities" necessary to establish a legal basis for President's Rule will have been completed.

14 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
page 1
