July were encouraging the defection of army officers. General Shihab has agreed with rebel leaders to attempt to block the election of Chamoun's successor, now set for 24 July, until "the last foreign soldier withdraws from Lebanon."

rebel leader Rashid Karame has reported that UN Observer Group leaders Plaza and Dayal have told him in a meeting that they were anxious that their report should be "devoid of anything which might lead to intervention in Lebanon." Karame assured them that the sizable nighttime truck convoys from Syria detected by aerial observation were simply carrying "vegetables and fruit." He then requested that Syrian authorities load some vehicles with "some goods of this type" in order to convince the observers by a personal inspection. Karame claimed the two observers suggested that "we join together against the common enemy." The UN observer group in Lebanon has taken an antagonistic attitude toward the landing of marines, claiming it had frustrated an "arranged" settlement between the contending factions. Every effort is being made to thwart liaison between the UN group and US forces.

UAR reaction to the landing of British and American forces in Lebanon and Jordan has consisted of bitter radio broadcasts, and, institution of the highest known level of military alert. Reserves have been called up and popular resistance units mobilized. Syrian armored forces have been sent to the Lebanese frontier and fedayeen units originally intended for action in Lebanon have been held in Syria. UAR Air Force units in Syria have been reinforced with bombers from Egypt for use "in support of Iraq should the occasion arise."

Meanwhile Turkish troops, in response to the rising tempo of Syrian military moves, were observed on 15 July in unusually large concentrations of armor and motorized units all along the central Syrian-Turkish border from Birecik to Mardin.

In Jordan, 3,000 British troops reached Amman in the first day's airlift, and by 18 July the UK force is expected to number about 8,000 men. At least six jet fighters are now stationed at Amman airfield. The British troops are

18 July 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
