[PAGE 01]
2 July 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Widespread drought in Soviet "new lands" (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Ba Cut's Hoa Hao forces reported defeated by Vietnamese army (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Pinay suggests Big Three meeting on North Africa (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Widespread drought in Soviet "new lands":

Comment: Similar drought conditions have been reported recently in Chkalov Oblast and northwest Kazakh SSR. These reports, together with available weather data, indicate that the entire "new lands" area has suffered from lack of rainfall. Even if weather during July is favorable, crops in the "new lands" will be only mediocre at best.

Crop prospects in European USSR continue to be favorable. Therefore, despite apparent difficulties in the "new lands" area, the total Soviet harvest for 1955 could equal or might possibly exceed the mediocre level of 1954, when there was a drought in the Ukraine. (Prepared by ORR)

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ba Cut's Hoa Hao forces reported defeated by Vietnamese army:

Rebel Hoa Hao leader Ba Cut was defeated and driven from his stronghold near the Cambodian border on 29 June,

His remaining forces total approximately 900 men. The only escape for Ba Cut's remnants, is to be evacuated by the French navy from their present small enclave on the southwest coast.

[PAGE 04]
WESTERN U. S. S. R.
ESTABLISHED AND NEW WHEAT PRODUCING AREAS
JULY 1955

MOSCOW
NOVOSIBIRSK
AKMOLINSK
NORTHWEST KAZAKHSTAN

[PAGE 05]
although military action against the Hoa Hao west of Saigon was proceeding very well, the political phase was unsatisfactory. The majority of the population in the former rebel-held territory remains under the influence of either the Hoa Hao or the Viet Minh.

Comment: The rapid progress of the Vietnamese national army in neutralizing organized Hoa Hao opposition has tended to obscure the fact that the government may still be faced with substantial guerrilla activity by die-hard rebel elements. The army is now engaged in mopping-up operations intended to forestall such a development.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Pinay suggests Big Three meeting on North Africa:

French foreign minister Pinay urged Ambassador Dillon that during Secretary Dulles' stay in Europe, representatives of the United States, Britain and France hold a meeting to discuss all aspects of the North African problem. He considered that it might even be advisable to have such a meeting at the chiefs-of-government level.

Pinay also said that he hoped a simple statement of an agreed position would come out of the meeting. This, he said, would greatly help to put at rest the many rumors of American and British opposition to the continued presence of France in North Africa.

Comment: On 20 June Premier Faure suggested a high-level meeting with the United States on the North African situation and mentioned that Marshal Juin might head a French delegation to Washington.

The increasing French charges during the past month of American interference in North African affairs may be a build-up for a demand that the United States agree to a forthright statement backing French policy in North Africa.
