[PAGE 01]
Copy No. 99
2 July 1955

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Widespread drought in Soviet "new lands" (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Ba Cut's Hoa Hao forces reported defeated by Vietnamese army (page 3).
3. Indonesian president attempting to split army opposition (page 5)

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Pinay suggests Big Three meeting on North Africa (page 6).

****

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Widespread drought in Soviet "new lands":

Members of a United States Quaker delegation returning to Moscow in late June from Akmolinsk, deep in the "new lands" region (see map p. 4) reported dust "shoe mouth deep" on the streets. reported similar dust conditions in Novosibirsk. Residents of Novosibirsk commented that there had been no rain for several months. The drought was reported to be the main topic of conversation in the areas visited in Western Siberia and Kazakhstan.

Comment: Similar drought conditions have been reported recently in Chkalov Oblast and northwest Kazakh SSR. These reports, together with available weather data, indicate that the entire "new lands" area has suffered from lack of rainfall. Even if weather during July is favorable, crops in the "new lands" will be only mediocre at best.

Crop prospects in European USSR continue to be favorable. Therefore, despite apparent difficulties in the "new lands" area, the total Soviet harvest for 1955 could equal or might possibly exceed the mediocre level of 1954, when there was a drought in the Ukraine. (Prepared by ORR)

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ba Cut's Hoa Hao forces reported defeated by Vietnamese army:

Rebel Hoa Hao leader Ba Cut was defeated and driven from his stronghold near the Cambodian border on 29 June, His remaining forces total approximately The only escape for Ba Cut's remnants, is to be evacuated by the French navy from their present small enclave on the southwest coast.

[PAGE 04]
WESTERN U. S. S. R. ESTABLISHED AND NEW WHEAT PRODUCING AREAS
1 JULY 1955

PRESENTATIONS DIVISION

[PAGE 05]
although military action against the Hoa Hao west of Saigon was proceeding very well, the political phase was unsatisfactory. The majority of the population in the formerly rebel-held territory remains under the influence of either the Hoa Hao or the Viet Minh.

Comment: The rapid progress of the Vietnamese national army in neutralizing organized Hoa Hao opposition has tended to obscure the fact that the government may still be faced with substantial guerrilla activity by die-hard rebel elements. The army is now engaged in mopping-up operations intended to forestall such a development.

3. Indonesian president attempting to split army opposition:

President Sukarno is believed to have begun efforts to undermine army unity in order to prevent a cabinet reshuffle or a cabinet collapse. He has summoned to his Bogor summer home the territorial commander in East Java, Colonel Sudirman, and the commander of the military police, Colonel Prajogo, presumably to discuss army opposition to the appointment on 27 June of Colonel Utoyo as the new chief of staff.

Since Sudirman had been careful prior to 27 June not to commit himself to any army faction and had stated that his primary loyalty was to Sukarno and the government, the president may be able to persuade him to withdraw his support from Acting Chief of Staff Lubis and the five other territorial commanders. Should Sukarno be successful in undermining the army's united opposition, it is unlikely that the motion of no confidence in pro-Communist Defense Minister Iwa, introduced in parliament on 29 June, would be passed.

Meanwhile, however, normally pro-government Indonesian newspapers reflect a continuing loss of cabinet prestige.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Pinay suggests Big Three meeting on North Africa:

French foreign minister Pinay urged Ambassador Dillon that during Secretary Dulles' stay in Europe, representatives of the United States, Britain and France hold a meeting to discuss all aspects of the North African problem. He considered that it might even be advisable to have such a meeting at the chiefs-of-government level.

Pinay also said that he hoped a simple statement of an agreed position would come out of the meeting. This, he said, would greatly help to put at rest the many rumors of American and British opposition to the continued presence of France in North Africa.

Comment: On 20 June Premier Faure suggested a high-level meeting with the United States on the North African situation and mentioned that Marshal Juin might head a French delegation to Washington.

The increasing French charges during the past month of American interference in North African affairs may be a build-up for a demand that the United States agree to a forthright statement backing French policy in North Africa.
