[PAGE 01]
18 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR--Second vehicle launched from TTMTR within 25 hours; neither believed to have achieved its objective.

Mikoyan, at end of visit to Iraq, says no change envisaged in Soviet aid program for Baghdad.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Africa’s most influential African leader reported dying as result of police beatings.

Change or overthrow of Sudanese Government increasingly likely.

Greek Government under increased pressure to improve relations with USSR because of planned Menderes-Khrushchev visits.

III. THE WEST

Castro planning to use May Day rally to demonstrate hemisphere and Sino-Soviet support of his regime.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: Two vehicles were launched from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range about 25 hours apart. The first was launched at 1007 EST, 15 April, the second at 1108 EST 16 April. Although there is evidence to the contrary, the 15 April event was some type of space venture--probably with a lunar mission. Preliminary calculation reveals that the probe attained only enough velocity to go into space about 115,000 miles. The continued lack of a public announcement and the low velocity achieved indicate that the vehicle failed to reach its objective.

Preliminary analysis of the 16 April event indicates that the vehicle lifted off the launching pad but failed almost immediately thereafter. The possibility exists that this was a standby lunar vehicle, inasmuch as it was launched at the next optimum time.

The 25-hour interval between the launchings is less than half the previous shortest interval and suggests that at least

USSR-Iraq: Mikoyan's statements to the press on 16 April at the end of his visit to Iraq were mostly cordial generalities. Although he had several private talks with Qasim, no joint communique was issued. The Iraqi Government's reception of Mikoyan was correct but not enthusiastic, and the military and the press continued their efforts to undermine the

Moscow would
e to iraqi requests for additional economic aid. In response to a direct question at his final press conference, however, Mikoyan said that no alteration of the existing $137,500,000
[PAGE 05]
aid program was envisaged because "we have such a good agreement that there is no desire from either party to change it." (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Africa: Albert Luthuli, the president of the African National Congress and the most influential African nationalist in South Africa, appears to be dying as a result of the harsh treatment he received after his arrest on 30 March.

The death or permanent incapacitation of Luthuli, who had exercised a restraining influence over African extremists, would provide Africans throughout the country with a rallying symbol for further action against the government. Regardless of Luthuli's condition, serious disorders may occur if Africans provoke police retaliation by heeding nationalist appeals to begin a week-long stay-at-home campaign on 19 April.

Sudan: Dissension within the top leadership of the Abboud military regime is growing, as each of the several factions tries to line up army and civilian supporters. The regime's unpopularity has increased, partly as a result of strong pressures by influential political and religious leaders for a return to civilian government. Junior army officers and elements of the National Unionist party reportedly are again planning a coup. It seems doubtful that all five regional army commanders would support the regime in the event of a showdown. (Page 3)

Greece: The recent announcement that Turkish Prime Minister Menderes and Soviet Premier Khrushchev will exchange visits this summer has created difficulties for the Greek Government, according to Foreign Minister Averoff. Opposition groups, both left and right, are again denouncing the "inflexible" foreign policy which has left Greece almost alone in its opposition to the USSR's economic and cultural offensive. Thus the government may decide

18 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
it must make some dramatic move toward improving relations with the bloc. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel Castro seems intent on making the May Day rally in Havana a demonstration of strong support for his regime not only by the Cuban masses but also by public sentiment throughout the hemisphere. Evidently aware of the cool attitude of most Latin American governments, he is trying to show hemisphere support by inviting numerous political figures who are out of office but have widespread reputations as liberal or "anti-imperialist" leaders. The Cuban Communist party is taking a leading part in preparations for the rally, and almost 100 representatives from Communist China and Soviet bloc countries are expected to participate. (Page 5)

18 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

The Mikoyan Visit to Iraq

Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan's eight-day visit to Iraq did not inhibit the Iraqi government and army from continuing strong measures to undermine the Iraqi Communists. The government's reception of Mikoyan was correct but not particularly enthusiastic. Although he talked privately with Qasim several times, no communiqué was issued.

His statements to a press conference on 16 April, the day of his departure, were mostly cordial generalities. In a message late in March reporting arrangements for the visit, the Soviet Government had indicated that it would be receptive to Iraqi requests for additional economic aid. In response to a direct question at his final press conference, however, Mikoyan revealed that no alteration of the $137,500,000 economic aid program was envisaged. He said, "We have such a good agreement that there is no desire from either party to change it."

Nationalist newspapers used the visit as an occasion for new attacks on Iraqi Communists, and one paper asked directly, "Have you, O Comrade, come to communize?" The Baghdad military court began trials of a large additional group of Communists, and the army used force to break up several small strikes, apparently Communist inspired. When Mikoyan went to Basra on 14 April, the Iraqi army and police sealed off all avenues approaching his route into the city and beat off crowds of Communist demonstrators who attempted to break through.

Soviet displeasure at these tactics--and perhaps at the entire tone of Mikoyan's reception in Iraq--was reflected by an Izvestia criticism that Mikoyan was prevented from having contact with "the Iraqi people."
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

South African Native Leader Reported Dying

Albert Luthuli, the president of the African National Congress and the most influential African nationalist in South Africa, appears to be dying as a result of the harsh treatment he received from the police after his arrest on 30 March.

Luthuli is reportedly suffering from dangerously high blood pressure as a result of police beatings, even if Luthuli should survive, he will be a "dull and shuffling moron."

Luthuli is almost the only African nationalist whose prestige extends throughout South Africa. His program has been moderate, emphasizing peaceful reform. He has favored the creation of an African-dominated state, with non-African minority rights constitutionally guaranteed. Although government-imposed restrictions have hindered his activities, he has heretofore acted to restrain African extremists. His death or permanent incapacitation would provide Africans throughout the country with a rallying symbol for further action against the government.

Regardless of Luthuli's condition, serious disorders may occur if Africans provoke police retaliation by heeding nationalist appeals to begin a week-long stay-at-home campaign on 19 April.
[PAGE 09]
The Sudanese Situation

The possibility of a sudden move to change or overthrow the Abboud military regime in the Sudan is growing. Dissension within the Supreme Military Council--the top governing body--has become acute, as each of its several factions tries to line up army and civilian support. Two council members, Deputy Army Commander in Chief Hasan Bashir Nasir and Minister of Information Talat Farid, have resorted to the use of spies to keep track of each other's activities.

Influential political and religious leaders have sustained their pressures for a rapid return to civilian government, and the Supreme Council members have been unable to agree on how to deal with them. The minister of interior has refused to present them with an ultimatum to desist or be jailed unless such action is endorsed by all army leaders. The head of the Ansar religious sect, which could probably muster several thousand partially armed tribesmen in an emergency, has warned the government that action against him would force "drastic countermeasures."

Junior army officers are again plotting a coup; elements of the National Unionist party are reportedly in contact with some of them for the purpose of joint planning to seize control of the government. A week ago, a considerable quantity of arms and ammunition was allegedly stolen from Khartoum military stores; almost immediately army units in the Khartoum area were put on standby alert.

It seems doubtful that the regime can count on support of all five regional army commanders in the event of a full-scale showdown.
[PAGE 10]
Greek Government Faces Increasing Pressure to Improve Relations With USSR

The announcement on 12 April that Turkish Prime Minister Menderes and Soviet Premier Khrushchev will exchange visits has caused the Greek Government more domestic difficulties than it had anticipated, according to Greek Foreign Minister Averoff. The opposition press, both the far left and the anti-Communist center, is again attacking the government's "inflexible" foreign policy. Several non-Communist political leaders have denounced the government for permitting Greece to become isolated in its opposition to the Soviet bloc's economic and cultural offensive. Liberal party leader Venizelos has seized the opportunity to announce that he has accepted a month-old Soviet invitation to visit the USSR. Venizelos, although a non-Communist, is sufficiently vain and ambitious to be used by the USSR for propaganda to undermine Greek Prime Minister Karamanlis.

The USSR has alternately used the "carrot and the stick" in attempting to "normalize" its relations with Greece, and late last year the Soviet ambassador in Athens vainly attempted to arrange an exchange of visits between Karamanlis and Khrushchev.

Athens is "resentful and unhappy" over Ankara's precipitate announcement of the visits and its omission of the fact that Menderes will visit Athens before going to Moscow.

Averoff has told the American ambassador that Athens must soon decide if it will "fall in line" and abandon its resistance to a detente. Thus Athens may decide to make some dramatic move to improve its relations with the bloc.
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Plans for Cuban May Day Rally

Fidel Castro seems determined to make the May Day rally in Havana a demonstration of strong support for his regime not only by the Cuban masses but also by public sentiment throughout the hemisphere and by the Sino-Soviet bloc.

A parade by the armed forces and militia units is planned to show Cuba's capacity to repel the foreign invasion Castro officials insist is being plotted by "imperialism." Previous plans for a march of a million workers are rumored to have been abandoned because of a bitter fight within the Cuban Labor Confederation (CTC) over the government's endorsement of efforts to purge non-Communist leaders. The Cuban Communist party has taken advantage of this situation to usurp CTC responsibility for organizing the May Day celebration, hoping thus to strengthen its influence with Castro and within the CTC.

Delegations invited from other Latin American countries include liberal leaders--many of them widely respected--who recently signed a "statement of solidarity with the Cuban Revolution." Their presence would be used to demonstrate support by nonofficial hemisphere groups and to offset the coolness of most Latin American governments toward Castro and their concern over his rejection of the Rio de Janeiro Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance.

Castro will also probably attempt to attract to Havana a large number of the prominent liberals and leftists from all Latin American countries and the United States who have been invited to Maracay, Venezuela, from 21 to 26 April to attend the scheduled conference of the Inter-American Association for the Defense of Democracy and Freedom--a meeting which is supported by Venezuelan President Betancourt's regime. Those invited to the Maracay conference include eight former chiefs of state and other influential
[PAGE 12]
political leaders and government officials, several of whom have long been considered unfriendly toward the US.

The Cuban Government reportedly is paying transportation and lodging costs for 18 Chinese Communists who will participate in the May Day rally. Along with 73 Soviet visitors and other bloc delegations, the Chinese will probably be given a prominent place in the demonstration.

The American Embassy in Havana is convinced the rally will have a strong anti-US and Communist-line flavor.
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
