South Vietnam Government Maneuvers Against Local Critics

The Diem regime, despite a show of unconcern, realizes that the much-publicized "manifesto" for democratic reforms issued in Saigon last month by a group of former officials and civic leaders could lead to more serious criticism. The government accordingly is taking immediate steps to bolster its prestige, while seeking to stigmatize its critics before popular opinion. Thus far, however, the widespread public discontent over the government’s authoritarian excesses has taken no organized form.

With the recent events in South Korea in mind, the government is turning particular attention to student elements, and has decided on an organizational program designed to assure their loyalty. At the same time, under the pretense of protecting the public against hoodlums, authorities reportedly have already arrested a number of youths suspected of antigovernment sentiment.

The Vietnamese press, apparently at government instigation, is characterizing the small opposition group as "foreign inspired." Stressing that the group’s press conference was held before "foreign journalists" in a "foreign hotel"--Air France’s elegant Caravelle in Saigon--editorials in progovernment papers have warned that this reliance on foreigners would lead to loss of Vietnamese sovereignty if the group had power.

The government apparently is considering more direct repression of the group, which has just applied for registration as a legal opposition party. Ngo Dinh Nhu, President Diem’s brother and political adviser, has described the group’s public criticism as illegal, and has stated that the government has little choice but to apply the law. Thus far, however, the government has maintained an official silence on the matter, with Diem taking stock of international reaction--particularly American--before showing his hand. In a rare presidential press conference held recently, Diem stated that "critics are always acceptable provided they are fair and impartial."
