USSR-Iraq: Iraqi security services since 10 May have undertaken intensive surveillance of the Soviet Embassy and homes of bloc diplomatic personnel. While Moscow and Baghdad officially remain on good terms, the Iraqi ambassador to Moscow reportedly commented during a recent trip to Baghdad that the two countries are "not as close as they were a few months ago" and that Soviet leaders are increasingly less well disposed toward Qasim. These developments tend to substantiate the gradual decline in Iraqi-Soviet relations marked by Qasim’s refusal in February to license the orthodox Communist party, the failure of Mikoyan’s April visit to produce significant results, and recent signs that Baghdad would like to improve relations with the West. (Page 4)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-USSR: Nehru, en route home from the Commonwealth conference, on 16 May was reportedly considering a two-day visit to Moscow for talks with Khrushchev, probably around 26-27 May, before returning to India. Nehru had received letters from Khrushchev repeating an earlier invitation to come to Moscow as soon as possible and was awaiting further word before making final plans. Nehru, now in the UAR, probably has been badly shaken by developments at the summit. Any decision to go to Moscow now presumably depends on his revised assessment of the situation and on whether he feels his personal intervention would help ease tensions.

Turkey: The prestige of Prime Minister Menderes is at an all-time low in Istanbul, and opposition elements there have gained a new sense of confidence. Turkish security forces expect a large demonstration in Ankara on 19 May, a Turkish youth and sports holiday. (Page 5)

South Africa: The South African Government apparently intends to maintain its present authoritarian policy, despite mounting criticism within the country’s white community. In parliament on 16 May, Justice Minister Erasmus refused to yield to vociferous opposition demands that the seven-week-old state of emergency be lifted, stating that the emergency regulations must remain in force at least
