[PAGE 01]
22 April 1958

Copy No. 140

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Poland: Gomulka's impending visit to Hungary and Rumania, a trip which may also include Bulgaria, is the latest of a series of moves by Poland during the past month to emphasize bloc solidarity. These moves have included adopting a position more in conformity with the Soviet interpretation of the Hungarian revolution, taking the lead in the bloc campaign against West German nuclear armament, and boycotting the Yugoslav party congress despite Gomulka's known sympathies. Such actions in support of Soviet bloc policy may have been taken by Gomulka to enhance his status among bloc leaders and to improve relations with the USSR.

USSR - Lebanon: Soviet Ambassador Kiktey has renewed Moscow's offer of unconditional economic assistance to Lebanon. Similar offers, which have not been specific, have been made to Jordan and to Saudi Arabia as part of Moscow's discreet effort to extend its economic relationships with pro-Western Arab states. This offer is apparently timed to exploit unrest in Lebanon in connection with President Chamoun's intention to seek re-election and is intended generally to encourage opposition to Lebanon's pro-Western policies.

i
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel-Jordan: Tension between Israelis and Arabs in the Jerusalem area may rise sharply as the Israelis make final preparations for the large military parade and other celebrations scheduled for 24 April. The presence of sizable concentrations of troops and armor in both the Israeli and Jordanian sectors, in violation of the General Armistice Agreement, creates the possibility of serious incidents. The presence of large crowds of civilians near the armistice lines could also lead to clashes.

22 Apr 58      DAILY BRIEF      ii
[PAGE 06]
Suez Canal compensation: The British directors of the old Suez Canal Company have been instructed by the Foreign Office to stand firmly for acceptance of Nasir's offer of approximately $65,000,000 at a company board meeting to be held on 22 April. Since both the British and French governments view Nasir's offer favorably, the majority of the shareholders of the company seem likely to accept the offer of compensation for the company's nationalized property in Egypt.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: The British have postponed further discussions with Athens pending the Greek national elections on 11 May, and are now trying unsuccessfully to moderate the Turkish demand for partition. In the meantime, they are refusing to make any public policy statement on Cyprus. The British at present are more fearful of violence by Turks than by Greeks, and plan to authorize demonstrations on 23 April, Turkish Youth Day, despite the danger that both communal violence and a renewed EOKA campaign may flare up.

22 Apr 58      DAILY BRIEF      iii
[PAGE 07]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Israeli-Jordanian Tension in Jerusalem

Increased Israeli-Jordanian tension in Jerusalem, as a consequence of troop movements into the area by both sides, will add to the difficulties of avoiding a serious incident during the large Israeli military parade and anniversary celebrations scheduled for 24 April.

During the past week, Israel has moved at least 74 tanks and other armored vehicles, plus field artillery, into Jerusalem in violation of the General Armistice Agreement. Between 4,000 and 5,000 Israeli troops have been brought into the city.

The Jordanian Government, probably fearful of the propaganda consequences of not taking a firm position against this violation of the armistice agreement, announced on 20 April that Jordanian troops and military equipment would be moved into the Jerusalem area in sufficient strength to redress the balance of forces. About 4,000 troops are available for the move, including an infantry brigade and two tank battalions with 60 tanks. The Jordanian Government has been advised by UN Truce Supervisor Von Horn that about 150,000 Israelis civilians will be along the route of the parade in the vicinity of the armistice lines.

The Israelis also plan to use searchlights from Israel to illuminate a Star of David on the Haddasa hospital on Mount Scopus, an Israeli-held enclave inside Jordan. Jordanian Foreign Minister Rifai has stated that these searchlights would be "knocked out." The celebrations also are to include a fireworks display on Mount Scopus. Israel is reported to have agreed, however, not to have an aerial fly-by.

General Von Horn has obtained agreement from both countries to permit UN military observers to be stationed throughout the city.

22 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 3
[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Poland: Gomulka's impending visit to Hungary and Rumania, a trip which may also include Bulgaria, is the latest of a series of moves by Poland during the past month to emphasize bloc solidarity. These moves have included adopting a position more in conformity with the Soviet interpretation of the Hungarian revolution, taking the lead in the bloc campaign against West German nuclear armament, and boycotting the Yugoslav party congress despite Gomulka's known sympathies. Such actions in support of Soviet bloc policy may have been taken by Gomulka to enhance his status among bloc leaders and to improve relations with the USSR.
