7. Czech Foreign Office accuses US of distorting Oatis case:
Czech Foreign Minister Siroky has informed the US Ambassador in Prague that the Foreign Office has washed its hands of the case of arrested US newsman Oatis because of US press and radio distortions of his prior meeting with the Ambassador on this matter. Siroky stated that Oatis would be tried within a few days and that a US Embassy official could attend the trial. According to the Foreign Minister, Oatis has made a "full confession" of "serious crimes against the Czech state." The US Ambassador comments that Oatis will probably endorse a confession at his trial and may even appear as a defector.
Comment: In a discussion of the Oatis case with the US Ambassador on 16 May, Siroky charged that the US was sponsoring Radio Free Europe, whose operations were creating an unfavorable atmosphere. As a result of a subsequent news leak in Germany, the Western press published reports that the Czechoslovak Government had demanded the suspension of Radio Free Europe in return for the release of Oatis.
WESTERN EUROPE
8. Soviets relax Berlin trade restrictions:
The USSR has relaxed its current restrictions on West Berlin's exports to the West, releasing several hundred requests for trade permits that it had hitherto refused to approve. At the same time, however, S. A. Dengin of the Soviet Control Commission has replied to Allied protests regarding the Soviet restrictions by claiming the right of the Soviets to control shipments from West Berlin as a means of ensuring that no illegally obtained raw materials from East Germany are included in those shipments. Allied and Soviet experts will attempt to work out a method of control. Meanwhile, the Allies are making it clear to Dengin that the resumption of negotiations for a trade agreement between East and West Germany is dependent upon the abandonment of Soviet restrictions on West Berlin exports.
Comment: This Soviet relaxation of restrictions appears to have resulted from the threat of firm Allied countermeasures, including the simultaneous embargo of key items from West Germany and West Berlin to the Soviet zone, as well as from the expectation of a prompt conclusion of an interzonal trade agreement, for which negotiations were halted by the West during the current dispute.
