[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet diplomat comments on Berlin conference (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. American observers report on supply of ammunition at Dien Bien Phu (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Saudi Arabia increasing its pressure on TWA to stop air service to Israel (page 4).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet diplomat comments on Berlin conference:

A counselor of the Soviet embassy in London, who has previously been used to disclose Soviet policy, told an American diplomat on 28 January that he believes it is idle to hope for progress on Germany and Austria at Berlin. He said these problems can be solved only after the Western powers have shown their willingness to relax tensions through agreement to outlaw atomic weapons, abandon advance bases and reduce armed forces by a given percentage.

He said that rumors of the presence of 12 Chinese Communist representatives in Berlin were "absolutely without foundation," but that the presence in the Soviet delegation of M. T. Fedorenko, the foremost Soviet expert on China, was "significant."

He further asserted that Moscow and not Peiping took the initiative in insisting that the USSR could not attend a Korean political conference as a member of the Communist side.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. American observers report on supply of ammunition at Dien Bien Phu:

A team of American officers who recently visited Dien Bien Phu reported on 28 January that the French artillery commander there estimated he had on hand only four to six days' supply of 105mm and 155mm ammunition.

Intermittent rains are causing concern over the condition of the main airstrip, where about 50 C-47s are landing daily. Twenty C-119 airdrop sorties are flown daily, a rate sustainable for only six days if enemy action were to prevent the recovery of the heavy drop parachutes.

Comment: The artillery commander's estimate contrasts with a 4 January figure from French headquarters of 30 days' supply. The headquarters figure covering all categories of ammunition may have emphasized the smaller calibers. The field commander may also be exaggerating his supply needs.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Saudi Arabia increasing its pressure on TWA to stop air service to Israel:

Saudi Arabia is increasing its pressure on TWA to discontinue air service to Israel, according to Ambassador Wadsworth. Acting Foreign Minister Yassin stated that the Saudi government boycotts commercial enterprises with branches in Israel and that if TWA continues its flights to Israel, the government will have "to re-examine its relationship with TWA."

[PAGE 05]
Yassin implied that the boycott has been accepted in principle by all the Arab League countries, and that if put into effect, it would prevent any foreign airline serving Israel from landing in or overflying the Arab states.

Comment: This is the strongest effort yet made by Saudi Arabia to force TWA to suspend air operations into Israel. TWA not only operates flights to Dhahran but also serves and manages the Saudi Arabian Airline.
