Tension Over South Tirol Issue

After years of inconclusive negotiation regarding Italian implementation of the Italo-Austrian pact of 1946--providing special rights for the inhabitants of the former Austrian South Tirol--Austria brought the issue to the UN General Assembly last fall. In line with a UN recommendation, the two countries undertook new and high-level negotiations on 26 January, but the talks broke down after two days. Italy had offered greater administrative powers for Bolzano Province--the heart of the German-speaking area--but Austria had insisted on a kind of local autonomy similar to that of the Italian region of Sicily. This would have required legislative changes.

An Italian delegate who participated in the abortive talks has told US officials that Rome is in "no hurry" to admit that further talks "are hopeless." The government apparently intends to maintain a public posture of holding the door open for further talks while maintaining the status quo in the area.

If the Liberal party--which fears Premier Fanfani will form a center-left reformist government dependent on Nenni Socialist parliamentary support--withdraws from the coalition that supports Fanfani's minority all - Christian Democratic cabinet, the government will be brought down. Discussing the general outlook for the government a few days ago, the secretary of the Christian Democratic party said the situation has become unstable. Although hopeful of saving the government, he spoke of its continued existence in terms of months and weeks.

The neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement, with its prestige revived as a result of having been the sole parliamentary supporter of the Tambroni Christian Democratic government last year, is trying to exploit the situation. The neo-Fascists may provoke further anti-Austrian demonstrations in Rome and probably hope that new clashes will occur in the South Tirol which will require disciplinary measures and draw Italian troops to the area.

6 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 10
