[PAGE 01]
24 May 1958

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 7 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Satellites Differ on Yugoslav Question

Hungarian, Rumanian and Polish comments on the Moscow-Belgrade dispute have emphasized "comradely criticism," They have avoided vituperation and, although fully adhering to basic positions on "revisionism," have called for further interparty talks and continuance of amicable government-to-government relations. This reaction--which in the case of Hungary admittedly reflects "consternation" of party members over Yugoslav developments--is significantly different from the uncompromising stand taken by Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany.

Comment in the official Hungarian party newspaper of 21 May, while closer to the Kremlin's position than Warsaw's guarded defiance, is nonetheless conciliatory. It calls for further discussions with the Yugoslav party "as between comrades" and warns Hungarian party members not to "backslide" to the vituperative line of the 1949 Cominform resolution against Yugoslavia. On the other hand, the Hungarian article does condemn the Yugoslav party for its "anti-Marxist views," admits the 1948 resolution expelling Belgrade from the Cominform was "essentially" correct, and alleges Yugoslavia approved of the Hungarian revolution.

Rumania, like Hungary, apparently still desires to avoid direct involvement in the dispute. The official Rumanian comment on the Yugoslav question issued on 18 May avoided polemics while carefully siding with Moscow on the ideological questions in dispute.

Polish comment goes much further, approaching open disagreement with the Kremlin's line and even hinting that Moscow does not fully support the Chinese Communist denunciation of Tito. An 18 May article in Swiat i Polska, unofficial organ of the Foreign Ministry, declared that the Poles considered the isolation of Yugoslavia in 1948 "unjustified."

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Egyptian Activity in the Sudan

The UAR's subversive campaign against Sudanese Prime Minister Khalil's pro-Western government may be gaining strength, and events in Lebanon have apparently shaken the confidence of high Sudanese officials in their ability to resist a possible Egyptian effort to overthrow Khalil's coalition.

Egypt was apparently unchastened by the setback in prestige it suffered in the Sudanese border dispute last February and Khalil's subsequent parliamentary election victory over the pro-Egyptian National Unionist party.

Disaffection of a relatively small number of members in the all-important house of representatives would threaten the slim majority now held by Khalil's Umma party in coalition with the People's Democratic party (PDP), which has its own small but troublesome pro-Egyptian wing.

Egypt is also reported to have been active in the southern Sudan, where resentment toward the central government is of long standing. Members of the Southern delegation in Parliament, on whom the coalition also depends for support, walked out of the 22 May session in protest against the form of the new constitution now being written. Their dissatisfaction with the government's stand against regional autonomy may make them amenable to Egyptian advances.

[PAGE 06]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
[PAGE 08]
[PAGE 09]
Situation in Algeria

There are increasing indications of friction and discord within the ranks of the dominant military and civilian extremists in Algeria and also between these elements and more moderate leaders who have been caught up in the recent developments there.

The American consul general in Algiers reports that as the stalemate continues, extremist civilian elements among the resident Europeans are beginning to envisage with equanimity a prolonged split with metropolitan France and even eventual secession. The army's only political objective, however, continues to be to bring about the desired change of regime in Paris, a goal to which General Salan committed himself more explicitly than heretofore when on 23 May he issued a statement saying the new all-Algeria committee had been formed to facilitate the establishment in Paris of a "government of public safety presided over by General de Gaulle." The Algiers leaders are not known to be planning to initiate in the near future any further action of a drastic nature to achieve this objective, but pressure for such action--which could conceivably take place in Tunisia, Algeria or France--may mount if the stalemate is of long duration.

[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

The French Crisis

Premier Pflimlin's proposals for strengthening the executive power appear already to be running into major parliamentary opposition. The decision of the National Assembly's steering committee to postpone discussion of the issue until 27 May probably reflects the basic distrust on the part of many deputies of any move curtailing their own powers, and may also indicate stronger opposition from the Independents than was anticipated. The Independents, including their top leaders Pinay and Senator Duchet, appear to be sliding more toward De Gaulle as the only alternative to a Popular Front.

According to some press reports, the French Communists are under pressure from Moscow to withdraw their support from Pflimlin. Since Soviet and French Communist propaganda has been proclaiming that Communist support for Pflimlin in the assembly has saved the Republic, it would be difficult for Communists to reverse their position. They might, however, find a pretext in the constitutional issue, arguing that they have always opposed strengthening the executive.

There is renewed speculation that Pflimlin will make contact with De Gaulle this week end to discuss "the steps by which the general could assume power" if President Coty were to call him to form a National Union government.

Although Pflimlin still has a chance to retain office himself, a split or even a relative strengthening of the left in his broad parliamentary support would bolster the case of those urging a De Gaulle solution.

[PAGE 11]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
