France Schedules Further Overflights of Libya Despite Tripoli's Protests

Despite a recent protest from the Libyan Government, France intends to continue the series of reconnaissance flights the French Air Force has been making over Libya since mid-1959. A French Air Force intelligence officer has notified the US air attache in Paris that flights north of the 30th parallel will be flown on 26-27 January and south of the parallel on 2-3 February.

Libya has become aware of such overflights only recently. On 9 January Libyan Prime Minister Muhammed Ben Uthman informed the US ambassador in Tripoli that on 4 and 5 January two French military aircraft had conducted 20-minute low-level surveillance over Ghat and two other villages in southwestern Libya near and on the Algerian border. French officials had previously notified the US that overflights south of the 30th parallel were scheduled for these dates. Uthman charged that a French military land penetration of Libyan territory had occurred also on 5 January, and stated that the French ambassador had been warned that repetition of such incidents would inevitably lead to a rupture of relations. He asked both the United States and Britain to intervene with France. He insisted that the whole matter be handled with the utmost secrecy, pointing out that publicity would generate strong domestic pressure for immediate action.

French officials have regularly notified the US of the schedule dates and areas for the overflights, and have as regularly ignored US and UK warnings of the possible consequences. The French military justify the overflights as essential to detect a possible Algerian rebel arms build-up on Libyan bases, and have even claimed to possess intelligence reports that a rebel air force is being formed there. Although arms have been transshipped through Libya to rebels in Algeria, Paris has made no claims that a major build-up has been discovered as a result of the overflights.

If such French activities are again detected, Tripoli may go beyond simply breaking relations. It may invoke its mutual defense

24 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
