Negotiations for Meeting of De Gaulle With Ferhat Abbas
Reported Under Way

immediately after the 6-8 January referendum vote on his Algerian policy, De Gaulle issued instructions that steps be taken immediately--through well-established links between the French Government and the Provisional Algerian Government (PAG)--to pave the way for direct negotiations between himself and rebel representatives. De Gaulle's willingness in principle to meet PAG premier Ferhat Abbas was conveyed to the rebels, and Abbas agreed. Negotiations are now under way to determine the time and place. De Gaulle, who waived his preference for Paris, offered to meet Abbas "anywhere in French territory" but balked at Abbas' insistence on Geneva. Within the French President's official staff it is estimated that meetings would begin during the first week of March. Consideration is also being given to inviting to the proposed meeting Mohammed Ben Bella--the rebel deputy premier whom the French captured and imprisoned five years ago--and Messali Hadj, leader of the moderate and rival Algerian Nationalist Movement, who resides in France under police protection.

foresee difficulty, however, in inducing the PAG to accept Messali. The French do not intend that Ben Bella and Messali should be present at more than the preliminary and final sessions.

Rebel Minister of Information Yazid told the US Embassy in Tunis on 17 January that the PAG is willing to meet French representatives without any preconditions or agenda.

Yazid asserted that the PAG had no desire to let formalities stand in the way of opening negotiations, and was considering means of reassuring French residents in Algeria that their interests would be respected in an Algerian republic. The provisional government probably feels that its position has been strengthened by the willingness of Algerian Moslems to accord it open support and by the massive abstention by urban Moslems in the recent referendum.

19 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
