GENERAL

1. Gromyko reported anxious to proceed with CFM negotiations:

US delegate Jessup reports an impression received at an informal four-power meeting that Soviet delegate Gromyko is very anxious to have some Western draft agenda in writing which he could submit to Moscow. Jessup also reports his impression that, when no Western draft was forthcoming in response to the 28 March proposal of the USSR, Gromyko was instructed to introduce the Atlantic Treaty item in order to counteract any impression of Soviet weakness and unlimited concessions. Gromyko also manifested interest in whether the first Soviet agenda item would be acceptable if reworded so as to show that "German demilitarization" could be either a cause or an effect of present international tensions in Europe.

Comment: The Western Powers planned to introduce a revised version of their draft agenda at the 2 April meeting of the delegates. Gromyko's reported attitude may be indicative of his apprehension that the Soviet Government is not satisfied either with his conduct of the negotiations or with their progress.

2. British seek solution to Iranian oil problem:

The US Embassy in London reports that UK Government officials are now genuinely alarmed over the prospects of losing British investments in Iran and oil supplies considered vital to the British economy. The Foreign Office regards more liberal financial terms to Iran as necessary, and is pressing the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company in that direction. It also recognizes that British policy must at least pay lip service to the principle of nationalization. At the same time, however, the Foreign Office thinks the relinquishing of the title to the oil properties would be dangerous and continues to believe that negotiations with Iran will be useless until a strong government has come into power. The Foreign Office has further indicated that if efforts at persuasion in Iran are unsuccessful, it is prepared to consider pressure, beginning with financial measures and possibly, if British lives
