Sino-Albanian Economic Aid Agreement

In expressing gratitude for Albania's "brotherly" concern for China's "struggle," the communiqué issued on 25 April makes clear that the new economic aid is Tirana's reward for supporting Peiping in its dispute with Moscow. The statement that Sino-Albanian economic relations "fully embody the proletarian internationalist spirit of mutual support and close cooperation" appears sharply critical of Soviet economic pressures imposed on both China and Albania and of Moscow's laggard help in the present Chinese economic crisis.

The announcement of the new aid agreement was delayed for more than two months, probably because Peiping did not want to publicize its support for Albania while trade and aid talks with the USSR were getting under way. The announcement of the new loan to Albania at this time suggests that little, if any, progress has been made at the aid talks, which are still continuing in Moscow.

Chinese agreement to construct complete industrial installations for Tirana injects a new element into Sino-Albanian economic relations. Peiping has similar programs in all three of the Asian satellites, where Sino-Soviet competition has become abundantly evident during the past year, but previous Chinese aid to Albania has consisted almost entirely of grain and raw material delivered on a credit basis. Since last autumn the Chinese have been delivering increasing amounts of wheat to Albania, despite critical food shortages in China. These deliveries, both from China and from nonbloc countries at Chinese expense, are well in excess of Soviet deliveries and have provided Tirana with more than enough food grains to meet immediate consumption requirements.

The new aid agreement underscores the extent of the Albanian regime's alienation from Moscow and China's role in supporting Albanian defiance of the USSR. Since 1956 the USSR has extended a total of some $140,000,000 in long-term credits to Albania, of which $75,000,000 remains unused. The Chinese underwriting of the added credits needed for the new Albanian

27 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
