South Korea

Major General Pak Chong-hui was court-martialed in 1948 on charges of being a Communist and was sentenced to 10 years in prison. At the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, he was recalled to service, and subsequently was pardoned because of his war record. He is not known to have re-established contacts with the Communists or to have been connected with South Korean leftist groups since 1948. However, because of alleged efforts to stir up discontent among officer elements following the revolt which toppled Rhee in April 1960, there was some question of his loyalty and whether he would soon be dropped from the Army.

The South Korean Second Army is largely composed of training and logistical units. It is not known whether units of the First Army--South Korea's combat ready force deployed along the Demilitarized Zone facing North Korea--support the uprising. First Army support for the coup could ensure its success. Although a proclamation of the "revolutionary committee" has named the First Army commanding general Yi Han-lim as "martial law commander" in the front line areas, Yi is reliably reported to be against the coup.

In a six point proclamation the insurgents, who have proclaimed martial law, have announced that they intend to strengthen anti-Communist measures, observe the UN charter, wipe out government corruption, rehabilitate the economy, work for Korean unification, and eventually return the government to civilian authority when their mission is accomplished. However, according to the reports of last month, Pak and his supporters had no definite plans for administering the government after they seized power. There also were indications that the Pak group was discontented over the loss of the privileged position enjoyed by the military under the Rhee regime. In the year since Rhee's ouster, many senior officers have been cashiered from the service, a civilian committee has been set up to investigate military affairs, and the press has been permitted to criticise the armed forces.

Army Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong was one of those widely criticized in the press for his support of the Rhee regime and accused of acquiring an illegal fortune through

16 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
