USSR Releases 1959 Economic Statistics

The value of Soviet gross industrial production increased 11 percent in 1959, according to official statistics released in Moscow on 21 January. This compares with 10-percent increases reported for the last two years. Production of producers goods was reported up 12 percent and consumer goods 10.3 percent, as compared with 11 and 7 percent, respectively, reported for 1958. Tentative appraisal of production results indicates that industrial growth continued at a high rate.

Raw material shortages responsible for the abandonment of the Sixth Five-Year Plan in 1957 seem to be largely overcome. The production of natural gas was the only "leading link" to fall short of its target, thus reflecting continuing pipe shortages.

The reported increase of 7.4 percent in industrial labor productivity reverses the recent trend toward a diminishing rate of increase.

Total capital investment rose 12 percent to a total of 275 billion rubles. The plan for capital construction for housing was fulfilled, with 80,000,000 square meters of urban living space and 850,000 rural homes completed. These additions to housing, the availability of food based in part on the carryover from the record harvest, and the increasing availability of manufactured consumer goods indicate that 1959 was a good year for the consumer.

Production of machinery and equipment showed sharp differences in rates of growth in response to changing priorities. The largest gain was registered by chemical equipment, which increased 55 percent, three times the annual rate required for fulfillment of the Seven-Year Plan. The fact that this item and generators were reported underfulfilled--despite the large production increases--suggests that present planning is for goals to be met in less than seven years.

Substantial decreases in production of agricultural machinery reflect extensive model changes and planned cutbacks for some items. Extensive re-equipping of two truck plants and a change

25 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
