[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
2 December 1952
Copy No. 51
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
SOVIET UNION
1.
FAR EAST
2. More Chinese Communist troops may be destined for Korea (page 3).
SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Thai premier may try to oust Phao (page 4).
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4.
WESTERN EUROPE
5. Allied air access to Vienna again challenged by Russians (page 5).
6. East German ordinance hurts West Berlin (page 6).
7. French Communist Party seen weakened (page 6).
8. Left-center of Italian Christian Democrats shows great strength at party congress (page 7).
LATIN AMERICA
9. Venezuela opposition party reportedly victorious in election (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION
1.

FAR EAST
2. More Chinese Communist troops may be destined for Korea:
About 6,000 Chinese Communist troops, formerly stationed in Hupeh and Kiangsi Provinces, arrived in Hankow on 31 October. The troops were said to be awaiting rail transportation for their departure to Northeast China.
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Thai premier may try to oust Phao:
Police Director General Phao is maintaining contact with pro-Communist elements.
Phibun may attempt to oust Phao unless the police director submits to his control.
Comment:
control of a large paramilitary police force renders his removal difficult. Nevertheless, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the Thai Government is seriously attempting to check Communist activity.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4.
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE
5. Allied air access to Vienna again challenged by Russians:
At a 28 November meeting of the Allied Council in Austria, the Soviet member presented a resolution to prohibit American and British combat aircraft from using the air corridors to Vienna.
According to the Soviet interpretation, a 1945 Allied protocol precludes the flight to Vienna of other than "communications or transport" planes.
In view of Soviet High Commissioner Sviridov's insistence on reciprocal overflight privileges in the Western zones, Ambassador Thompson believes that the Russians may intend to test this prerogative.
Comment: American use of the Tulln airport and the corridor to it for commercial and military planes has been the subject of frequent exchanges between the Soviet and American High Commissioners. The Russian protests, however, have not gone beyond disagreement with the American view that existing agreements place no restrictions on the types of planes which may service occupation forces in Austria.
[PAGE 06]
6. East German ordinance hurts West Berlin:
American observers in Berlin believe that the East German ordinance restricting West Berlin purchases in East Berlin will bring about a further deterioration in the living conditions of West Berlin low-income groups. The People's Police have reportedly increased surveillance of West Berliners at sector borders. No major disruption of the West Berlin economy is foreseen.
Comment: Although East German propaganda has strongly emphasized that the new measure is directed against the policies of the West Berlin government, the ordinance also bears out reports of serious food shortages in East Germany.

7. French Communist Party seen weakened:
The French Communist Party may need two years to recover from the repercussions of the Marty-Tillon affair. French popular reaction to the Czech trials is also injuring the Communist cause.
At the Moscow Congress, French Communists were instructed to encourage neutralism and to emphasize the economic rather than the political activities of the General Labor Confederation (CGT) in order to obtain united action with all French labor unions.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: The prestige of the party's national leadership and its present capabilities for blocking Western rearmament have been severely damaged. Concentration by the CGT on the workers' economic aims, however, could speed up a revival of those capabilities in the event Premier Pinay's anti-inflation and anti-Communist programs fail.

8. Left-center of Italian Christian Democrats shows great strength at party congress:
At the recent Christian Democratic national congress, the left-center faction, which has supported an electoral coalition of the moderate parties, emerged as the strongest force. The American Embassy estimates that it has picked up about half the seats in the party's national council, and is therefore in a position to challenge the predominantly right-center leadership, although it is unlikely to do so before the elections.
Premier de Gasperi, the Embassy notes, remains the "unquestioned" leader of his party.
Comment: Should the left-center succeed in halting or slowing the party's trend toward collaboration with the Monarchists and other right-wing parties, the government coalition's prospects for victory in the spring elections would be substantially improved.

LATIN AMERICA
9. Venezuela opposition party reportedly victorious in election:
The government party has lost the Constituent Assembly election in Venezuela.
[PAGE 08]
Unofficial reports indicate a victory of "possible landslide proportions" for the Republican Democratic Union (URD), whose leader, Villalba, has publicly claimed victory. Venezuelan morning newspapers of 1 December, however, carried no elections results.
Comment: Unofficial returns are too fragmentary to substantiate opposition claims of a landslide.
The URD, the third-ranking party, is a moderate left-wing party headed by the demagogic Jovito Villalba. Villalba recently retracted his campaign allusions to nationalization of the oil and steel industries and has professed friendship for the United States.
A government overturn at the polls would be unprecedented and might lead to a fabricated revolt and "palace coup" or other drastic action.
