[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

US OFFICIALS ONLY

24 November 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. USSR reported to have offered radioactive isotopes to Iran (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2. Comment on appointment of Jacob Malik to head Soviet delegation to UN (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Japanese draft budget cuts defense expenditures (page 4).
4. South Korea reported prepared to eject Communist members of UN inspection teams (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Cairo embassy denies discrimination against Jews in Egypt (page 5).
6. Comment on Popular Front victories in Greek municipal elections (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. French Communists reported joining forces with rightists against Mendes-France (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. USSR reported to have offered radioactive isotopes to Iran:

who recently returned
from the annual locust control conference
in Moscow. The delegate agreed to bring the Soviet offer to the
attention of the Iranian government.

Comment: This report, if correct, is
the first indicating that the USSR is willing to make radioactive
materials available to non-Orbit countries.

The offer may
also be designed to steal the thunder from the American "atoms-
for-peace" plan, now being considered in the UN, which will not
be in operation for some months. The USSR has expressed
important reservations in regard to this plan.

SOVIET UNION

2. Comment on appointment of Jacob Malik to head Soviet delegation
to UN:

The appointment of Jacob Malik to be
temporary head of the Soviet UN dele-
gation--a post he occupied from 1948 to
1952--will not alter Soviet policy in the
UN, but its presentation will certainly lack the color and some of
the effectiveness of the Vyshinsky approach.

Malik's diplomatic career began in
1937 as a member of the press section in the Commissariat for
Foreign Affairs. Two years later he was sent to Tokyo as
embassy counselor and in 1942 was made ambassador.
[PAGE 04]
Malik returned to Moscow in July 1946
and the following month was appointed deputy minister of foreign
affairs.

FAR EAST

3. Japanese draft budget cuts defense expenditures:

The draft supplementary budget sub-
mitted to the Japanese cabinet by the
Finance Ministry on 19 November
included a cut of 4.55 billion yen
($12,640,000) in funds for the National Defense Agency,
according to the Far East Command. The cut, amounting to
5.7 percent of planned expenditures, is being considered by the
cabinet and, if approved, will be presented to the Diet at the
end of this month.

The Far East Command comments that
it is possible the above action is intended as a "feeler" for the
American reaction prior to final action.

Comment: The American Military
Assistance and Advisory Group in Japan believes the proposed
cuts would seriously hurt the morale, training, and effectiveness
of the Japanese defense forces and preclude for the present the
activation of any new units.
[PAGE 05]
4. South Korea reported prepared to eject Communist members of
UN inspection teams:

South Korea will attempt positive action
to eject Polish and Czech members of
the Neutral Nations Inspection Teams.

General Won
Yong-tok's threat to take "positive measures" if the Communists
fail to respond favorably by 29 November to his request that
they withdraw from Korea manifests a sincere hope to force the
withdrawal of the teams and must be taken seriously.

South Korea will start with a campaign to
incite public opinion against the Communists' presence in South
Korea, and follow it with public demonstrations, mob violence,
and government-directed covert acts of violence against individual
Communist team members.

Comment: A government-directed
campaign against the teams in August included sniping at team
members and the throwing of crude bombs into the NNIT compounds.
At that time the Eighth Army commander warned that it was
impossible to ensure the teams' absolute security. Only a firm
stand by American authorities caused a temporary halt in the
Korean campaign.

Won
Yong-tok was preparing a group of former Chinese prisoners of
war to take action against the Communist members.
the Wounded Veterans' Association and other
patriotic elements have been involved in previous actions. The
activities of these groups have traditionally been disavowed by
the Korean government although they actually function as instru-
ments of government policy.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Cairo embassy denies discrimination against Jews in Egypt:

Denying reports of mass arrests and
torture of Egyptian Jews, Ambassador
Caffery states that the Jews have fared
[PAGE 06]
better under the Nasr regime than at any time since the 1948
Palestine conflict. He adds that to the best of his knowledge
there are only 14 Jews under arrest and they are charged with
espionage for Israel.

Caffery interprets the steady rise of
stocks of Jewish-controlled companies on the Cairo exchange
as evidence of the prosperity and acceptance of Jews in Egypt.

Comment: Current Israeli propaganda
is charging Egypt with serious mistreatment of its Jewish
minority.

While the Nasr regime has given full
support to the Arab line on Israel, it has from the beginning
emphasized a concept of national unity which avoids any sem-
blance of discrimination against minority groups.

Minority elements in Egypt have fre-
quently engaged in Communist activities and a number of Jews
have in the past been included among those arrested.

6. Comment on Popular Front victories in Greek municipal
elections:

Preliminary reports of Greek munic-
ipal elections on 21 November show that
the Communist-supported Popular Front
achieved notable successes over the Greek
Rally of Prime Minister Papagos. The
Front elected mayors in such important
places as Athens, Piraeus, Volos,
Kavalla, Larissa and Lamia.
[PAGE 07]
Run-off elections, required if no
candidate receives a minimum of 40 percent of the vote, are
scheduled for 28 November in at least 27 other communities.
The Front candidate in Salonika has a sizable electoral advan-
tage and it seems likely that, regardless of current efforts by
the government, some of the other Front candidates will also
win run-off elections.

The prestige of the Papagos govern-
ment has received a severe blow and the widespread discontent
revealed by the voting will strengthen the opposition. The suc-
cess of Popular Front techniques on the municipal level sug-
gests that the same techniques will be used both in parliament
and in the next parliamentary elections. Fragmentation of the
Rally through internal splits has already appeared in parliament.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French Communists reported joining forces with rightists against
Mendes-France:

The French Communist Party plans to
collaborate with the Gaullists and other
parliamentary groups hostile to Premier
Mendes-France to overthrow him at the
first opportunity, according to a confidential source of the American
embassy in Paris. André Ullman, the Communist editor of the
crypto-Communist weekly Tribune des Nations, stated on 20 Nov-
ember, when he revealed this plan, that "henceforth all restraints
in dealing with Mendes-France can be abandoned."

Comment: The increasingly hostile tone
toward Mendes-France in the Soviet and French Communist press
is another indication that the Communists have reached a decision
to try to unseat the premier as a result of Soviet failure to block
West German rearmament.

Ullman is a key contact between the Com-
munists and the extreme rightists who sometimes find it expedient
[PAGE 08]
to collaborate with them.

Open criticism of the premier has been
growing, but this is the first indication that opposition groups
are organizing for an early concerted effort to oust him. The
North African situation seems likely to furnish an opportunity
for such an effort.
