[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

13 January 1961

Copy No. C 76

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

Bolivia-Czechoslovakia: Czech Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hajek is to visit Bolivia at the invitation of President Paz for a six-day period beginning next week. According to a Bolivian Government spokesman, Hajek is authorized to make a definitive offer of Czech installation of an antimony smelter in Bolivia. The Bolivian Government has been under heavy pressure since last fall to respond to Soviet overtures relating to a tin smelter. (Page 2)

Guatemala: President Ydigoras told the American ambassador on 10 January that he has discovered a conspiracy among senior army officers and is sending a number of them

13 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
to posts abroad. The ambassador comments that he has never seen Ydigoras appear so harassed. Such dissension is known to exist among the military forces, and the opposition parties are actively seeking to exploit it.

Although the threat to Ydigoras is serious, he is a skillful manipulator and has already coaxed and bribed one party out of the three-party opposition coalition formed last month.

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Main Elements in the Congo Situation: Shifting Fortunes of Mobutu-Kasavubu and Lumumba Forces; Basic Problems Including Role of the Army; Relations with African States, Belgium, the Bloc, and UN; and Pros-

13 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Czech Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hajek, accompanied by representatives of the foreign and commerce ministries, is to make a six-day visit to Bolivia beginning next week. President Paz invited Hajek, who is reportedly en route to the Brazilian presidential inauguration on 31 January. A government spokesman is quoted in the press as stating that Hajek is authorized to make a definitive offer of Czech installation of an antimony smelter in Bolivia. Bolivia's annual antimony production is five to six thousand metric tons.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may have been prompted in part by an interest in dramatizing Bolivia's interest in foreign economic help. Paz is seeking an emergency increase in American aid. Vice President Juan Lechin recently interrupted a trip to the United States, Europe, and Asia after a stop in Washington and returned to Bolivia.

The Bolivian Government has been under heavy domestic pressure since last fall to accept bloc economic aid first suggested to a Bolivian parliamentary delegation in Moscow last July. A Soviet parliamentary delegation which visited La Paz in late December tentatively offered a credit of $150,000,000 with details of the offer to be worked out during a visit to Moscow probably in February or March of a Bolivian economic delegation.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may alternatively be designed to tighten the pressure of extremist agitation for acceptance of bloc aid by presenting an appearance of new Bolivian-bloc economic negotiations. The Paz administration appears to be close to the final stages in its negotiations for substantial economic and technical aid from sources which include the Inter-American Development Bank, the US Government, and a private West German company which has secured a federal government guarantee in Bonn. The aid is for the virtually bankrupt Bolivian Mining Corporation (Comibol). Paz believes that the rehabilitation of Comibol will provide him with a significant increase in support from the politically important miners.

13 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Plotting Resumes in Guatemala

The President disclosed to the American ambassador on 10 January that he had discovered a conspiracy among senior army officers and that he is sending a number of them to diplomatic and consular posts abroad. In his conversation with the ambassador, Ydigoras was vitriolic against the Guatemalan congress, which has stymied his program in recent sessions, despite the fact that a majority of the deputies were Ydigoras supporters at the time of the December 1959 congressional elections. The ambassador commented that he has never seen Ydigoras so emotional and showing such visible signs of harassment.

Although the threat to the President is serious, he is a skillful political manipulator and has already coaxed and bribed one party to leave the three-party opposition "unity pact" concluded early last month. He now is applying his divide-and-rule tactics against the leftist, non-Communist Revolutionary party, the only party in Guatemala with a degree of mass support and the President's most potent civilian adversary.

13 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
TOP SECRET
