of chief of state in addition to his present post as party first secretary. His appointment as chairman of the newly formed 17-man Council of State formally empowers him to intervene directly in all government operations. The personnel changes associated with the reorganization appear designed to concentrate power in the hands of Dej and those most closely associated with him. (Backup, Page 7)

Bulgaria: Long-quiescent "nationalist" elements in the Bulgarian Communist party have become active in the last few months.

Bulgarian intelligence authorities reportedly uncovered sometime in January an opposition element of middle-ranking party functionaries centered in Sofia and Plovdiv who were seeking to create pressure within the party for a change in regime policies. The group hoped to make Bulgarian policy less subservient to Soviet policies and more responsive to internal economic and social requirements. Because of the delicacy of the situation, the regime reportedly does not intend to exploit the matter by holding political trials or by taking extreme punitive measures. (Backup, Page 8)

Ecuador: President Velasco's vacillation on policy toward the Castro regime and relations with the bloc is contributing to a sharp division between pro- and anti-Castro elements. This conflict, which has been accompanied by organized demonstrations and reported plotting on both sides, may jeopardize the prospects for holding the 11th Inter-American Conference, which has been frequently postponed since 1959 and is now scheduled to begin in Quito on 24 May. Indications of an impending shake-up in the cabinet, which may include removal of Foreign Minister Chiriboga--leader of the anti-Castro faction in the government--suggest that Velasco is leaning toward the pro-Castro groups and has decided to strengthen his relations with Cuba. If Velasco moves toward stronger support of the pro-Castro faction, conservative elements are likely to consider action against the regime. (Backup, Page 9)

22 Mar 61
DAILY BRIEF
