Zorlu in conversation with Ambassador Warren was genial and showed every desire to maintain a united front before the USSR. The Turkish Government intends to reply to the Soviet protest note of 13 May along lines acceptable to the United States.

There has been little editorial comment in the African press except in Ethiopia and Tunisia, where the need for world peace and disarmament was stressed. Neither the United States nor the USSR was specifically blamed. President Bourguiba of Tunisia complimented Secretary Herter for a "courageous and master stroke" in handling the matter publicly.

Khrushchev's actions in Paris have brought universal condemnation from the non- Communist press in Western Europe. Influential papers that had been most critical of American handling of the U-2 incident have applauded Western firmness. West German papers have likened Khrushchev's tactics to those of Hitler or "Stalin in his best days." French papers blame Khrushchev for the conference break, and speculate that some internal crisis which caused his brusqueness may point to his own weakness and possible loss of power in Moscow.

British papers all hold Khrushchev responsible for the turn of events, with the pro-Liberal Manchester Guardian noting that "while the British Government over the past 18 months has gained a reputation for supple diplomacy, it may now have to earn a reputation for firmness." The Laborite Daily Herald, which alone had unreservedly condemned the American role in the U-2 incident, on 17 April decided that President Eisenhower's statement had made it "impossible for Khrushchev to say he is being threatened by aggressive Americans, and it will be monstrous if he can still think of throwing the world's hopes in an ash-can."

Limited non-Communist Latin American press opinion on the U-2 incident thus far has been moderately critical, but has expressed some sympathy for the US position and explanation. It has also reflected concern over the incident's effect on the summit meeting. The controlled Cuban press and radio for the most part have used the U-2 affair to bolster their charges of "US aggression" against the Castro regime.
