III. THE WEST

Reaction to U-2 Incident and Summit Developments

The limited Asian reaction received thus far has been surprisingly sophisticated over the U-2 incident and dismayed and critical of Khrushchev for his summit actions. Nevertheless, the United States has not escaped blame for provoking Khrushchev.

In Japan, initial official reaction blamed Khrushchev for the threatened breakdown of the summit meeting. Foreign Minister Fujiyama stated that Khrushchev is using the "spy plane" incident as an excuse for breaking off the talks because he feels there is no prospect of agreement on the German problem. The chairman of the left-wing Socialist party termed Khrushchev's action "regrettable" but said he understood the reason.

In Southeast Asia, there has been no high-level official comment yet on the U-2 incident and succeeding developments. Distress over the serious setback to hopes of a world detente was a major theme in widespread press commentary on the situation. While the comment was generally sympathetic to the American position in this matter, there was recurring criticism of the United States for handing the USSR a major propaganda issue.

India, while critical of the overflights in general, has played down the U-2 incident. New Delhi had placed much hope in the summit as a means of relieving world tension and is greatly concerned by the breakup of the meeting. Early Indian comments blame Khrushchev for making a propaganda play. Pakistani President Ayub has lodged a mild protest with the United States over the U-2 incident, but publicly has charged the USSR with overflying Pakistan.

Reaction of the nationalist press in Iraq has been relatively subdued, but pro-Communist newspapers have made intensive attacks on the U-2 incident. Radio Cairo, which had earlier treated the incident as constituting a major barrier to any progress at the summit, has alleged "the present tension has intentionally or unintentionally been created by certain groups in the United States." The Israeli press and radio regard the U-2 incident as a Soviet propaganda victory which Khrushchev is exploiting to the hilt. Turkish Foreign Ministe
