The Situation in South Vietnam

(Based on information available as of 0400 hours, EST,
12 November)

The coup effort against President Ngo Dinh Diem appears to be losing its strength rapidly. Although the situation in Saigon is still fluid, the arrival in the city of considerable numbers of troops loyal to Diem apparently has reversed the early advantage held by rebellious paratroop units that besieged the presidential palace on the morning of 11 November.

Troops of the 7th Division began arriving in Saigon in the early hours of 12 November, local time, in response to Diem's call for support, and elements of the 21st Division may now also be in the city. Loyalist troops are reported to have advanced on the palace area and to have forced the withdrawal of paratroop units there. The rebels are now said to have retreated to an army barracks about one-half mile from the palace, and heavy firing has been heard from that area.

Approximately at the time when loyalist forces were preparing to enter Saigon, a statement by President Diem broadcast by Saigon radio promised to dissolve the present government and to allow the military to set up a provisional government. This statement, following negotiations between the president and the rebels, apparently was designed to gain time for the arrival of reinforcements. At 1015 hours on 12 November, Saigon time, the Saigon radio announced that Diem's forces were again in control of the station with the assertion that "counterrevolutionary forces offer this victory to President Ngo Dinh Diem and the people!" At 1100 hours local time officials of the Directorate General of Police and Security announced that loyal army forces had reoccupied police headquarters following surrender of the rebels there.

There are no reports thus far of significant Communist guerrilla exploitation of the present situation. However, the movement of army forces from heavily infested areas outside the capital, and the confused situation in the city, provide additional opportunities for increased activities.

12 Nov 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
