[PAGE 01]
4 March 1954

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. French commander sees need of military "coup" before Geneva (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Disturbances may break out during Tehran elections (page 5).
5. Alleged Soviet agent arrested in raid on Tudeh center (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA
8. Arbenz speech may presage new Guatemalan tactics at Caracas (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. French commander sees need of military "coup" before Geneva:

General Cogny, commander in Tonkin, believes that to enhance the French position at Geneva, it is desirable that his forces execute some major coup before 26 April, according to the American consul in Hanoi. Whether this coup takes the form of major clearing operations within the Tonkin delta or large-scale raids outside, Cogny stated, it is indispensable that the lost initiative be "demonstrably regained."

Commenting on conditions in the delta, the French commander said that the situation there had gradually deteriorated since the onset of operations in Laos. He mentioned specifically the enemy's mine warfare, which is increasing seriously and spreading to areas previously free of it. Eighty percent of the officer losses in Tonkin during the past six months were attributed to enemy mines.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: It is unlikely that Cogny, with his mobile reserve so depleted, could undertake large-scale operations. Some of his reserves are being returned to the delta, however, which may permit him to undertake an operation of limited scope, such as an attack on an enemy supply base, in order to put the French in a more favorable propaganda position.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Disturbances may break out during Tehran elections:

Current reports indicate that disturbances may break out when the postponed Majlis elections in Tehran begin on 6 March, the elections, but an armored division has been alerted and an infantry division will be ready if needed.

Army telephone communications allegedly were cut twice last week, but the Iranian G-2 and deputy chief appear unconcerned over the possibility of a lack of communications during disturbances.

Opposition leaders Baghai, Kashani, Makki and others are trying to arouse opposition to Zahedi personally as well as to the government's handling of the elections. They are also reported to be "cautiously seeking Communist support."

Comment: The opposition is expected to make a strong bid in Tehran, seat of Iranian political extremism, where 12 seats are at stake, and disturbances are almost inevitable. Suppression of rioting by force will not increase the government's popularity and will strengthen the opposition even if it wins no Majlis seats.

[PAGE 06]
5. Alleged Soviet agent arrested in raid on Tudeh center:

On 27 February Iranian army intelligence officers raided a Tudeh military training center at Veramin southeast of Tehran, Forty arrests reportedly were made, including that of an instructor of Tudeh terrorists, believed to be a Soviet national.

General Bakhtiar, Tehran's military governor, considers the raid a major blow at the Tudeh organization in the area. Interrogations have produced organizational data, code designations of members, and campaign plans to isolate Tehran from military support from the south.

Comment: This raid appears to be one of the most important moves carried out by the government against the Tudeh. Previous reports have stated that Soviet agents were training the Tudeh.

[PAGE 07]
LATIN AMERICA

8. Arbenz speech may presage new Guatemalan tactics at Caracas:

In his State of the Nation address on 1 March, Guatemalan president Arbenz criticized past inter-American resolutions on Communist intervention as "vague and inexact." Asking for clarification of what was meant by intervention, he stated that under international law neither a doctrine nor an organization but only a state can be guilty of intervention.

[PAGE 08]
Comment: The speech suggests that Guatemala may raise questions of international law at Caracas to confuse further the scheduled discussion of Communist intervention.

This tactic could touch off lengthy debate among the Latin Americans, who pride themselves on their proficiency in international law, on the propriety of ascribing any intervention to an ideology or movement, and could result in the Caracas resolution on the subject being as vaguely worded as the ones passed in 1948 at Bogota and in 1951 at Washington.
