[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

6 May 1956

Copy No. 103

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. RUSSIANS MAY BE CHANGING POLICY ON ALLIED
TRAVEL THROUGH EAST GERMANY
(page 3).

2. SOVIET BLOC REPORTEDLY APPROACHES MOROCCANS
ON EXCHANGING DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS
(page 4).

3. SAUDI-BRITISH TALKS ON BURAIMI UNPROMISING

4. PINEAU FORECASTS FEDERATED STATUS FOR ALGERIA

5. DEATH OF SOUTH KOREAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE

6. AMBASSADOR CUMMING BELIEVES SUKARNO UNLIKELY
TO INITIATE SERIOUS TALKS IN US

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. RUSSIANS MAY BE CHANGING POLICY ON ALLIED
TRAVEL THROUGH EAST GERMANY

It appears that the Soviets and the East
Germans are again attempting to com-
pel the Western powers to recognize
East Germany as a "sovereign" nation,
and to recognize its right to control all
travel within its borders. An American
sergeant attached to the American em-
bassy in Moscow was told by an East
German official upon his arrival at Schoenefeld airport just
outside Berlin in East Germany on 3 May that in the future
an East German visa would be required to travel between
the airport and Berlin.

The United States embassy in Bonn re-
ports that two private American citizens were told by the
Soviet embassy in Bonn on 3 May that their request for visas
to travel to Berlin should be directed to the East German
Foreign Ministry in East Berlin. The Soviet embassy offi-
cials said they had "no right" to issue the requested visas.

According to the treaty of 20 September
1955 between the USSR and East Germany, the Russians re-
served to themselves "temporarily" the control of Allied
traffic in East Germany, implying that they might later turn
over this authority to East Germany. The Soviet authorities
have been issuing visas to Allied nationals for travel in East
Germany.

The Germans have not yet attempted to
assert control over official travel between West Germany
and West Berlin over the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET BLOC REPORTEDLY APPROACHES MOROCCANS
ON EXCHANGING DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS

The Moroccan government has been
approached by several Soviet bloc states
regarding the establishment of diplo-
matic missions in Rabat, Moroccan for-
eign minister Balafrej informed the
British consul general in Tangier on
2 May.

Comment
The Moroccans have been pressing the
French for the right to enter into diplo-
matic relations with other nations; they wish to establish
embassies in Paris, Washington, Madrid and Cairo. Al-
though France has maintained that the protocol of 2 March
could not be implemented until ratified by the French Na-
tional Assembly, a high French official in Rabat informed
the American consul general on 4 May that he expected an
early announcement by Paris giving the Moroccans control
of their foreign affairs with the right to exchange diplomatic
missions.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. SAUDI-BRITISH TALKS ON BURAIMI UNPROMISING

The preliminary Saudi-British dis-
cussions in Riyadh on 28-30 April
concerning the Buraimi Oasis dispute
and the coastal protectorates recessed
without material progress.

British foreign secretary Lloyd, while
expressing gratification that the initial
objective of returning the British am-
bassador to Jidda and commencing talks
had been achieved, remained pessimis-
tic over an eventual agreement on the
Buraimi issue. London will seek, mean-
while, to prolong negotiations while at-
tempting to improve other aspects of re-
lations with the Saudis.

The Saudis, who consider Buraimi the
primary issue, had expected that the talks would produce an
agenda for further meetings. They now feel that the British
were stalling and plan to submit the dispute to the UN Secu-
rity Council within two months unless there are favorable
developments in the meantime.

The British emphasized to the Saudis
they were not prepared to surrender Buraimi and proposed
to submit an agenda for future discussions after consultations
in London. The Saudis rejected protests against anti-British
propaganda and denied having supplied arms to dissident tribes
in disputed areas of the British protectorates.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. PINEAU FORECASTS FEDERATED STATUS FOR ALGERIA

French foreign minister Pineau told
Secretary Dulles on 3 May his govern-
ment will accept a negotiated settlement
with Algerian nationalists based on a
federated status and as close ties to France as possible.
Pineau insisted that the question of timing is important; that
a settlement could not come until France had successfully
demonstrated its military strength, but need not await com-
plete victory.

Pineau said such a solution could prob-
ably obtain parliamentary ratification at any time with the
support of the Communists, but that his government felt it
was very important to wait until broader support was assured.

Comment
Pineau's statement may indicate that the
Mollet government is ready to go beyond
its last announced formula of conceding only minor modifica-
tions of the present relations between France and Algeria.

The Mollet government apparently feels it
can now present a solution more palatable to the left. Here-
tofore, rightist pressure had compelled the government to go
slow on political concessions, but General De Gaulle's view
that a federation policy is the only solution left may reflect a
growing willingness even among some rightists to accept looser
ties with Algeria. Poujadists and supporters of ex-Gaullist
leader Soustelle, however, can be expected to launch a strong
attack on such a move, and their efforts may receive increased
backing if the military campaign is successful.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. DEATH OF SOUTH KOREAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE

Sin Ik-hui (P. H. Shinicky), Democratic
Party candidate for president of South
Korea who died on 4 May was not ex-
pected, even by his own party, to defeat
President Rhee. His death, however, could have some ef-
fect on the important vice presidential race. It could en-
courage Rhee's opposition to join forces. Should negotiations
now under way for a coalition of the major opposition parties
succeed, an upset of Rhee's vice presidential running mate,
Yi Ki-pung, might result.

The sole remaining opponent of Rhee,
Socialist Cho Pong-am will gain a portion of the votes orig-
inally slated for Sin, but still is not expected to present a
serious challenge to Rhee. Cho, who was expelled from the
Communist Party in 1946 for criticizing party policies, ran
a poor second to Rhee in the 1952 presidential elections.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. AMBASSADOR CUMMING BELIEVES SUKARNO UNLIKELY
TO INITIATE SERIOUS TALKS IN US

Indonesian president Sukarno, both in
his public and private utterances while
in the United States, will dwell on such
general subjects as nationalism, colo-
nialism, and the Asian demand for equality of status, in the
opinion of Ambassador Cumming.

Cumming doubts that any serious substan-
tive questions will be raised during the visit. He points out
Sukarno's aversion to details and the inability of the other
members of his party--with the exception of Foreign Minis-
ter Abdulghani--to speak authoritatively for the Indonesian
government.

Comment
Sukarno, scheduled to arrive in Washington
on 16 May, may be expected to raise the
question of West Irian, but in general probably conceives his
mission to be one of selling himself and Indonesia to the Amer-
ican people and government. He is also believed to be genu-
inely interested in observing American life.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 6 May)

UN secretary general Hammarskjold in-
formed Israel he has obtained an Egyptian promise to prevent
any persons, including civilians, from crossing the Egyptian
borders. He also received a "satisfactory reply" from Egypt
on the question of an "informal lifting" of the blockades in the
Suez Canal and Straits of Tiran, according to the Israel Foreign
Ministry. The American embassy reports Israel has
shown "restrained optimism" for the first time with regard
to Hammarskjold's negotiations. Israel believes that Egyptian
control over civilians is necessary for border stabilization
and appears hopeful that the Suez Canal may be opened, at
least for the transmitting of its petroleum imports.

Staff talks in Cairo between a Jordanian
military delegation and Egyptian army representatives have
resulted in an agreement to "unify and co-ordinate" efforts
of the two armies, according to the Jordan radio on 6 May.
King Hussain has reportedly sought to avoid linking Jordan in
a full military alliance with his Arab neighbors. However, an
Egyptian news agency has reported that the talks resulted "in
the signing of a military agreement between Egypt and Jordan
along the lines of the Syrian-Egyptian military agreement."

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
Israel has obtained diplomatic clearance
from the Greek government for the overflight of 12 Mystere
jet fighters from France. Six are expected to overfly Greece
on 15 May and six on 25 May.

6 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
