in 1960. Oil revenues should go a long way toward making the country self-supporting; in recent years the economy has been maintained only by foreign assistance, largely in return for Western base rights. (Page 3) (Map)

Laos: The Laotian cabinet's decision after much debate to release top pro-Communist political leaders from house arrest on 8 June apparently has aggravated the underlying conflict between old-guard conservatives and young reformers who opposed the move. This latest schism could lead to general instability and further disruption of the government's anti-Communist program. Despite the release of these leaders and the announcement that operations against the defected Pathet battalion have ended, the bloc will probably continue to protest publicly over the situation in Laos. (Page 4)

Indonesia: The political impasse created by the Constituent Assembly's recent rejection of the 1945 constitution continues. Most sources, including Premier Djuanda, feel that any action will await President Sukarno's return from his world tour on 28 June, and that the 1945 constitution then will probably be put into effect by presidential decree. Army chief Nasution is said to be working with the attorney general on a legal basis for such a presidential decree.

India- USSR: The high-level Indian economic mission which recently returned from Moscow obtained Soviet agreement to undertake preparatory work on the construction of a large machine-tool plant in India. In addition, a previously discussed $20,000,000 loan for assistance in building pharmaceutical plants in India was signed, bringing total bloc aid to date to $324,000,000, about ten percent of all foreign aid. While no definite action was taken on other Indian requests--such as doubling the capacity of the Bhilai steel mill--Soviet officials apparently made it clear to the Indians that they were ready to assist these projects and gave preliminary estimates of planning and scheduling. (Page 5)

Ceylon: Prime Minister Bandaranaike's cabinet reorganization announced on 9 June is primarily an effort to put on the appearance of change. Despite press reports of "sweeping changes," the
