USSR - Berlin: In elaborating on his threat to sign a separate German peace treaty if the Federal Republic's Bundestag meets in West Berlin this fall, Khrushchev last week told Austrian officials privately that the USSR would follow the treaty by initiating a step-by-step harassment of the West in such a way that no one move would seem worth a war. He emphasized that "nobody can make me believe that the British, French, or even the Americans will go to war to keep Berlin for Adenauer." Khrushchev's public and private statements in Vienna appear to be part of a continuing bloc effort to probe the West's determination and unity in maintaining its position in Berlin.

USSR - East Germany: at least two Soviet antiaircraft artillery brigades and elements of the two artillery divisions of the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany (GSFG) may have departed East Germany for the USSR during June. There are also somewhat weaker indications that a tank division may be withdrawn to the USSR. The pattern of withdrawals already noted suggests that an additional reduction of the GSFG may be in the offing, but it can probably be accomplished without much reduction in GSFG over-all capabilities. Any conventional artillery withdrawn has probably already been replaced by rockets and short-range missiles, while the mission of the departing AAA brigades has probably been taken over by surface-to-air missile units. To date there has been no publicity in connection with the reported withdrawals.

USSR - Somali Republic: Soviet officials who attended the 1 July Somali independence celebrations sought by means of lavish gifts and insistent urging to prevail on Somali leaders to sign a communiqué--already prepared in final form--establishing immediate diplomatic relations between the two countries. President Aden Abdullah told them that such a decision would have to wait the formation of the new Somali government. One Soviet delegate and an Izvestia correspondent remained in Mogadiscio, where they reportedly are looking into the possibility of a Soviet-backed irrigation program.
(Page 1)

12 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
