[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

28 April 1958

Copy No. 140

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
28 APRIL 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet vehicle launching at Tyura Tam; see Guided Missile Intelligence Committee statement in Daily Brief on page i.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nasir's plans for Soviet tour starting 29 April call for considerable negotiation, mostly economic.

Poor Syrian grain harvest will strain UAR budget and may hurt Nasir politically.

European extremists in Algiers renew call for army takeover in Paris; rumors of coup d'etat in Algeria recur.

Indonesia - Bloc jet trainers reportedly will be offloaded at Surabaya; IL-14 transports expected within two weeks. Bukittinggi may now have fallen to central government forces.

Construction of military installation on Yemeni coast at entrance to Red Sea progressing under direction of Soviet bloc engineers.

III. THE WEST

Adenauer stressing disarmament as summit topic; opponents of government's nuclear arms policy will exploit Mikoyan offer.

Guatemalan President Ydigoras ready with propaganda campaign agitating for "return" of British Honduras.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

28 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Missile Activity: Guided Missile Intelligence Committee Statement as of 1200 EDT, 27 April 1958.

Available information does not permit positive identification of the operation, but the following possibilities exist:

The launching of an ICBM or ESV essentially similar to the previous two Sputniks;

The launching of another type space vehicle such as one used in a lunar operation or a more sophisticated satellite, such as a recoverable one;

Failure of the intended operation;

A unique type of practice which could also serve as a part of a hoax.
[PAGE 05]
The most likely of these possibilities is that the operation was to launch some type of space vehicle, such as one used in lunar operations or a more sophisticated ESV.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nasir's trip to the USSR: Plans for Nasir's scheduled 19-day visit to the Soviet Union starting 29 April appear to call for a considerable amount of negotiation, mostly economic, as well as a tour of selected points in the USSR. The negotiators who will accompany Nasir are competent, relatively conservative economic experts who are wary of further commitments to the Soviet bloc. However, for political reasons, Nasir might feel unable to refuse a spectacular new Soviet offer.
(Page 1)

United Arab Republic: Nasir is seriously concerned over the poor Syrian grain harvest. The lack of an exportable surplus will put strains on the UAR budget and embarrass Nasir politically. Egypt, which had expected to import Syrian wheat, will probably be forced to seek additional supplies abroad, possibly from the USSR.
(Page 2)

Algeria - France: The call by European extremist demonstrators in Algiers on 26 April for an "army solution" to the crisis in Paris probably reflects their conviction
[PAGE 06]
that the trend in France has turned against them. There are renewed rumors of an imminent attempt at a coup d'etat looking to the establishment of Algeria as an independent state. A coup attempt would involve French residents and some elements of the army in Algeria. While the success of such a move is doubtful, the idea of a coup would have increased appeal if a government favoring a negotiated settlement of the Algerian problem came to power in Paris.

*Indonesia: Bukittinggi may now have fallen to central government forces. In Djakarta, the recently arrived Soviet ship Ismail will unload jet trainers at Surabaya. IL-14 transport aircraft will arrive in Indonesia within the next two weeks and that IL-28 bombers will follow within several months. (SECRET NOFORN)
(Page 3) (Map)

Yemen-USSR: Construction of military installations on the Yemeni coast at the southern entrance to the Red Sea--flanking the oil-tanker route from the Persian Gulf to Western Europe--is progressing under the direction of Soviet bloc engineers. The British in Aden state that the Soviet-financed projects include an airfield, defensive installations, and coastal gun positions.
(Page 5) (Map)

III. THE WEST

West Germany: Adenauer's increased emphasis on his new policy line that disarmament should be the main topic at a summit conference stems primarily from his concern over the domestic West German political interest in the nuclear armament issue. By relegating such questions as German reunification to a lesser place, Adenauer evidently hopes to evade heavy opposition criticism of his nuclear weapons policy in five important state elections this year.
[PAGE 07]
This policy has also met with considerable public criticism. Soviet Deputy Premier Mikoyan's statement offering to renounce Soviet use of nuclear arms against West Germany if the Federal Republic is kept free of nuclear weapons has given West German opposition parties new ammunition for their campaign.
(Page 6)

Guatemala - British Honduras: President Ydigoras is prepared to carry out a strong propaganda campaign to promote the idea of Guatemalan sovereignty over neighboring British Honduras. His primary motive is to strengthen his domestic political position by taking a strong stand on an issue with emotional appeal to all Guatemalans. He threatens a series of dramatic gestures, including an appeal in the United Nations for Latin American solidarity against "colonialism."
(Page 7)
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
(No back-up material).

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nasir's Trip to Moscow

UAR President Nasir has stated that his trip to Moscow, scheduled to begin on 29 April for 18 or 19 days, will be devoted largely to "reassuring" the USSR, in view of his recent moves against pro-Soviet elements in Syria. However, Nasir hopes to reorganize the separate Egyptian and Syrian economic and arms deals and perhaps obtain an increase in "basic economic aid." He may also attempt to secure Soviet agreement to provide hard currency for Egyptian cotton, to reduce the cost of arms already ordered, and to furnish jet aircraft for his civil airline.

Nasir apparently expects to do some hard bargaining, and the inclusion of the relatively conservative Egyptian ministers of finance and economy in his retinue suggests he may attempt to avoid extensive further commitments. The fact that no military personnel will accompany the group seems to rule out significant new arms purchases.

Nevertheless, the USSR may offer economic assistance on large-scale new projects which would tempt Nasir. Such an offer might consist of Soviet underwriting of the development plans for the Suez Canal, large-scale agricultural improvement schemes, or even financing Nasir's pet project, the Aswan Dam. A sizable contingent of UAR newspaper and radio men accompanying Nasir will guarantee propaganda cover for home consumption, and any agreement made, regardless of its real magnitude, will be publicized as another victory for "positive neutralism."

28 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
Poor Syrian Grain Crop Worries Nasir

The prospective small size of the Syrian grain harvest, resulting from drought, is worrying UAR President Nasir and may embarrass him politically by coming so soon after the Syrian-Egyptian union. Although it is believed there will be sufficient wheat for Syrian domestic consumption, the anticipated absence of normal supplies for export will result in an important loss of foreign exchange. It will also force Egypt, which had expected to rely on Syrian wheat for part of its consumption, to seek additional supplies abroad, possibly from the Soviet Union.

A temporary prohibition of grain exports, as well as statements by officials in the Syrian Ministry of Economy that there will be no domestic shortage, will probably result in grain dealers holding supplies off the market in anticipation of higher prices later in the year. A rise in grain prices could cause a serious loss of Nasir's prestige in Syria and nullify the effect of his recent decree cutting the price of bread, the staple of Syrian diet.

Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Indonesia

Bukittinggi may now be in central government hands. Singapore monitors of the radio station there report it is now announcing itself as "Radio Republic Indonesia" rather than using its former name of "Radio Revolutionary Republic Indonesia." With the fall of Bukittinggi several days after the capture of Solok, government forces are expected to push for a final rout of dissident troops believed concentrated between these two points.

The government has announced the appointment of Lt. Col. Nasution, operations commander in eastern Central Sumatra, as "war administrator" of that area, and apparently plans to name the western commander, Col. Jani, as chief administrator there, with over-all authority for Central Sumatra. It has also banned political activities in former dissident-held areas.

The Soviet vessel Ismail, which recently arrived in Djakarta with bloc military equipment, will offload Soviet-made jet trainers in Surabaya.

The anticipated IL-14 transport deliveries will be made within two weeks, followed within several months by IL-28 bombers.

Col. Simbolon, foreign minister of the dissident regime in Central Sumatra, has approved the suggestion of North Celebes commander Col. Sumual that the dissident capital be moved to Menado after Bukittinggi's fall. Also approved was the appointment of Col. Warouw, former military attaché in Peiping, as vice premier.

The dissident air force's attacks on Ternate Island apparently have had a considerable demoralizing effect

28 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
INDONESIA
[PAGE 12]
"The government has become a vacuum and all of the people in the city have evacuated to the hills." Central government agents are keeping close surveillance on the dissidents' airfield at Menado.

Soviet Ambassador Zhukov has delivered to the Indonesian Communist party (PKI) instructions from Moscow to stage a coup d'etat in Djakarta if the central government appears ready to reach a damaging compromise with the dissidents. Zhukov indicated the Soviet Union was prepared to send weapons and aircraft if needed for the coup. It is improbable that Moscow would consider such a move, in view of the fact that sponsorship of armed PKI action would shatter the bloc's posture of noninterference which is fundamental to its policy throughout Asia and Africa. There is also little likelihood of any compromise damaging to the PKI, which probably will emerge from the present crisis in a stronger position than ever. Moreover the PKI is believed well satisfied with its rapidly increasing political gains and unlikely to risk these by gambling on the success of a coup.

28 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Soviet-Directed Construction of Military Installations in Yemen

Two Soviet engineers have visited the Bab al-Mandab area in Yemen repeatedly during the last three months in preparation for construction of an airfield at the southern entrance of the Red Sea. Work was scheduled to begin about 25 April.

The project is being financed by the USSR as well as directed by Soviet technicians. Yemen's deputy foreign minister in mid-April admitted Soviet assistance was being received on the construction of military installations at Bab al-Mandab and "elsewhere along the Aden Protectorate border." The nature of the latter installations is unclear. However, an airfield had been rebuilt in the Baidha area near the disputed Aden Protectorate frontier. A field at Harib may have been similarly repaired.

Three new gun emplacements on a hill overlooking Bab al-Mandab Strait. In September, two Soviet engineers were reported to have inspected the area prior to the arrival of guns and ammunition.

The "new guns" at Bab al-Mandab, along with one at the village of Dhubab, 16 miles to the north, had been inspected and cleaned by the "experts."

The emplacements are suitable for the Soviet 122-mm. field gun, several of which have been received by Yemen. The models of this gun thus far identified in Yemen do not have sufficient range to cover the navigable channel through the strait completely, although a later model, which may also have been received, could do so. The guns can cover the British airfield on Perim Island, which lies in the strait.

28 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 15]
III. THE WEST

Adenauer's Flexibility on Summit Talks

Faced with Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan's statement on 25 April that the USSR will refrain from using nuclear weapons against West Germany if Bonn keeps its territory free of nuclear weapons, Chancellor Adenauer may be expected to counter with his new and more flexible policy line that controlled disarmament should be the chief goal of a summit conference. He amplified this line in an interview on 26 April at which he reportedly said a summit conference need not have a formal agenda and could run for two or three years at the committee level.

West German public opinion now strongly favors a summit conference, and Adenauer's more flexible attitude is a tactical retreat in view of the five important state election campaigns facing his party this year. Adenauer must counter a strong Social Democratic party (SPD) attack on his policy of accepting nuclear weapons for the West German armed forces.

The 25 April debate in the Bundestag on submitting this policy to a national referendum, however, revealed considerable confusion and lack of unity among the opposition in pressing this issue. Moreover, Mikoyan's "hard line" on German reunification, as stated in his 26 April press interview, is likely to help Adenauer rather than the SPD by bringing home to the German public that the USSR remains adamantly opposed to any compromise on this question.

Page 6
[PAGE 16]
Guatemalan President to Wage Campaign For Sovereignty Over British Honduras

Guatemalan President Ydigoras told a group of British friends on 24 April he will "use all means" to extend Guatemalan sovereignty to British Honduras and is prepared to "spend millions" to this end. He apparently has in mind a concerted effort to gain the support of all Latin American countries and may carry the issue to the United Nations. An armed invasion of the colony is unlikely, however, as the President seems to realize that such action would have disastrous results.

In an attempt to dramatize the issue, Ydigoras made one unsuccessful attempt to visit the colony on 16 April and now says he will make a second try, this time by sea. He will ask permission in advance, but if it is denied, he intends to go anyway and will also levy a 100-percent duty on British goods entering Guatemala.

All recent Guatemalan governments have used the claim to British Honduras--based on old Spanish territorial claims--to rally domestic support to their regimes. Ydigoras, who lacks wide and well-organized political support, is probably similarly motivated. He seems, however, more determined than his predecessors and his penchant for the dramatic grandstand play could carry him to a point where it would be difficult to back down.

The dispute also involves Mexico, which claims the northern part of the colony if Britain should accede to Guatemalan demands. If oil is discovered in the northern part of Guatemala, where explorations are under way, there will be increased Guatemalan pressure for cession of British Honduras, which would provide access to the sea.

28 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 17]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
28 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Missile Activity: Guided Missile Intelligence Committee Statement as of 1200 EDT, 27 April 1958.

Available information does not permit positive identification of the operation, but the following possibilities exist:

The launching of an ICBM or ESV essentially similar to the previous two Sputniks;

The launching of another type space vehicle such as one used in a lunar operation or a more sophisticated satellite, such as a recoverable one;

Failure of the intended operation;

A unique type of practice which could also serve as a part of a hoax.

The most likely of these possibilities is that the operation was to launch some type of space vehicle, such as one used in lunar operations or a more sophisticated
[PAGE 18]
III. THE WEST

West Germany: Adenauer's increased emphasis on his new policy line that disarmament should be the main topic at a summit conference stems primarily from his concern over the domestic West German political interest in the nuclear armament issue. By relegating such questions as German reunification to a lesser place, Adenauer evidently hopes to evade heavy opposition criticism of his nuclear weapons policy in five important state elections this year.

Guatemala - British Honduras: His primary motive is to strengthen his domestic political position by taking a strong stand on an issue with emotional appeal to all Guatemalans. He threatens a series of dramatic gestures, including an appeal in the United Nations for Latin American solidarity against "colonialism."
(Page 7)

28 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iv
