Situation in Laos

Nehru told the press on 2 May that he expected a cease-fire within a few days and suggested that it might help if the ICC went to Laos. The commission is awaiting instructions in Delhi from the UK and the USSR, as Geneva Conference co-chairmen, after filing its initial report on 1 May.

New Delhi's policy at the forthcoming Geneva Conference would be aimed chiefly at keeping Laos unified and non-Communist, objectives which he noted were shared by India and the Western powers. Sen conceded, however, that a major difference lay in the interpretation of "Communist" as applied to the Pathet Lao - Kong Le forces. Indian officials are concerned that a cease-fire line will be used as a basis for determining the relative strengths of the two sides in a provisional government, thus giving the "northern side"--controlling two thirds of the country--disproportionate weight in domestic politics during the extended period of propaganda debate at Geneva.

While the Polish member of the ICC has been agreeable in preliminary discussions, according to the Indian chairman, he has made it clear in statements to the press that the ICC should not go to Laos to arrange and bring about a cease-fire. The ICC report of 28 April to the Geneva co-chairmen stipulated that the ICC should await the proclamation of an agreed date for announcing the cease-fire in Laos before proceeding to the country. The ICC also stated in its report that it would establish cooperative relations with any such "joint committees" as may be set up for effective implementation of the cease-fire.

The fall of Tchepone would be regarded as a particularly serious development by South Vietnamese leaders who have watched the southward advance of Communist forces in Laos with anxiety. President Diem has long been concerned over the Communist guerrillas in southern Laos, but he has not felt South Vietnam's security directly threatened as long as these elements remained dispersed and poorly armed. According to an unconfirmed report, however, Diem was planning

3 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
