NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British withdrawing recognition of nationalization principle in Iranian Oil dispute:

The British Charge in Tehran has been instructed to present to the Iranian Foreign Minister, not later than 15 March, a note stating that Britain no longer recognizes the principle of nationalization as applied to the oil industry.

The note points out that the British Government had previously recognized this principle in an effort to obtain a settlement of the oil dispute, but that since last summer's conditions no longer exist, neither the government nor the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company are now bound by the principle. According to the Charge, this note is just for the record and to maintain Britain's position before the International Court of Justice.

Comment: The note on nationalization will prejudice the present favorable atmosphere of the negotiations with the International Bank for an interim settlement and may even cause the Iranian Government to take further anti-British actions.

Other notes to be presented by the same deadline protest the closing of British information and cultural centers in Iran, the last-minute refusal of Iran to sign a civil air agreement with Britain, and anti-British articles in the Iranian press.

5. Shah believes problem of US aid to Iran will be solved soon:

The Shah, in a conversation with General Zimmerman, Chief of the US Military Mission, said that the Mossadeq government will not be in power much longer and that the problem of the US Military Mission and of American military aid will be solved when a new government takes over. He urged that the Mission continue temporarily without a contract and emphasized the difficulties it would face in returning if it left. The Shah added that he was disappointed by the small amount of military aid given Iran because he thought its strategic position should result in special consideration.

Comment: The Shah's belief that the government will not remain in power may be inspired by Prime Minister Mossadeq's recent statements that he intends to resign after the new Majlis meets in April. However, Mossadeq continually vacillates on the question of his resignation.
