Turkish Internal Situation

The march of Turkish military cadets through the streets of Ankara on 21 May, apparently in support of the recent student demonstrations against the government's repressive policies, is a blow to Premier Menderes' regime. This development, the most serious so far in the current political unrest, is the first open indication of dissatisfaction among army elements and will encourage both students and other opposition groups. Recent reports have also indicated that lower and middle-grade army officers are taking an increasingly active role in civilian-directed street demonstrations.

The 21 May demonstration followed reports that an army colonel, father of one of the cadets, had been beaten by police while watching a student demonstration against the government on 20 May. There have been other reports in recent days of minor brushes between the police and army which probably have resulted in the growth of considerable hostility. The participants in antigovernment demonstrations repeatedly have shown respect and even friendship toward army troops sent to disperse them but have indicated open hostility toward the police.

A crowd of civilians who followed the cadets in their march also demonstrated later and called for the resignation of Minister of Interior Namik Gedik and Director General of the National Police Cemal Goktan. Premier Menderes previously has been reported contemplating the removal of both men, and the pressure within his own Democratic party (DP) for such a step will probably increase. The participation of elements of the armed forces in demonstrations may give anti-Menderes leaders within the DP the incentive to demand that the premier also step down.

Menderes, however, is reported reassured of popular support by his recent trip through Turkey's Aegean provinces. It now appears likely that he will misjudge this basically rural support for nationwide endorsement of his policies and refuse to compromise with his opposition both within and outside his party. It is doubtful that his recent promises of "early" elections will be enough to prevent continued demonstrations against his government despite stringent preventive measures such as those taken in Ankara on 22 May; these banned the congregation of more than five persons without written license.
