[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
TAB

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

Tyura Tam Launch Preparations -

A valid 8-hour countdown for a Tyura Tam launching operation began at 0001 GMT, 18 June 1959, and was still in operation as of 0709 GMT. If continued without delay, launch time should be 0800 GMT (0401 EDT).

Information available as of 0330 EDT indicates that this is some type of space vehicle rather than an ICBM. A Venus probe is unlikely, however, since conditions would not be favorable for such an event at this time.

Although there are some similarities between this activity and the operation which resulted in the Soviet lunar probe launch of 2 January 1959, present data does not permit a firm prediction as to whether this operation will be a lunar probe.

[PAGE 04]
18 JUNE 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Party presidium probably meeting in Moscow.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Kuwait making defense arrangements with UK.
South Korea--Bipartisan group of political leaders, without President Rhee, agree on need to modify hostile attitude toward Japan.

III. THE WEST
Dominican Republic--Insurgents still fighting in interior; more may have arrived from Cuba.
Argentina--Ranking generals present demands to Frondizi.
Irregular force in Costa Rica warns it ready to attack Nicaragua.

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
*USSR: The heaviest concentration of party presidium members to appear in Moscow since the party congress last February was on hand for the opening of the All-Union Industry and Agriculture Exposition on 16 June. The American Embassy reports that all but one of the members who reside in other cities were accounted for at the ceremony. The top leaders may have gathered for preliminary discussions on the business of the central committee plenum which is scheduled to meet on 24 June to deal with domestic economic topics. The embassy points out, however, that the Soviet censor passed a Western correspondents dispatch to the effect that Khrushchev met on 14 June with members of the presidium to discuss new instructions for Gromyko, suggesting that the presidium is discussing developments at the Geneva conference.

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East and Asia: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet action which would jeopardize US interests exist in Laos and in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Iran. The situation in the Middle East remains precarious, but a deliberate initiation of large-scale hostilities is unlikely in the immediate future.

Watch Committee conclusion--Berlin: No significant indications bearing on the possibility of hostilities.

[PAGE 06]
Kuwait-UK: Kuwait, concerned over developments in Iraq, is engaged in talks with the British aimed at bolstering its defenses and internal security. The Kuwaitis have asked for tanks, antitank guns, rocket launchers, and ammunition. The UK, while anxious to encourage the Kuwaitis, intends to handle the matter with "extreme care" to avoid undermining its simultaneous efforts to improve relations with Iraqi Prime Minister Qasim.

South Korea: According to the leader of the major opposition party, top leaders of the ruling party agreed with him at a meeting on 15 June that South Korea's hostile policy toward Japan must be modified. These leaders probably feel that Japan's apparent determination to permit the voluntary repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea indicates a hardening of Tokyo's attitude toward Seoul, and that continued South Korean intransigence would only reduce the likelihood of a settlement of Japanese - South Korean differences on terms favorable to Seoul. It is doubtful that such views would be communicated to President Rhee.

III. THE WEST
Dominican Republic: Trujillo's forces have not yet succeeded in completely rounding up a small group of insurgents in the mountainous interior, and there are signs of discontent in the navy. Insurgents who have been captured since the 14 June incursion claim that they were flown from Cuba and that two boatloads of additional men are en route from Cuba. These may have already landed somewhere on the northern coast.

*Argentina: President Frondizi on 17 June rejected an army demand, presented by five ranking generals, for the dismissal of the Army Secretary, General Solanos Pacheco. Frondizi did, however, agree to dismiss Assistant Secretary Reimundez and in so doing may have temporarily relieved the crisis within the

18 June 59 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
army. Reimundez has been replaced by General Rosendo Fraga, formerly a commander in the Cordoba area, where army units are severely disaffected. The group of five generals reportedly also demanded that Frondizi alter his labor policies to relieve the army of strike-breaking duties and other tasks that "place the military in a bad light." They may attempt to force demobilization of the country's railway workers and will probably press for evacuation of army forces from strike-threatened power plants in the interior.

*Costa Rica-Nicaragua: President Echandi was warned on 17 June by the leader of a substantial military force of irregulars in Costa Rica that the irregulars are ready to attack Nicaragua and that if Echandi attempts to stop them there will be "plenty of trouble in Costa Rica." Fragmentary newscasts from San Jose later in the day suggest that Echandi, despite the warning, was deploying troops in an effort to prevent any attack on Nicaragua from Costa Rica. If the revolutionary force in Costa Rica should try, it could not by itself defeat the 5,000-man Nicaraguan National Guard. However, the Somoza regime is also faced with the threat of further rebel incursions from Honduras in the north.

18 June 59 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
No Back-up Material

II. ASIA-AFRICA

British Renew Assurances to Kuwait on Security Against Iraq

Kuwait has received renewed assurances in its talks with the United Kingdom regarding security measures to be taken against possible Iraqi aggression. The Ruler of Kuwait first sought and received such assurances in early May in case of hostile Iraqi action following a Kuwaiti Government crackdown on internal Communist elements. On 17 May the Acting Ruler informed the British he had expelled "200 Iraqi Communists."

The Foreign Ministry now has advised the American Embassy of detailed arrangements under discussion. The UK does not intend to establish a "base" or station British troop units in Kuwait. In the event of an Iraqi attack, however, the Kuwaitis have agreed to provide accommodations for British elements, use certain vehicles and armored cars in a delaying action on the frontier, and initiate communication and other liaison with the British brigade designated to carry out military action. The Kuwaitis have asked for ammunition, six to eight tanks, mobile antitank guns, and 3.5-inch rocket launchers and ammunition. Earlier they had agreed to permit Britain to stockpile tanks as well as other equipment for use by British troops who would be brought in during an emergency.

18 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 09]
South Korean Leaders Have Second Thoughts on Policy Toward Japan

Top leaders of both the ruling Liberal party and the opposition Democratic party are concerned over the possible disastrous effects of President Rhee's intransigent policy toward Japan, according to Democratic leader Cho Pyong-ok. Cho says that President Rhee's chief political lieutenant, Yi Ki-pung, along with some other top Liberal leaders, believes that a change in policy toward Japan is necessary; Cho furthermore has informed American Ambassador Dowling that unless the government's Japanese policy is changed "promptly" the Democratic party will have to withdraw its bipartisan support.

Such concern probably reflects a realization by responsible South Korean leaders that Japan's apparent determination to permit voluntary repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea indicates a hardening of Tokyo's attitude toward Seoul and that South Korean intransigence is reducing the likelihood of a settlement of Japanese - South Korean differences on terms favorable to Seoul. Ambassador Dowling has interpreted a South Korean request for American good offices to dissuade Tokyo from carrying out its repatriation plan as an admission of South Korea's helplessness, despite its rash threats.

There has been no indication, however, that President Rhee is prepared to modify his demands for a normalization of relations with Japan. Following a meeting of top political leaders of both major parties on 15 June--at which it was agreed that President Rhee should be advised of the urgent need for a change in policy--Cho Pyong-ok told Ambassador Dowling that he doubted this would be done since no one dared make such a suggestion to Rhee.

18 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Fighting Continues as Dominicans Expect New Landings

Ambassador Farland reported on 16 June that fighting continues between Dominican forces and a small group of insurgents in the mountainous interior and that there are signs of discontent in the navy. According to the government, insurgents captured since the 14 June incursion claim that they were flown from Cuba and that two boatloads of additional men are en route from there. A Cuban press report of 16 June said "uprisings" had taken place in the Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata areas on the northern coast. Dictator Trujillo's government has expressed confidence that there will be an early end to the "skirmish." It has acknowledged some apparent collaboration between the garrison at Constanza--site of the air landing--and the insurgents, and has made numerous arrests. New landings are expected by the government.

Enrique Jimenez, a Dominican who served as an officer in Castro's guerrilla army during the Cuban civil war and has since been in charge of training Dominican exiles in Cuba with the backing of a Communist-controlled Dominican exile union (UPD), is in the Dominican Republic with a small armed group.

On 15 June a Dominican official said that his government had no intention then to request assistance from the Organization of American States.

The 14 June incursion followed several weeks of strained relations among Caribbean nations which resulted in Venezuela suspending diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on 12 June. The Cuban Embassy in Ciudad Trujillo was closed on 5 June, and a complete rupture of diplomatic relations is expected momentarily.

18 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
Costa Rican President's Neutrality in Nicaraguan Affair Leads To Threat Against His Government

Frank Marshall, Costa Rican revolutionary veteran, warned President Echandi on 17 June that he has a substantial military force in the country ready to attack Nicaragua and that if Echandi attempts to stop it, "there will be plenty of trouble in Costa Rica." The President immediately called in his cabinet and the leaders of various political parties. Fragmentary Costa Rican newscasts have subsequently indicated that, despite the threat, Echandi may be sending elements of the Civil Guard to prevent an attack on Nicaragua by Marshall.

Echandi's efforts to maintain neutrality in the Nicaraguan affair have been highly unpopular in Costa Rica, where public opinion strongly backs the Nicaraguan opposition. Former President Jose Figueres' partisans, who dominate the legislature, have openly supported the Nicaraguan rebels and Figueres is believed to have aided the Nicaraguans who took part in the ill-fated invasions of 31 May and 1 June. However, Figueres could not back Marshall's threat without negating the basis of a political creed that has gained him wide prestige throughout the hemisphere. Marshall, a rash and unstable man, is capable of violent action, but would have little support for an attempt against the Costa Rican government.

If Marshall's forces succeeded in invading Nicaragua they probably could not be themselves defeat the 5,000-man Nicaraguan National Guard. However, the Somoza regime is faced with the threat of further incursions from Honduras in the north.

18 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
