LATIN AMERICA

1. Comment on the Guatemalan situation as of 20 June:

As of 20 June the outcome of the efforts to overthrow the regime of President Arbenz of Guatemala remains very much in doubt. The controlling factor in the situation is still considered to be the position of the Guatemalan armed forces, and thus far this group has not given any clear indication of whether it will move, and if so, in which way. If the Guatemalan army should move within the next few days against the Arbenz regime, it is considered to have the capacity to overthrow it. On the other hand if it remains loyal and if most of the military elements commit themselves to vigorous action against the forces of Castillo Armas the latter will be defeated (see map, page 5).

The position of the top-ranking military officers is constantly shifting, with daily rises and falls in their attitudes. This group has long proclaimed its strong anti-Communist feelings and its ultimate intention of doing something to rid the government of Communist influences. Various officers have declared themselves as willing to take action against the regime given just a little more time or just a little more justification. It is probable that the rising pressure of events will compel this group to declare its position, one way or the other, at any time from now on--although the possible result could be a split in the ranks. There were unconfirmed rumors as of Saturday night to the effect that Colonel Diaz, the Chief of the armed forces, and some 40 officers had applied for asylum in various foreign embassies in Guatemala City, but these embassies have not yet confirmed this report.

There were new defections on Saturday from the Guatemalan air force, one pilot flying out with his plane and several others obtaining asylum in the Salvadoran embassy. The Guatemalan air force has thus far failed to produce any interception effort against the overflights by the Castillo Armas planes. However, heavy antiaircraft fire is reported.

There is thus far no evidence to confirm the charges and propaganda of the Guatemalan regime of bombing
