UAR and Lebanese Dockworkers Boycott American Shipping

In retaliation for the picketing of the UAR freighter Cleopatra in New York, UAR longshoremen have declared a boycott of American ships, which may also be denied supplies and other facilities in UAR ports. Longshoremen in Beirut and Aden are reported ready to take similar action against American shipping. The UAR is urging dockworkers throughout the Arab world to join in the boycott; the executive council of the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions reportedly will meet on 20 April to discuss the situation.

Members of the International Longshoremen's Association and the Seafarers' International Union have been picketing the UAR freighter Cleopatra in New York since 12 April, and loading of the ship has been halted. Their action is in protest against the UAR's boycott of ships which have traded with Israel. Cairo news media claim the demonstration is Zionist sponsored and that it is a "last desperate effort by Zionists to break the UAR economic blockade of Israel and force passage of the Suez Canal."

The picketing of the Cleopatra has been hailed by the Israeli press as a possible turning point in Israel's struggle for Suez passage. The Israelis are hopeful that picketing of UAR ships will spread to ports in other countries and that the incident will publicize the blockage of Israel's shipping through the canal and inspire support for overcoming these restrictions. The UAR, on the premise that a state of war still exists between it and Israel, bans from the canal ships chartered by Israel or by firms in which Israelis have part ownership, as well as Israeli ships and cargoes. On 10 April the Greek ship Astypalea was released from Port Said after nearly five months of detention. It had been chartered by an Israeli firm to carry cement from Haifa to Djibouti via the canal. The cargo was unloaded before the vessel's release. An Israeli Foreign Ministry official has said that ships with cargoes from Israel will continue to be sent through the canal "from time to time."
