[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
1 April 1951
Copy No. C-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
GENERAL

1. Widespread UK and French sentiment for more conciliatory Western position in four-power talks (page 3).

5. Soviet consulates in Yugoslavia closed (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Widespread UK and French sentiment for more conciliatory Western position in four-power talks:

US Embassy London reports that the British public, which has viewed the Soviet proposals of 28 March as “a concession of considerable importance,” would become increasingly critical of US policy should these proposals not be accepted as a basis for discussion in seeking to eliminate unacceptable features of the revised Soviet agenda. The Paris press has featured the alleged British feeling that the “ice is beginning to melt” between the West and the USSR, and has emphasized that the UK Government is trying to bring the US to a “more moderate policy” in the Far East while appearing to count on France to use similar influence in Europe. The pro-government newspaper Figaro reported in particular that “wide current British opinion” had observed that the West “would be well advised” to renounce German rearmament, at least for the near future.

Comment: The Soviet proposals of 30 March -- introducing additional East-West issues -- are likely to produce considerable public disillusionment in the UK and France, but will not halt the rise in popular sentiment for a more conciliatory Western position resulting from Gromyko’s 28 March concessions.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
5. Soviet consulates in Yugoslavia closed:

US Embassy Belgrade reports that the Yugoslav Government has requested the USSR to close its consulates in Zagreb and Split and to remove their eight staff members from Yugoslav territory immediately. The request was based principally on the grounds of lack of reciprocity, since the USSR
[PAGE 06]
does not permit Yugoslav consulates outside of Moscow. The Yugoslav Government also noted that the Soviet consulates in Zagreb and Split had no proper consular functions to justify their existence. According to the US Embassy report, the Soviet Government has already complied by closing the consulates and the Soviet personnel are preparing to leave the country.
