[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
20 April 1952
Copy No. 52
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
1.
FAR EAST
2.
3. Top Chinese official in Tibet reportedly intends to visit India (page 4).
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4.
5. Syria willing to accept 500,000 more Arab refugees (page 5).
LATIN AMERICA
6. Political disturbances in Ecuador (page 6).
7. Revolution reportedly planned for Venezuela (page 7).

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Top Chinese official in Tibet reportedly intends to visit India:
General Chang Ching-wu, senior Chinese representative in Tibet, intends to visit India to discuss with Prime Minister Nehru plans for a "most-favored-nation trade treaty" with Tibet and to request "increased" exports of grain, cloth and construction materials from India.

Comment: There has been no high-level contact between India and Tibet since the Chinese occupation of Tibet in autumn 1951. Chang's visit could prepare the way for a discussion of all aspects of Indo-Tibetan relations.

Chang's immediate mission, however, may be to ease a serious food shortage reported in Tibet. India, which probably cannot supply much food, may agree to cooperate in expediting shipments of Chinese commodities sent via Calcutta.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4.

[PAGE 05]
5. Syria willing to accept 500,000 more Arab refugees:
Syria is willing to resettle 500,000 Arab refugees in addition to those already there, according to the Chief of State, Colonel Selo. Colonel Shishakli had previously intimated that he would welcome this opportunity for economic development.

Colonel Selo urged an agreement integrating Syrian plans for a $200,000,000 development program with the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) projects. He also made it clear that in view of the political risks involved in accepting the refugees and in spite of the economic advantages, Syria would welcome any additional funds for general economic development which UNRWA could secure.

Comment: Acceptance of Arab refugees along with sizable economic assistance would enable the Shishakli-Selo regime to build a larger, more powerful Syria.

Successful resettlement of so many refugees would be a major step toward the solution of one of the Near East's most pressing problems. Other Arab states are likely to be uncooperative on the resettlement project and insist that the refugees be returned to their Palestinian homes.

LATIN AMERICA
6. Political disturbances in Ecuador:
The political situation in Ecuador is tense and rumors of a pending revolution are persistent. A minor incident occurred in Quito on 18 April when university students shot at and burned an effigy of presidential candidate Velasco Ibarra. This resulted in unfounded rumors that the revolution had started.

Comment: The February announcement of Velasco Ibarra's candidacy and his return on 1 March from exile in Argentina have upset earlier predictions that the presidential contest would be a "fairly normal one."

Velasco is scheduled to arrive in Quito on 22 April on his campaign tour, which has already resulted in violence. Communist leaders are reported to be organizing shock troops in Quito in preparation for Velasco's arrival, and Communist and Socialist students are actively engaged in propaganda campaigns against him. Should the expected disturbances in Quito reach serious proportions, it is possible that the ambitious Minister of Defense might stage a preventive coup "to protect" Ecuador from further bloodshed and from possible rule of the twice deposed ex-president Velasco.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
7. Revolution reportedly planned for Venezuela:
Gustavo Machado, a high Communist leader, and Valmore Rodriguez, spokesman for the Democratic Action Party, were on the Colombian-Venezuelan frontier with a large shipment of arms which they planned to deliver to the area around Maracaibo on 18 April. The Government was setting up an extensive water blockade and land patrols. The Chief of the National Security Forces in the capital, however, indicated that he had no knowledge of any planned disturbances.

Comment: Police precautions may be merely a routine follow-up on the government's 9 April announcement that the outlawed Democratic Action Party had planned disturbances for 19 April and 5 July. The Maracaibo oil area was not affected by the Democratic Action's uprisings last October.

The present report implies full-scale Communist-Democratic Action collaboration which would be a new factor in current Venezuelan politics. It is not certain whether the meeting and collaboration of these two leaders -- if true -- would imply mere harassing or strike tactics in the Maracaibo oil area or would herald countrywide disturbances.
