been removed from his residence. An unconfirmed report stated that the Ambassador's family will leave London shortly. The US Embassy in Prague has been reliably informed that Dr. Adolf Hoffmeister, Czechoslovak Ambassador to France, will not return to Paris and that his family is expected to arrive in Prague shortly.

Comment: The above named Czech Ambassadors are three of a larger group of Czech diplomatic representatives abroad that was recalled to Prague in mid-February, about a week prior to the official public denunciation of former Foreign Minister Clementis as an agent of French intelligence. All of these diplomats have now either defected, as did the Czech Ambassador in New Delhi and the Czech First Secretary in Bern, or have been relieved of their assignments. Since these men were either friends of Clementis or appointed to their posts during Clementis' tenure as Foreign Minister, it is likely that the recalls are associated with the current purge in Czechoslovakia.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. Opponents predict defeat of Schuman Plan in French Assembly:

In a conversation with a representative of the ECA Mission to France, two key industrialists and a prominent Socialist deputy have expressed strong antagonism to the draft Schuman Plan treaty. The Socialist and one of the industrial leaders -- the First Vice-President of the powerful National Employers' Association -- declared that the Assembly would not ratify the treaty. The other industrialist -- the leading spokesman for the French steel industry -- bitterly criticized the French Government on the grounds that it was the only European government "maligning" its own steel industry; his bitterness was also directed at the US, because he felt that Monnet's repeated "threat" of the withdrawal of US financial aid had induced the delegations to support and initial the present treaty draft.

Comment: This report is the clearest indication to date that French industrialists will attempt to prevent ratification of the Schuman Plan treaty. It is doubtful whether the Socialist deputy's opposition to the treaty is shared by a majority of his party's

- 8 -
