WESTERN EUROPE

5. Allies defer decision on semi-heavy arms for West German police forces:
The three-power Special Security Committee has authorized the West German Federal Republic to arm both border and mobile police with normal police weapons. The Germans have requested semi-heavy arms, but the Committee deferred its decision on this point. The British are willing to authorize normal infantry weapons for the police, and the French representative indicated partial agreement.

The determining factor will be a definition of the role the border police is to perform. The British expect it to take the shock of any aggression from the east, but both the French and US representatives were obliged to request governmental instructions on the question.

Comment: Semi-heavy arms had been agreed to for the mobile police force authorized a year ago. Since the Germans had difficulty organizing this group, which is not expected to exceed 5,000 men by the end of 1951, they have developed the border police, now consisting of 10,000 men. The French had blocked the Germans' request for semi-heavy equipment in April, 1951, and also secured British agreement to oppose manufacture of these arms in Germany. The French will probably agree, however, to arming the border police with medium mortars and antitank weapons, and can be expected to permit a reserve of such arms for the mobile police.

6. French Socialists refuse to renew electoral alliances with coalition parties:
The French Socialist Party's National Council has issued a belligerent resolution seemingly ruling out alliances with any other party in the October cantonal elections. Furthermore, the keynote address at the council meeting proclaimed the Socialists' refusal to participate in the government unless the new church-school laws are repealed. A Socialist spokesman has revealed, however, that the fight against the center parties would be subordinated to the battle against the Communists and the Gaullists, and the Socialists will not actively promote the downfall of the present cabinet.

Comment: The forcefulness of the Socialists' campaign against aid for church schools is enhanced by the proximity of the cantonal elections. In the face of sharp Communist competition for the labor vote and Radical Socialist competition in some areas for the anti-clerical vote, the Socialists are making a determined fight to retain their strong position in the departmental councils, where they now have 25 percent of the seats to be filled in October. The current Socialist policy of opposing the government on certain vital issues is a continuous threat to its existence, but can be expected to stop short of precipitating De Gaulle's return to power.
