LATIN AMERICA

9. US and Chilean officials discuss disposition of Chile's 20 percent copper quota:
The Minister of Economy advised a US Embassy official that Chile would have difficulty in disposing of its 20 percent share of Chilean copper output at a price exceeding 27.5 cents per pound without making sales to questionable brokers. Shortly after this conversation, orders were issued to stop a thousand ton shipment to Holland.

President Gonzalez Videla stated to the US Ambassador on 18 September that he was emphatically against leaks of copper ore, but he reiterated the Chilean stand "regarding desperate need for dollars and cashing maximum from the 20 percent quota." The President suggested that US and Chilean missions in Europe should work closely to check on all doubtful consignees. The US Embassy comments that "this is encouraging since the Ministry of Economy has been pressuring Anaconda to speed shipments to questionable consignees."

Comment: The price of 27.5 cents per pound was established in the recent US-Chilean copper agreement which allotted 80 percent of the output to be sold through the US firms. Other information indicates that Chilean Government measures to prevent transshipment of copper to the Soviet bloc are not entirely satisfactory. The Minister's statement and Chile's expressed preoccupation over its dollar position may be in part calculated to justify eventually an increase in the price of copper.

10. Uruguayan cabinet favors an offer of two destroyer escorts and a regimental combat team for UN service:
The cabinet on 19 September unanimously approved the offering of two destroyer escorts -- about to be purchased from the US -- for the common defense of the Western Hemisphere and for Unified Command service pursuant to the UN "Uniting for Peace" resolution. Further, the cabinet approved the "organizing, equipping, and training of a regimental combat team of ground troops for UN service." A letter to this effect is being forwarded to the UN Secretary-General.

Comment: The Uruguayan Constitution requires that Congress approve the departure of national forces from the Republic. Columbia is thus far the only Latin American country to have supplied troops to the UN.
