8. Austrian export control effort assessed:

US Legation and ECA officials in Austria report the Austrian Government is cooperating effectively with the US in controlling East-West trade and, given the limitations imposed by the Soviet occupation, has gone as far as possible in thwarting Soviet economic penetration of Austria and in denying the USSR strategic materials. The Austrians must be circumspect in their efforts to control this trade because of the ever-present possibility of Soviet retaliation, which could result either in the partition of Austria or in restrictions upon shipments from the Soviet zone to other parts of Austria. Only a small number of items subject to embargo are produced in Austria, but the USSR would retaliate immediately if the action were taken to control transit shipments originating in other Western countries, and furthermore, the Austrian Government has no controls over the exports of the Soviet authorities and plants. In matter of trade, Austria has been conceding to Eastern Europe only what has been necessary to obtain essential Austrian imports (principally coal) and to maintain the Eastern markets for Austrian goods that do not sell in the West. US officials declare that the continued orientation of Austria's trade toward the West will gradually further curtail Austria's dependence upon the East for raw materials and markets.

Comment: Although the Austrian Government doubtless tries to control trade with the East, its ability to do so is limited because of the predominance of Soviet influence in Austria. Soviet firms not only produce large quantities of 1-B items in Austria, but Soviet-controlled shipping companies in Vienna are actively engaged in buying up required items throughout Western Europe and sending them East.

9. De Gaulle's Course expected to aid Communists in 17 June elections:

As the French electoral campaign opens, the comparative apathy of the electorate promises to hurt all parties except the Communists. The Right, however, is expected to show "substantial gains," presumably at the expense of the Center. If all non-Communist parties formed electoral alliances, they could obtain the majorities necessary to eliminate Communist representation, but De Gaulle has ruled out this possibility by refusing to allow his party's candidates to affiliate with other parties. Since this decision will actually reduce the number of seats De Gaulle can expect to win, he is evidently more anxious to undermine the strength of the Center than to decrease Communist representation. Both the Gaullists and the Communists, by ignoring the Center in their respective campaigns, hope to attract those middle-of-the-road elements which could be expected to vote for one extreme in protest against the other.

Comment: A gradual trend toward the Right in French politics has been observed since 1947, and De Gaulle's Rally of the French People can be expected to become a major party in the next Assembly at the expense principally of the centrist Popular Republicans. The Communist Party, whose strength has shown little or no decline in Assembly by-elections, is likely to benefit from the growing inflation. Electoral reform was intended to reduce Communist representation sharply, but its effect has been largely counterbalanced by De Gaulle's injunction against electoral alliances.
