Congo: Anti-Gizenga commentary on Radio Leopoldville indicates that Kasavubu so far is holding to his own proposals on reconvening the Congolese parliament. The Leopoldville radio on 17 May characterized the Congo crisis as "in its final stages," and after alluding to Gizenga's counterproposals observed that "no delaying tactics will prevent... the convocation of parliament" by Kasavubu.

Belgian officials in Elisabethville have again voiced concern that the security situation in Katanga will deteriorate as Belgian military personnel are replaced in coming weeks. The Belgian consul general has said that he had no confidence in the ability of the UN to protect the 12,000 Belgians in Katanga, and that Belgian nationals in Elisabethville have drawn up emergency evacuation plans. The American Consulate believes that at present these Belgian fears are exaggerated.

Hammarskjold has told Ambassador Stevenson that he plans to send Dayal back to Leopoldville on about 25 May for roughly one month. Hammarskjold stated that he was convinced that the reaction to Dayal's return would not be so sharp as to paralyze UN operations. He insisted that were Dayal not to return to Leopoldville there was a real danger that India would shift its position not only on the Congo but on broader UN issues.

(Backup, Page 3) (Map)

France-Algeria: Despite the hope of the Provisional Algerian Government (PAG) that the broad outline of an agreement with the French would be reached through preliminary contacts before talks begin at Evian on 20 May, recent reports indicate that little common ground has been established. The PAG negotiating team reportedly still feels that Algerian sovereignty--including the Sahara--must first be recognized before it can offer concessions for French participation in the economic sphere and guarantees for the European minority. The PAG is said to hope that the negotiations can be completed in three months--but is ready to break them off if no concrete progress is made within two weeks. The French team is expected to be firm but courteous, since it is well aware

19 May 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
