[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

9 December 1954

Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

NAVY review
completed
PACOM review(s)
completed.

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communist submarines now considered capable of offensive operations (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Albania reported seeking to improve relations with Greece (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communist submarines now considered capable of offensive operations:

The state of training of Chinese Communist submarine crews is now considered sufficiently advanced to permit offensive

[PAGE 04]
operations, according to the American Pacific Fleet. As yet, however, these submarines, which are based at Tsingtao, are not believed to have operated in waters outside the Yellow Sea.

Comment: There are three small coastal submarines and at least two and possibly three long-range "S-class" types at Tsingtao. The use of these submarines in coastal waters would present a real danger to Chinese Nationalist vessels, the crews of which are considered unskilled in anti-submarine warfare.

A number of recent reports have told of submarines sighted near Nationalist-held islands, but none of the reports have been confirmed. There is some possibility, however, that the Nationalist destroyer escort lost near the Tachens in November may have been torpedoed by a submarine.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Albania reported seeking to improve relations with Greece:

Comment: Albanian efforts to improve relations with Greece are a reflection of Moscow's present policy of promoting "peaceful coexistence" with the non-Orbit world. Tirana's recent resumption of normal diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia now highlights the total absence of any diplomatic intercourse with Albania's southern neighbor.

Greece is very unlikely to agree to the establishment of normal diplomatic relations with Albania in the near future. Athens has consistently held that the two countries are at war by virtue of Albania's declaration of war on Greece in 1940, and that a peace treaty must be concluded before normal relations are established.

[PAGE 07]
