[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
23 June 1960
Copy No. C 68
DOCUMENT NO. 46
DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 June 1960
DAILY BRIEF

Indonesia: The Communist party, continuing to exploit the West New Guinea dispute, is giving it the strongest possible anti-American twist. The party's latest tactic is to press hard for the seizure of US assets in Indonesia on the ground that the US permits the Dutch to use American weapons in West New Guinea.

i

[PAGE 04]
British East Africa: Tanganyika's moderate African leader, Julius Nyerere, by actively advocating accelerated independence for the East African territories "as one political unit," has made a major bid for the leadership of regional nationalism. Efforts to unify the diverse areas of East Africa face almost insurmountable difficulties, but Nyerere may believe the time opportune to bid for a wider following in view of the increasing political tempo in East Africa. Attempts to speed the pace toward independence will cause Britain added difficulties in Kenya and Uganda and will add to the problems of the settler-controlled Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland because of Nyerere's appeal to Nyasaland nationalists.

III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS
With respect to the question of Sino-Soviet bloc intentions to initiate hostilities, the Watch Committee conclusions remain negative.

23 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Indonesian Communist Party Continues to Exploit West New Guinea Issue

The Indonesian Communist party continues to exploit the West New Guinea dispute and is giving it the strongest possible anti-American twist. Party Secretary General Aidit has sent a cable to the Indonesian cabinet setting forth a series of anti-American and anti-Dutch demands.

The party demands the seizure of all American enterprises in Indonesia until the US prohibits Dutch use of American weapons in West Irian. It insists on the nationalization of Dutch assets, including those in mixed enterprises, in retaliation for the Netherlands' strengthening of its forces in the disputed area. The Communist daily, Harian Rakjat, headlined Aidit's demands on 21 June, and other Communist and left-wing papers gave them front-page coverage.

The Indonesian Government's response to the dispatch of Dutch naval units to West New Guinea has been chiefly at the diplomatic level--seeking support for its position from Afro-Asian countries and, on 6 June, circulating a letter to UN members condemning Dutch action. Official and non-Communist domestic Indonesian comment has sharply decreased since it has become apparent that Dutch units will not enter Indonesian territorial waters. Even President Sukarno, apparently realizing he would only be helping the Communists politically, has made no extreme anti-Dutch or anti-Western statements. Should the Communists continue to exploit the issue, however, Sukarno and the cabinet may consider re-

23 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Julius Nyerere, Tanganyika's moderate African leader who has cooperated closely with Britain, has apparently made a major bid for leadership of East African nationalist groups. In a recent speech in Addis Ababa, he demanded accelerated independence for all regional states--Kenya, Uganda, and Zanzibar as well as Nyasaland--and their emergence with Tanganyika as "one political unit" rather than as separate states with existing boundaries.

In Tanganyika there was initial confusion as to whether he advocated stepping up the pace of freedom for the other states or delaying local independence. Nyerere, however, later clarified his intention as meaning earlier independence for the group under Tanganyika's auspices. London has previously agreed to early independence for Tanganyika--desired by Nyerere for July 1962, but by most other nationalist party leaders for 1961.

Achievement of East African unity would appear to face almost insurmountable difficulties because of personal and tribal rivalries. However, Nyerere may have chosen an opportune time to present his bid for leadership. In Kenya, nationalist leaders are divided, and Tom Mboya faces a real challenge for power. In Uganda, African factions continue their infighting, which has complicated London's effort to ready the protectorate for early independence. In Zanzibar, Sheik Ali Muhsin, with the support of the Arab minority and growing African backing, is pressing London for early self-government for the island.

Nyerere's demands may lead to new difficulties for Britain as well as the settler-dominated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Nationalist agitation led by Dr. Hastings Banda has been a serious challenge to the Federation's security, and disorders may break out again this summer if talks in July between Banda and British officials prove inconclusive. Banda and Nyerere have conferred recently, and Nyerere's statement suggests that he may cooperate to some extent with Banda to try to dismember the Federation.

23 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
