[PAGE 01]
24 August 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Change in Thai Government again indicated (page 3).
2. Chinese Nationalist force penetrating Karen territory (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Tudeh seeks tribal assistance in campaign to expel US Military Mission (page 5).
5. Greek Government reportedly plans new moves to defeat Papagos (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. Saar political leaders urge referendum on territory's Europeanization (page 6).
7. Pleven delays French-American air-base agreement (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Change in Thai Government again indicated:
Ambassador Stanton has been told that conflict within the ruling clique is reaching a critical point and that the actions of the chief rivals for power, Generals Sarit and Phao, indicate they are preparing for an armed showdown.

Citing considerable evidence of increasing tension, Stanton states that a major change in the Thai Government may occur within the next five weeks.

2. Chinese Nationalist force penetrating Karen territory:
a Chinese Nationalist force of 700 men has moved south from northeastern Burma into the base area of Karen operations (see map).

The American Embassy comments that continued Nationalist involvement with the Karens might cause the Burmese Government to make the Nationalists their primary target instead of the insurgent Communists.

Comment: Open Nationalist cooperation with the Karens could influence the Burmese to appeal the issue to the United Nations or to request military assistance from the Chinese Communists.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
INDIA
CHINA
BURMA
LAOS
THAILAND
PAKISTAN
BHUTAN
BAY OF BENGAL
ANDAMAN SEA
GULF OF SIAM

THE UNION OF BURMA

Area of Karen-Burman conflict
Area of Karen concentration
Area of Chinese Nationalist Forces

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
Demarcated
Undemarcated
Undefined

SCALE 1:3,850,000
MILES
KILOMETERS

M-20823-1

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Tudeh seeks tribal assistance in campaign to expel US Military Mission:
Tudeh leaders have approached National Front Deputy and Qashqai tribal leader Khosro Khan for assistance in the current Tudeh campaign to oust the American Military Mission from Iran. Khosro Khan refused, stating that the Tudeh's alignment with Soviet policy prevented it from being truly nationalistic.

Comment: This approach is consistent with current Communist efforts to obtain National Front agreement to Tudeh collaboration. It was apparently made on the basis of the Qashqai's known hostility to the army and on their desire to regain sole control of the tribe's territory in oil-rich southwestern Iran. The Qashqai have reportedly been urging the National Front to purge the army and place officers sympathetic to the tribe in key positions.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
5. Greek Government reportedly plans new moves to defeat Papagos:
The Liberal-EPEK coalition in Greece is planning a broad electoral front which will include all possible anti-Papagos elements, perhaps even the Communists. This front will be resorted to if the majority system is used in the next elections.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Saar political leaders urge referendum on territory's Europeanization:
The leaders of the Saar Government are pessimistic regarding French-German efforts to find a solution to the Saar issue and fear that Germany may break off the current negotiations at the 29 August meeting. The leaders believe that a strong demonstration of the Saarlanders' wish for Europeanization might strengthen the hands of both Schuman and Adenauer, and therefore urge that a referendum be held before the present talks break down.

The American Consul in Strasbourg believes that the Saar Government desires immediate British and American support to press for a referendum.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Saar government leaders are discouraged by France's insistence on the maintenance of the French-Saar economic union and its refusal to cede any territory to a Europeanized Saar. They are also disturbed by Germany's growing tendency to postpone a settlement.

7. Pleven delays French-American air-base agreement:
French Foreign Minister Schuman has informed the American Embassy that Defense Minister Pleven has still not given a definite reply to his inquiry regarding signature of the air-base agreement, but has implied that there are no unsettled issues.

Comment: Although the technical aspects of the agreement covering American air bases in France have been settled since early August, Pleven has avoided setting a date for signature.

The Embassy states that for some time Pleven has been "difficult" on anything relating to the United States. This attitude presumably stems from his failure to win additional American financing for French armament production. He may be planning to use the air-base agreement as a bargaining weapon.

- 7 -
