Congo: New moves planned by Lumumba to bolster his internal position have an authoritarian character. These reportedly will include the suspension of judicial procedures in favor of trial by military tribunal and passage of a law requiring that licenses for newspapers and periodicals be renewed every two months. A major internal crisis for Lumumba appears to have been averted by postponement of the Abako party's convention scheduled for 13 August at which the Abako had been expected to declare the lower Congo region independent of the Lumumba government. Lumumba also may avoid an early showdown concerning the political status of Katanga in the expectation that a scheduled meeting of independent African states in Leopoldville from 25 to 30 August will take a strong stand in favor of a unified Congo.

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold on 15 August summoned a new meeting of the Security Council following Lumumba's charge that the Congo had "lost confidence" in Hammarskjold. In an effort to retain the propaganda initiative, Lumumba also called for the dispatch of a 14-nation UN commission to oversee the withdrawal of Belgian troops. (Page 4)

UAR-USSR: A Syrian delegation is scheduled to leave for the USSR within the next few days to sign contracts for several major development projects under the $150,000,000 line of credit extended by Moscow in 1957. Reportedly included is Soviet construction of a high dam on the Euphrates River. Soviet activities in Syria on this and other projects have so far been largely limited to preparatory surveys, although the satellite countries have carried out some smaller projects. Conclusion of this new series of construction contracts is in line with Moscow's current efforts to re-establish close political ties with the UAR. (Page 5)

Thailand: Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman is giving the impression that a trend toward neutralism in Thailand is inevitable. In a recent conversation with the Chinese ambassador in Bangkok, he argued that neutralist and even Communist sentiment is growing rapidly in Thailand because of the continued success of neutral governments, particularly Cambodia, in obtaining

16 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
