Sino-Soviet Relations

New reports continue to indicate that a residue of bitterness between Moscow and Peiping has been left over from the Bucharest congress in June.

Khrushchev attacked Mao personally at a closed session, comparing him to Stalin and alleging that the Chinese leader had no idea of the present international situation. The Chinese delegate, retorting angrily that Khrushchev was a "revisionist," declared, "We have no trust in your analysis of the world situation." Khrushchev is said to have termed the breach between the two countries extremely serious.

An 82-page document circulated by the Russians at the congress presented a detailed criticism of Chinese actions and declarations. It charged that the Chinese underestimated the dangers of local wars and that their hostile policy toward India had provoked anti-Communist reaction throughout Southeast Asia. The document scored Peiping for refusing to join in common defense proposals for the establishment of missile bases and radar detection units in China, for opposing Moscow's gradualist strategy in underdeveloped countries like India, Indonesia, and Egypt, and for bringing criticism of the Soviet party into the open.

Since the Bucharest congress, which was followed by a Soviet party plenum that condemned "left-wing sectarianism" and "narrow nationalism," Moscow has taken the ideological initiative against Peiping. A long Pravda article of 7 August accused "leftist phrasemongers" of departing "absolutely" from Marxism in their eagerness to advance world revolution by means of war. Izvestia has termed Peiping's interpretation of Lenin a "blasphemy" and called other points of the Chinese position "absolutely absurd."

The Chinese, comparatively taciturn since the congress, replied to the Soviet charges in a 13 August People's Daily editorial. It asserted that "modern revisionists" were spreading calumny and slander against China and were "apologists for imperialism." The failure of the Chinese to attend the Orientalist congress currently meeting in Moscow may reflect Peiping's rancor.

The Russian-language magazine of the Sino-Soviet Friendship Society has apparently suspended publication. According to the Yugoslav press, a mass exodus of Soviet specialists from China is under way, but this report is unconfirmed.

16 Aug 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
