didate. Nevertheless, Mossadeq's National Front, through its sympathizers now established in the provincial governments, is in a position to control the electoral machinery. The Shah, who reportedly fears that Mossadeq will allow dissident elements to enter the next Parliament, has extended support to some of Mossadeq's opponents among the tribes.

Comment: Iranian tradition and electoral law make it impossible to hold free elections in the American sense of the word. The coming elections are unlikely to depart from the traditional pattern. Pressure from the army, the landowners and the British will influence the outcome, but all indications now point to a National Front victory. The Shah's fear that the Communists and their sympathizers may gain a foothold in Parliament is not unfounded, for the Tudeh Party is reportedly actively attempting to engineer the elections of its members, disguised as National Frontists, and Mossadeq's lenient attitude toward the Tudeh suggests that it may succeed.

8. Comment on the Syrian military coup d'etat:

The 29 November military coup d'etat in Damascus, an essentially internal affair, re-emphasizes the dominant position of the Syrian Army Chief of Staff, Colonel Shishakli, who for the past two years has maintained behind-the-scenes control over governmental affairs. This sudden military action ends the day-old Populist-dominated cabinet of Maruf al-Dawalibi, and it has probably put an indefinite clamp on influential Populist Party leaders, who were attempting to eliminate military control of the country.

Shishakli is essentially an opportunist, intent on maintaining his own strong position in Syria. Since neutralism is strong in this country, he is not likely to direct Syria into a closer relationship with the West. Shishakli has been appreciative of French arms shipments, but annoyed over the lack of similar military supplies from America and Britain. While he has recently consulted with the Soviet Minister in Damascus, he is not believed to be sympathetic to the USSR. He is also opposed to a Syrian-Iraqi Union and has friendly relations with both Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
