[PAGE 01]
18 June 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Great Britain and France object to tone of draft note to USSR
(page 3).

FAR EAST

3. High Commissioner of Malaya may recommend more American aid
(page 4).

4. American Ambassador recommends firm policy on aid to
Indonesia (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iranian Communists reportedly weakened by dissension (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Great Britain and France object to tone of draft note to USSR:

Both Great Britain and France agree on
the desirability of a meeting with the USSR,
provided a prior understanding on the
agenda can be reached. They contend,
however, that the tone of the American
draft reply to the latest Soviet note would
lead the Western Europeans to blame the
West rather than the Russians for un-
willingness to talk.

American observers in Bonn believe that
Chancellor Adenauer might not object to the American draft because
of its insistence on Allied-Soviet agreement on certain conditions
prior to any talks.

Comment: The American draft calls for
a study of election conditions in both East and West Germany and
an impartial investigation not subject to veto. Great Britain and
France maintain that Western Europe must not be given grounds to
believe that conditions are being imposed which the USSR is expected
to reject.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. High Commissioner of Malaya may recommend more American aid:

The American Consul in Kuala Lumpur
believes that General Templer, High
Commissioner of the Federation of Malaya,
during his imminent visit to London may
advocate greater American participation
in the Malayan struggle. He may propose Mutual Security aid to
obtain military supplies or American subsidization of natural rubber.

The High Commissioner is gravely con-
cerned over the rubber price situation, and he may argue in London
that the success of the anti-Communist campaign in Malaya should
not be jeopardized by a drop in the price of rubber.

Comment: During the past two years,
funds for the war in Malaya have been supplied chiefly by the Feder-
ation of Malaya, which has maintained a budget surplus largely through
revenue from rubber exports.

[PAGE 05]
4. American Ambassador recommends firm policy on aid to Indonesia:

American Ambassador Cochran believes
that continuation of the US aid program to
Indonesia on the present equivocal basis
will undermine rather than strengthen Amer-
ican objectives and prestige in that country. He therefore recom-
mends that no further aid be extended until Indonesia states clearly
what obligations it will assume in return for the assistance.

Comment: The last Indonesian Cabinet
fell early in April because it secretly agreed to the requirements of
the Mutual Security Act. The present cabinet, while stating it de-
sires American economic aid, has refused to indicate the terms on
which it would accept help.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iranian Communists reportedly weakened by dissension:

there is increasing dissension in the
Tudeh Party. The trouble apparently
comes from dissatisfaction with the party's
demands on the time and money of its members, conflict between
Iranian nationalism and the party's allegiance to the Soviet Union, and
Tudeh's attempt to blame its youth organization for the unsuccess-
ful March riots.

Comment:
the army has seized many Tudeh docu-
ments in recent months. While the Tudeh is undoubtedly affected by
the financial deterioration in Iran, there is no evidence that the party
is having unusual difficulty keeping its members in line.

[PAGE 06]
