[PAGE 01]
4 August 1956

Copy No. 105

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SUEZ DEVELOPMENTS (page 3).

2. (page 4).

3. THE CHINA-BURMA BORDER SITUATION (page 5).

4. LAOTIAN GOVERNMENT- PATHET LAO NEGOTIATIONS (page 7).

5. COMMUNIST CRITICISM OF INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT (page 8).

6. TEST OF STRENGTH MAY BE SHAPING UP IN SYRIA (page 9).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 10)
[PAGE 04]
1. SUEZ DEVELOPMENTS

Comment on:

The Egyptian statement commenting
on the Western communique on the
Suez situation suggests that Nasr's
tactic now is to play for time until
there are clearer-cut indications of
the amount of support Egypt will receive from other Arab states, such
countries as India and Ceylon, and
the USSR. The principal point of interest in the statement is a cautious
assertion that "a compromise between
Egypt's interests and use of the canal
as an international waterway should
not be ruled out." This phrasing still
leaves open the question as to how the compromise should be
reached.

Nasr appeared to
be "wavering slightly" in the face of continued bellicose reports from London and Paris. there is
now some chance that Nasr might accept an international commission, including the USSR and Egypt, to oversee the freedom of transit of the canal.

Arab support will be rallied at a meeting of the Arab League scheduled for 7 August. Saudi Arabia,
which because its oil moves through Suez is one of the most
interested Arab parties, has not issued a public statement,
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. THE CHINA-BURMA BORDER SITUATION

There are, moreover, strong grounds
for suspicion that the clashes referred to by the press actually took place some time ago.

The Burmese government clearly is not
displeased with the extensive play the "invasion" story is receiving in the Western press. This is indicated by its carefully worded communiqué of 31 July which, while stating that
the Rangoon Nation's article was overdrawn, admitted the government's serious concern over Chinese Communist incursions.
In the past, Rangoon has dealt far more severely with the press
for far less provocative journalism.

Thus far, Peiping has maintained complete
silence on the issue. The publicity in the Burmese press has
[PAGE 07]
undoubtedly discomfited Peiping, which has made special efforts to win Burma's good will. Communist China, however,
will insist strongly on its own claims in any discussion with
the Burmese.
[PAGE 08]
4. LAOTIAN GOVERNMENT- PATHET LAO NEGOTIATIONS

In negotiations between the Laotian government and the Pathet Lao, which began
in Vientiane on 1 August, Prime Minister
Souvanna Phouma has proposed an agenda
calling for cessation of hostilities, restoration of royal control in Phong Saly and Sam
Neua Provinces, and integration of the
Pathets into the national community without discrimination. Prince Souphannouvong,
leader of the six-man Pathet delegation, has advanced a broader
agenda including the formation of a coalition government, guarantees of the rights of the Pathet troops, and the "question of
neutrality!"

In his opening statement, Souvanna reassured the Pathet delegation of Laos' "strict adherence" to the
five principles of peaceful coexistence, and emphasized that
the Laotian people must not be disappointed in their hopes for
a settlement at this time. Souvanna stated this settlement must
be based, in general, on the Geneva accords and the recommendations of the International Truce Commission.

The American ambassador in Vientiane notes
the absence of the pro-American Deputy Premier Katay from the
delegation. Souvanna has said he feared Katay's pro-Western
reputation would increase Pathet Lao suspicions of the validity
of Laotian independence.

Souvanna has indicated that negotiations will
be conducted by subordinate officials for "three or four days,"
after which he and Souphannouvong would hold a final meeting to
close out the negotiations.
[PAGE 09]
5. COMMUNIST CRITICISM OF INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT

The Indonesian Communist newspaper
Harian Rakjat printed an editorial on
2 August which probably constitutes the
strongest criticism that the Communists
have yet leveled against the coalition government of Premier Ali Sastroamidjojo. Although the strongly
anti-Communist Masjumi received its usual slaps, the editorial
was apparently also aimed at the new moderate leadership of
the National Party, which heads the coalition government.

Heretofore, the Communists have been
pressing for a united front and have sought to promote relations with the National Party at the expense of the Masjumi.
Because of the apparent shift toward moderation in Indonesian
national politics, as indicated by President Sukarno's recent
praise of the US and the emergence of the National Party's right
wing as its dominant faction, the Communist Party may be finding itself forced into an opposition role.
[PAGE 10]
6. TEST OF STRENGTH MAY BE SHAPING UP IN SYRIA

A test of strength between rightist
and leftist elements may be shaping up in
Syria. Two cabinet ministers, members
of the leftist Arab Socialist Resurrection
Party (ASRP), have reportedly threatened
to resign if President Quwatli does not
sign the death sentences passed on members of the rightist Syrian Social Nationalist Party involved in the assassination of an ASRP army leader in April 1955.

The rightists--conservative politicians supported by a group of senior army officers--moved to eliminate
leftist influence in the army on 7 July when they forced the resignation of Chief of Staff Shuqayr. Since then, they have moved
slowly and the leftists have had time to organize. Either the
rightist or leftist faction in the army may be seeking a political
issue on which to base the use of force to establish itself in
power.

The American army attaché reported on
1 August that there was more than the usual number of army
officers in Damascus. He suggested that they might be there
to assess the situation and to align their forces.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 3 August)

Israeli press reaction to the Suez Canal
nationalization now reflects a fear that big-power determination to achieve an orderly settlement within an international
framework will only enhance Nasr's prestige and shake the remaining Western positions in the area, with further impairment
to Israel's security. While Egypt has prevented Israeli ships
from using the Suez Canal since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli
war in 1948, it does permit passage through Suez of non-Israeli
vessels carrying "nonmilitary goods" of Israeli origin if they
are not destined for an Israeli port. Vessels trading with Israel
are blacklisted and are not permitted to refuel or reprovision in

Egypt has ordered the transfer of two three-inch coast defense guns from El Arish near the Israeli front to
Port Said in the canal zone.

This is the first firm indication of
withdrawal of equipment from the Israeli front to the canal zone.

News of the Suez Canal nationalization has taken
some of the tension off the Israeli-Syrian border,
[PAGE 12]
