4. Agreement between Tibetan delegation and Peiping is expected soon:
US Emb London
25 May 51
SECRET

The UK High Commissioner in New Delhi, quoting Indian Foreign Office sources, reports that an agreement between the Tibetan delegation and the Peiping regime is expected in the "next few days." These sources anticipate that Peiping will assume responsibility for Tibet's defense and foreign relations. They claim that India advised the Tibetan delegation that Tibet "would not be justified in resisting such terms," but also encouraged the delegates to seek an agreement that Chinese Communist troops would not be stationed in southern Tibet in the absence of a "threat from Nepal or India."

Comment. The head of the Tibetan delegation, which arrived in Peiping in late April, publicly stated that he intended "to negotiate a successful liberation" of Tibet. While India has hoped for a semi-autonomous Tibet under Chinese suzerainty, it is expected that the Communists will exercise effective control over Tibet just as they do over any other "liberated" area populated by an ethnic minority. Peiping's propaganda has already perceived a "threat" from territory bordering Tibet.

5. Indonesia prompted by UN embargo to request additional US exports:
The Indonesian Government has officially stated that it will honor the UN embargo of strategic materials to Communist China by adhering to the trade pattern that existed before the embargo was recommended. According to Foreign Minister Subardjo, this pattern included no rubber shipments to China. However, both Subardjo and Indonesian Ambassador to the US Ali stressed to the US Ambassador in Djakarta the unhappy results that the embargo would have on Indonesia and stated that a new approach would be made to the US for consumer goods. Ambassador Ali stated that he feared Communism would grow in Indonesia as a result of the drop in rubber prices and the consequent lowering of living standards. The US Ambassador replied that Indonesia had done almost nothing to suppress Communism since its achievement of sovereignty and the disorders had
