1. SOVIET DEFENSE PRODUCTION
ACTIVITIES REORGANIZED

Comment on:

Dmitry Ustinov, 49-year-old former
Soviet minister of defense industry,
was promoted on 14 December to USSR
deputy premier. He will share top
responsibility for the administrative
direction of the Soviet government with Premier Bulganin
and three other deputy premiers--Anastas Mikoyan, Iosif
Kuzmin, and Aleksei Kosygin. Ustinov, known for his
ability to arrive at independent decisions, will probably
be responsible for all defense production activities.

The new state committees, which on
14 December replaced the ministries of Aircraft Industry,
Defense Industry, Radiotechnical Industry, and Shipbuilding,
are to ensure central control and coordination--particularly
in developmental work--over enterprises and plants transferred
from the abolished ministries to appropriate regional
councils of national economy (sovnarkhozy) for operational
management.

The ministries affected were among the
eight industrial ministries not abolished in Khrushchev's re-
organization of industrial management last May. The remain-
ing four--Medium Machine Building (atomic energy), Power
Stations, Chemical Industry, and Transport Construction--are
apparently considered unsuitable at present for further inte-
gration into the sovnarkhoz system because of the broadly
interregional interdependence that characterizes their activ-
ities or because of security considerations.

Pyotr Dementyev, former minister of air-
craft industry, Aleksandr Dymrachev, Ustinov's former first
deputy in the Ministry of Defense Industry, and Valery Kalmykov,
former minister of radiotechnical industry, were appointed
chairmen of the respective state committees. Chairmanship of
the State Committee for Shipbuilding went to the former deputy
minister, Boris Butoma. No assignment for the former minister,
Andrei Redkin, was mentioned. Redkin was last noted 6 Decem-
ber in connection with the launching of the atom-powered ice-
breaker.

15 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
