Cambodian - South Vietnamese Relations

Immediate tensions between Cambodia and South Vietnam have been eased as a result of the discussions in Saigon last week between Premier Sihanouk and President Diem. The three-day informal talks between the two leaders and their top advisers were cordial and produced substantial agreement on a number of issues, such as trade relations and border controls, that have long been a source of friction. Sihanouk, flattered by the attention he and his party received, described the outcome as "clearing the way for an entente."

Lasting rapport between Cambodia and South Vietnam, however, seems improbable, given Sihanouk's fatalistic belief in inevitable Communist victory in the East-West struggle--a view which conflicts directly with Diem's aggressively anti-Communist position.

Sihanouk is reported to have expounded on his belief in Soviet superiority in the missile field, rejecting rebuttals from Vietnamese officials present. Specifically, Sihanouk said that the USSR is superior to the US in ICBMs; he also maintained that the continued existence of American IRBM bases in foreign lands is being questioned.

Sihanouk claimed that Cambodia's neutralist policy is the only "safe" policy for small nations, and referred to the current fighting in Laos as an example of problems which come to governments that adopt too strong an anti-Communist stand. At another time during his visit, he explained that his recognition of Communist China in 1958 merely acknowledged the fact that Chinese Communist agents were already operating in Cambodia; when a Vietnamese official remarked that this gave a legal cover for these activities, Sihanouk replied, "That is destiny...and one cannot oppose destiny." Implicit in Sihanouk's conversations was his belief that Communist China is predestined for ascendancy in the Far East--a belief he apparently has held for some time.

Diem feels that this defeatist attitude has facilitated Communist subversion in Cambodia, particularly by Peiping. He is not reassured by Sihanouk's claim that he can successfully oppose Communism with "his own weapons."

13 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
