The Situation in the Congo

The likelihood of a full-dress UN debate on the Congo has brought a reiteration by Tshombé and Lumumba of their respective positions. On 7 November, Lumumba endorsed the current UN role in the Congo and applauded the criticism of Brussels and the Mobutu government contained in the report of UN representative Dayal.

Also on 7 November, Tshombé passed a memorandum to the American Consulate in Elisabethville expressing hope that Congolese and Katangan leaders would agree on a "new" formula for political association--presumably a confederation--which would be "in conformity with the regional peculiarities" of the Congo area. Tshombé has periodically indicated he would accept some form of political association with the Congo, provided it involved a sufficient degree of provincial autonomy.

In contrast with the political lull in Leopoldville, the power struggle in Orientale Province between pro- and anti-Lumumba elements continues unabated. A recent shipment of automobile parts from Czechoslovakia to Stanleyville was reported to include arms for pro-Lumumba forces there. Elements sympathetic to Lumumba, led by his leftist vice premier, Antoine Gizenga, have maintained the initiative in Orientale Province and have imprisoned or placed under house arrest numerous supporters of Colonel Mobutu.

however, the Congo Army garrison at Watsa--in northeast Orientale Province--has threatened to march on Stanleyville if imprisoned army officers there are not released.

Elsewhere, there are indications that many Congolese are sensitive to the need for a restoration of political stability. In two areas of Kivu Province--one of them a Lumumba stronghold--minor officials and businessmen recently spoke to an American official concerning the need for a restoration of popular confidence and for the return of Belgian employers. Several expressed apprehension concerning the effect of a return to power by Lumumba.

9 Nov 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
