I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Latest Chinese Communist Note to India Contains No New Offers

Communist China's latest note to India expresses a "fervent desire" to settle the Sino-Indian border issue but makes no new offer which would facilitate negotiations. The note, sent on 26 December and broadcast in summary by the Chinese on 2 January, is intended to answer Indian communications of 26 September and 4 November. Essentially it is a recapitulation of Peiping's now familiar "indisputable facts," which attempt to portray Communist China's territorial claims as traditionally valid while denying those of India. Despite the note's relatively mild tone, sources in New Delhi have been quoted as saying it does "little to enthuse India."

Stating that a settlement must take into account "historic background and the present actual situation," the Chinese again indicated that they have no intention of abandoning the northeast corner of Ladakh but hinted that their claims to portions of northern Assam might eventually be more negotiable. The note urged Nehru to meet with Chou En-lai to "reach agreement on some principles" and called on New Delhi to accept "two key points"--the Chinese view that the entire border is undelimited and Chou's proposal for a mutual withdrawal of frontier troops.

New Delhi is not likely to find either of these points acceptable, and Nehru probably will again reject the proposed meeting with Chou as premature, although he may repeat his suggestion that discussions be held at a lower level. Public and parliamentary pressure for a stiff stand is likely to mount if reports of a new border incident are confirmed. According to a press report from Calcutta, official Indian sources believe that Communist Chinese ground fire is responsible for the crash of an Indian transport plane near the Indian-Tibetan border on 3 January.

Nehru may defer a formal reply until after Khrushchev's expected visit to New Delhi in February, in the hope of enlisting Soviet influence to soften Peiping's stand. Moscow's handling of the issue continues to be essentially factual, with emphasis on statements made by both parties expressing their willingness to negotiate a settlement.

4 Jan 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
