The Situation in Turkey

The Turkish public appears to be more apprehensive over the future course of events than at any time since the Committee of National Union (CNU) purged 14 of its 37 members last November. Civil leaders are moving cautiously to make sure that the CNU will have no occasion to back down on its promise to hold elections by 29 October. An American Embassy official stated recently that partisan sentiment seemed sure to become extremely disruptive either before or after elections. He also noted that one result of the political tension is a resurgence of xenophobia and an increase in private criticism of US-Turkish military cooperation.

The avowed main task of the regime is to restore civil government. Many Turks believe that this will be done but that the timing will be determined by the completion of trials and approval of the new constitution and electoral law. The electoral legislation passed the House of Representatives on 6 April and has been sent to the CNU. The House now is debating the draft constitution. When this review is completed, the draft will be submitted to the CNU for approval, and must then be approved by a popular referendum.

There can be little doubt that the military still determines the policy of the Turkish Government and that any cabinet minister who differs with the CNU must resign. The resignation of the minister of industry on 14 April suggests continuing discontent within the government over military rule. As one prominent Turkish politician observed, "For years to come, Turkish politicians will feel a bayonet at the backs of their necks."

Since the relaxation of restrictions on activities of political organizations, it has become increasingly apparent that the banned Democrat party (DP) of the former regime remains a significant factor in Turkish politics. The CNU is apparently alarmed by indications of DP strength and is trying to keep it under control without having to take openly repressive measures. New political parties have been warned not to identify themselves too closely with the outlawed party. Behind the scenes the DP,

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
