Israeli Military Parade in Jerusalem

The Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement signed on 3 April 1949 specifically excluded armored vehicles from a ten-kilometer (6.2 miles) strip on either side of the armistice demarcation line--which includes the divided city of Jerusalem. The Israelis have announced that their parade will include over 300 pieces of ordnance, headed by 14 recently delivered British Centurion tanks and including 18 Sherman tanks, 26 French AMX light tanks, heavy and light artillery including French SS-10 guided antitank missiles, and American 106-mm. jeep-mounted recoilless guns. Some of these units are already in Jerusalem. The column also will include motorized infantry and a marching contingent of 4,000 men and women from the Israeli armed services. There will be no air force overflights because of the closeness of the border.

In recent years Israel has held its anniversary parade alternately in Tel Aviv, Haifa, and Jerusalem on the Jewish calendar date which corresponds to 14 May 1948, when Israel attained its independence. This year the Israelis attempted to forestall the furor that arose in connection with the 1958 parade in Jerusalem by apprising the UN Truce Supervision Organization, and through it the Jordanians, of their plans, stressing that the heavy equipment to be shown is only for ceremonial purposes. The Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) subsequently condemned the Israelis for using tanks and heavy artillery in the 17 March rehearsal.

A Baghdad newspaper reported on 14 April that the Arab states might hold a joint military parade in the Arab sector of Jerusalem, with Jordan providing the major force and smaller contingents representing other Arab armies. The Jordanian foreign minister has since said that his government has definitely decided not to hold a "retaliatory" parade. However, he pointed out that failure to do anything would be interpreted both in Jordan and elsewhere in the Arab world either as weakness or as yielding to pressure from the United States.

On 15 April Jordan submitted a new complaint to the MAC regarding the Israeli heavy equipment which already is in

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
