fighting units" had liberated two thirds of the country's territory.

Soviet Premier Khrushchev, in a recent discussion of world affairs with the Indian ambassador in Moscow, implied that the USSR had entered the Laotian struggle to prevent Chinese involvement. Khrushchev reportedly said that Chinese Communist involvement in Laos might have caused the conflict to spread "from Southeast Asia to the straits of Formosa," and eventually raise the question of the USSR's obligations under the Sino-Soviet defense pact. Khrushchev's purpose in referring to Sino-Soviet differences on policy in Laos probably was to impress New Delhi with the USSR's reasonableness and restraint in the Laotian affair and to underscore the need for accepting Soviet terms for negotiations.

Soviet spokesmen apparently took much the same line with Indian officials in the US in mid-February. In a 14 February discussion with an American official regarding Laos, the deputy chief of Indian Mission, Chatterjee, remarked that he had gathered the impression from Soviet colleagues in Washington that if Laos developed into another Korea, the Chinese Communists would necessarily control the situation. Chatterjee said that the Soviet spokesmen took pains to leave the impression that the USSR, by remaining in control of the Laotian situation, had forestalled Chinese intervention.

Burmese Premier U Nu and Chou En-lai endorsed the principle of "coordination and cooperation" against the Chinese Nationalist irregulars. Peiping and Rangoon mounted joint military operations against the irregular forces in Burma earlier this year. The reference to the Nationalist forces was probably sought by the Chinese Communists as an implicit expression of Burmese support for Peiping's expressed concern about the activities of these irregulars in Laos. Chinese Communist broadcasts have labeled the evacuation of irregulars from Laos to Taiwan "phony" and warned that only the old and ineffective were removed. Peiping radio also recently charged that Chinese Nationalist elements conducted a raid into China from Laos.

A divided Laos is unacceptable, according to a Chinese Communist journalist who periodically briefs editors of the Communist

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
