Nicaraguan Government at Least Temporarily Strengthened

The position of Nicaraguan President Luis Somoza has been strengthened by the lack of military success by the two small rebel groups which landed from Costa Rica early last week and by the weakening of the business strike in the capital. However, minor incidents of civil resistance are still occurring in the capital, and Nicaraguan exiles in El Salvador, Venezuela, and other nearby countries continue plotting.

The rebels, estimated to number about 70, are still at large in two widely separated locations about 75 to 100 miles east of Managua. Composed chiefly of adherents of the opposition Conservative party, the rebels have apparently not aroused the widespread support they expected despite the fact that the areas in which they landed have long been regarded as Conservative strongholds.

Meanwhile, in the capital city, the businessmen's strike, which at its peak last week affected up to 70 percent of the city's business, has dwindled as the result of negotiations between business leaders and the government, and the threat of reprisals. Students, however, are threatening a strike for 9 June to protest the "intervention" of the Organization of American States in the crisis, and many physicians are reported still on strike.

Isolated minor terroristic acts continue--at least some of them probably efforts by the Conservatives to arouse a generally apathetic public.

Nicaraguan rebel leader Enrique Lacayo Farfan is believed to have left Costa Rica on 6 June for Venezuela where he and former Costa Rican President Figueres, who is also in Caracas, can be expected to make every effort to obtain aid for the rebels. Communist-controlled Nicaraguan exile groups there have asked for maximum Venezuelan support for the Nicaraguan revolution. A well-armed Nicaraguan exile group in El Salvador and another in Guatemala were planning on 4 June to move through Honduras into Nicaragua.

9 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
