FAR EAST

4. Communist armored units reportedly entering Korea:

Three recent reports have alleged that new major Communist armored units have arrived in Korea. A recent US Air Force report states that a "special mechanized brigade" trained in Tungwha, Manchuria and equipped with 60 tanks and 60 self-propelled guns entered Korea in late April.

Comment: While this information remains unconfirmed, it may refer to the possible movement of an additional North Korean armored unit, equipped with 50 to 100 tanks, into North Korea from a Manchurian training area. Despite frequent reports that Chinese Communist units are equipped with Soviet armor, the presence of such units in Korea has not been confirmed.

As of early April, the US Far East Command estimated that the North Korean Army had from 150 to 175 tanks, primarily in western Korea.

5. Chinese Communist official hints at "sanctions" against Hong Kong:

The UK Charge in Peiping reports that, in a conversation with Indian Ambassador Panikkar in Peiping, a Chinese Communist Vice Foreign Minister accused the UK of being "double-faced" in supporting the UN embargo; he ignored Panikkar's retort that Peiping's attitude "had not been helpful" in promoting friendly relations with the UK. When Panikkar expressed the hope that Peiping would not retaliate by promoting difficulties in Hong Kong, the Chinese official replied that Peiping might have to impose "sanctions," "although he wished to see Hong Kong "prosperous." He added that the Hong Kong Government was "obviously more worried" than he.

Comment: The Hong Kong Government is aware that the Communist threat to the Colony is increasing as trade restrictions decrease Hong Kong's value as an entrepot for Peiping and as the Communists improve their military position in Kwangtung. However, the Chinese Communists apparently still consider Hong Kong more valuable to them in British hands than it would be in their own. Despite recent rumors of an imminent attack on Hong Kong, Peiping's propaganda does not indicate an intention to assault the Colony at this time.
