Consultative Committee of Afro-Asian Economic Conference
Meets in Indonesia

An eleven-member consultative committee appointed by the Afro-Asian Economic Conference in Cairo last December is meeting in Indonesia from 25 to 30 April to study the terms of a constitution for a permanent Afro-Asian Organization for Economic Cooperation and to decide on a site for its headquarters. Japan, Communist China, Indonesia, India, Pakistan, Iraq, the UAR, Libya, Sudan, Ethiopia, and Ghana are represented on the committee.

The committee's major constitutional problem is to decide whether to admit the USSR as a full member of the new organization. An Indonesian, who was a key figure in the conference in Cairo, says he has received a draft constitution from Cairo which provides for Soviet membership and for an organization headquarters in Cairo. The draft also provides for a powerful secretary general and a significant reduction in the influence of member delegations--an arrangement which would give the UAR a strong hand if the headquarters were to be established in Cairo.

Several nations at the Cairo Conference in December opposed Soviet membership, and Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Japan will probably oppose it again. Ethiopia and Libya may also oppose. The UAR, Iraq, Sudan, Communist China, and possibly Ghana may favor Soviet participation. The vote at the consultative committee meeting will therefore presumably be close.

On the location of a permanent headquarters, the committee may also be widely divided. Indonesia apparently favors Bandung or Djakarta, though it would support Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, or New Delhi. Other nations opposing the UAR's previous attempts to dominate Afro-Asian meetings probably would also favor a shift from Cairo.

The 40-nation Afro-Asian Economic Conference held in Cairo last December was nongovernmental and supposedly nonpolitical in nature. The Egyptians, however, invited the USSR to be a member of the conference and asked delegations from several other Communist countries to be observers. Communist propaganda efforts
