I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping Protests "Persecution" of Pathet Lao Units

The Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry's statement of 18 May on Laos demands that Vientiane "stop at once" its "persecution" of former Pathet Lao units which it describes as tantamount to "launching a civil war." Peiping's statement is intended to discourage Laotian punitive action against holdout Pathet Lao units and to support North Vietnam's latest letter to the Indian chairman of the International Control Commission (ICC) in Indochina requesting a meeting of the Laos commission "at the earliest possible moment."

Hanoi's letter cited the earlier arrest of Prince Souphanouvong, leader of the Communist-front Neo Lao Hak Zat party (NLHZ), and the "encirclement" of the two former Pathet Lao units by the Royal Laotian Army as "serious violations" of the 1954 Geneva agreements. The letter pointedly ignored, as did Peiping's statement, the fact that these incidents came about because the units refused integration into the Royal Army as formally agreed upon.

North Vietnamese comments have concentrated solely on demanding the return of the ICC and have not threatened any counteraction. Counteraction of a military nature would provide Vientiane with the opportunity to cite Communist violations of the Geneva accords.

The status of the two dissident battalions remains in doubt. Prince Souphanouvong, chief of the former Pathet Lao, on 17 May reportedly ordered both battalions to integrate. On 19 May, the unit stationed at Luang Prabang in northern Laos was reported integrated with the exception of about 26 men who had disappeared. However, the bulk of the dissident battalion in Xieng Khouang Province in central Laos escaped during the early morning hours of 19 May. This unit had previously been reported planning retreat to the North Vietnamese border where it would presumably regroup under the protection of Communist North Vietnamese troops. Conflicting reports indicate that a number of men,

20 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
