This year the Communist Orbit is in a position to repeat last year's performance and has already indicated its willingness to do so. Furthermore, Indian Communists have recently shown unexpected strength in the national elections in the food-deficit states of southern India; unlike last year they are now in a position to debate food issues in both state assemblies and the national Parliament.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Iran may close foreign cultural offices in Tehran:

The Iranian Government is seriously considering the closing of foreign cultural and information offices in Tehran, as well as the provinces. Although the government has assured the US Embassy that the order closing provincial offices was aimed at the British and Russians, not at the United States, the Embassy believes that extension of this policy to Tehran would indicate an anti-foreign policy rather than one simply anti-British or anti-Soviet.

Comment: The Iranian Government's policy of obtaining public support through the promotion of anti-British sentiment has already led it to take increasingly severe measures against foreign activities. The need to continue such a policy as well as the growing xenophobia which it has helped create may well induce the government to take further steps against foreigners.

7. Israel expresses interest in closer military ties with the West:

The Israeli Foreign Minister has informed General Eisenhower that Israel is directly interested in the proposed Middle East Command because Arab hostility has isolated the Jewish state from neighboring countries. He pointed out that Israel's trained manpower reserves and expanding industrial potential would be very useful to the West. He suggested that his country should be given a separate and special position in the Middle East Command which would guarantee Israeli territory against any Arab threat.

The Israeli Prime Minister has also proposed to Britain that "concrete plans might well be initiated now" to establish closer Anglo-Israeli ties. The British Embassy in Washington has informed the Department of State that Britain may soon send an exploratory mission to Tel Aviv to discuss matters of strategic interest to both countries.

Comment: This is the clearest indication to date that the Israeli Government actually desires closer alignment with the West. Strengthened Western ties would assure Israel protection against any Arab threat as well as Western help in solving its desperate economic problems.
