The British are convinced that Nehru has concluded firmly that it is to India's advantage to remain in the Commonwealth. A senior official of the Commonwealth Relations Office feels that he would surrender this membership only under extreme provocation, which would not include the supply of a modest amount of American arms to Pakistan.

Comment: Britain has previously shown great deference to Nehru, as in its strong support for Indian views on the Korean peace negotiations. An indication of a firmer attitude is the recent suggestion by a British official to the Indian high commissioner in London that India view the projected agreement between the United States and Pakistan in the proper perspective.

Ceylon suggests regional prime ministers’ meeting:

Ceylonese prime minister Kotelawala told the American ambassador in Colombo on 25 December that his suggestion for a meeting of the prime ministers of India, Pakistan, Burma, Indonesia and Ceylon had been made in order to seize the initiative from India and to lead South and Southeast Asian nations into an anti-Communist bloc. He failed to invite the prime minister of Thailand because he is "too unstable."

Kotelawala denied press reports that he had called the meeting to discuss American military aid to Pakistan and stated that he would welcome any "sale" of arms to that country.

Earlier, a Ceylonese official had said the meeting would concern itself with problems common to the countries involved. He also said invitations might later be extended to Indochina and Japan.

Comment: Kotelawala's suggestion represents Ceylon's first major venture into the international political arena. Because of the antagonisms rife in the area, however, it is doubtful that a conference, acceptable to most of the nations, would achieve important results.

Both Prime Minister Nehru and the Indian press have incorrectly indicated that concern over the question of American military aid to Pakistan inspired Kotelawala to make his suggestion.
