[PAGE 01]
27 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]27 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communist China experiencing usual spring shortages; food riots reported.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan--Government delays move for lower-house ratification of new security treaty with US.
Nepalese talks with Chou En-lai.
Iraq--Finance Minister Hadid, head of National Democratic party, resigns from cabinet.
South Korea--Rhee submits resignation to National Assembly; caretaker government likely to oversee new elections[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]].
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

[[PRED_REDACTION_2]]Communist China: Food riots have occurred in South and Central China and large numbers of refugees have moved into Peiping from a "distressed" countryside. Although food shortages are a normal spring occurrence, the harvest last year was smaller than that of 1958, and the food situation this spring is decidedly tight. The regime, in view of the curbs on food consumption over the past year, probably has sufficient stocks to maintain diets at minimal levels until the early harvest in June. (Page 1[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]])

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: The Kishi government, in an effort to forestall a parliamentary crisis and possible public furor, has delayed any move to secure lower-house ratification of the new US-Japanese security treaty until 15 May at the earliest. The government's decision was brought about primarily by the actions of the Socialists, who backed up their demands for additional time for debate by resorting to force to block committee deliberations on the treaty. Leftist-sponsored, antitreaty demonstrations in front of the Diet on 26 April led to a violent outbreak by the radical students' association, which is also threatening violence during President Eisenhower's visit in June. ([[PRED_REDACTION_3]]Page 2)

Nepal--China[[/PRED_REDACTION_3]]: Nepalese officials have told the American ambassador that the treaty of peace and friendship which Katmandu expects to sign with Peiping during the current Chou En-lai visit will not contain a nonaggression clause barring Nepal from making defensive arrangements with third countries. Prospects for the talks as a whole have been dimmed by the inconclusive results of the [[PRED_REDACTION_4]]Nehrus Chou[[/PRED_REDACTION_4]] conversations, the publicizing of Peiping's claim to Mount Everest, and Katmandu's belief that the Chinese and the Russians have supported recent civil disturbances inside Nepal. ([[PRED_REDACTION_5]]Page 3[[/PRED_REDACTION_5]])
[PAGE 05]
Iraq: Finance Minister Muhammad Hadid, head of National Democratic party (NDP) and one of the most influential and conservative members of Qasim's cabinet, has submitted his resignation from both the cabinet and the party. Hadid has been at odds with other key NDP leaders who have been demanding the withdrawal of the party's support for the Qasim regime. His resignation may be intended to bring the issue to a head prior to the party's conference scheduled for the end of April. Qasim has not yet accepted the resignation. The loss of Hadid to the cabinet along with the party's support would limit Qasim's support almost entirely to the military.

South Korea: President Syngman Rhee's formal resignation, submitted to the National Assembly on 27 April in the wake of renewed rioting in the country, is expected to be accepted immediately and to transfer to that already seriously divided body responsibility for solving the deepening political crisis. A caretaker government headed by Ho Chong, [[PRED_REDACTION_6]]newly named[[/PRED_REDACTION_6]] by Rhee to be foreign minister, is likely to oversee new elections but not before a struggle in the Assembly over Rhee's proposed constitutional amendment which would establish a parliamentary system of government. The ruling Liberal party is reported seeking to empower the Assembly to elect the president, while the opposition Democrats are insisting on a popular election. Rhee may attempt to succeed himself as president.

27 Apr 60
[[PRED_REDACTION_7]]DAILY BRIEF[[/PRED_REDACTION_7]]
ii
[PAGE 06]
[[PRED_REDACTION_8]]I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Food Supplies Tight in Communist China

There have been food riots in Central China. A quarter of a million refugees have streamed into Peiping from a "distressed" countryside. Food riots in the southern province of Kwangtung. At the same time there has been reporting food shortages in various parts of the country, deep cuts in rations, the closing of communal messhalls--in 1958 the sign of supply difficulties--and, in a few instances, disease and death from malnutrition.

Food shortages are normal in China in the spring, and the Chinese Communists, for all their fulsome claims of bumper harvests, have clearly not eliminated this annual problem. While the food situation this spring is decidedly tight in most places and probably grim in some, there is little to substantiate a belief that it is markedly worse this year than in the immediate past. The 1959 grain harvest was some 10 percent below the good 1958 harvest, but the regime has managed to keep a very tight lid on food consumption and probably holds sufficient stocks to sustain diets at least at minimal levels until the early harvest in June[[/PRED_REDACTION_8]].
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Tokyo Delays Plans to Ratify US-Japanese Security Treaty

The government of Japanese Prime Minister Kishi, attempting to forestall a parliamentary crisis similar to the one which nearly caused its downfall in late 1958, has deferred until 15 May at the earliest its plan to seek lower-house ratification of the new US-Japanese security treaty. The government's decision derived primarily from rising public and press criticism that it was acting dictatorially in ramming the treaty through the Diet.

The Socialists, reinforced by this criticism of the government, have used force in the Diet to block committee hearings on the treaty since 22 April. Although the government's decision avoids a showdown with the Socialists for the time being, Kishi still intends to secure ratification prior to President Eisenhower's visit in June. To do so will necessitate an extension of the current Diet session, a move the Socialists oppose as strongly as the treaty vote itself. There is a strong possibility of violence within the Diet on both issues.

Meanwhile, the extreme left-wing Zengakuren students' federation on 26 April turned an orderly leftist demonstration against the treaty into a riot in front of the Diet building and is threatening further acts of violence during the Eisenhower visit. Other leftist organizations, presently united in the antitreaty campaign, are planning to mobilize more than 100,000 persons for peaceful demonstrations during the visit.
[PAGE 08]
Prospects of Current Chou En-lai Visit to Nepal

The treaty of peace and friendship which Nepal expects to sign with China during Premier Chou En-lai's visit between 26 and 29 April will not contain a clause barring Nepal from making defensive arrangements with third countries, according to Nepalese officials. The formal signing of this treaty and of a border agreement, already agreed upon during Nepalese Prime Minister Koirala's recent trip to Peiping, is the principal item of business during the Chou visit. As part of the Katmandu government's desire to limit the Chinese premier's contact with the Nepalese public, arrangements have been made for the two premiers to meet for private conversations outside the capital.

The over-all prospects for the success of the Chou visit have been dimmed by the failure of the Nehru-Chou conversations in New Delhi, the Chinese claim to Mount Everest, and the Katmandu government's belief that both Chinese and Russian personnel in Nepal lent support to recent antigovernment disturbances. Sixteen members of the Nepalese Communist party have already been jailed for their part in the disturbances, and the government remains alert to further signs of Sino-Soviet complicity with the Nepalese Communists.

Chou is well aware of Nepalese views and may try to dispel a major source of Sino-Nepalese friction arising from the recent talks with Koirala in Peiping by suggesting that the border commission, to be established should discuss the feasibility of drawing the boundary through the summit of Everest. If he is rebuffed on the clause prohibiting third-country defense arrangements, he will probably insist on a statement of "principle" against participating in military alignments.
[PAGE 09]
Rhee Resignation Extends South Korean Political Crisis

President Syngman Rhee's formal resignation, submitted to the National Assembly on 27 April in the wake of new riots in the southern city of Pusan, is expected to be accepted immediately. Rhee's surrender of power transfers to the already seriously divided Assembly responsibility for solving the deepening political crisis. A caretaker government headed by Ho Chong, the new foreign minister named by Rhee on 26 April, is likely to oversee new elections following a move by the Assembly to implement Rhee's proposal for a constitutional amendment re-establishing the parliamentary system of government which was abolished in 1954.

A serious struggle looms in the Assembly on this issue. The ruling Liberal party is reported seeking to empower the Assembly to elect the president, while the opposition Democrats are insisting on a popular election. The outcome of this struggle may determine whether Rhee attempts to succeed himself. Additional difficulties may arise over the question of new elections for the Assembly as well.

The student-led demonstrations have not produced a candidate for national leadership, but Ho Chong, as acting head of state, may be emerging as a new power. He is a former Rhee lieutenant who was acting prime minister in 1951-52. More recently, as a political independent, he has enjoyed considerable prestige in Seoul where he served as mayor in 1958 and 1959. He is not in favor with the present leadership of the majority Liberal party but has been associated with Yi Ki-pung, the controversial vice president-elect whom Rhee relieved of all posts on 26 April.

Meanwhile, the possibility of reprisals against the police for their record of brutality has resulted in the disappearance of uniformed police from the streets in Seoul. General Song Yo-chan, chief of staff and martial law commander, reportedly believes that the police will be unable to maintain order, even in a less tense atmosphere, unless the major police officials in Seoul are removed and reforms instituted.

By contrast, relations between the demonstrators and the army troops enforcing martial law have been good. General
[PAGE 10]
Song has pursued a policy of restraint against the demonstrators, while at the same time attempting to influence the government toward concessions. Further unrest, possibly generated by the anticipated political struggle in the Assembly, could induce the military establishment to undertake a more active political role.
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
