Japanese Prime Minister’s Position

Ikeda’s management of the regular Diet session which ended on 8 June revealed his inability to command unity within his Liberal-Democratic party (LDP). This was evident in his handling of the Political Violence Prevention Bill, which provoked leftist groups to stage daily opposition demonstrations from 30 May until the end of the session.

Ikeda was reported reluctant to force the controversial bill through the Diet for fear that a row with the Socialists would mar his prestige just before his US visit. However, he yielded to pressure from conservative faction leaders, most notably Eisaku Sato, whom party leaders consider Ikeda’s most likely successor, and former Prime Minister Kishi. After forcing the law through the lower house in the face of Socialist obstructionist tactics in the Diet and demonstrations outside, he was blocked in the upper house by refusal of the president--a member of his own party--to force the bill out of the judiciary committee. The bill has been shelved for possible consideration at a special session later this summer.

Ikeda encountered similar intraparty opposition when he tried to revise five labor laws prior to ratifying International Labor Organization Convention 87, which guarantees freedom of employees to join unions. The same conservative LDP factions blocked the government when it proposed revisions which would draw minimum Socialist opposition, avoid disorders in the Diet, and ensure ratification. Kishi and Sato wanted to include measures for more stringent control of union political activity. Ikeda’s compromise efforts failed, and the bills will be carried over to the special session.

Ikeda has justified his administration by conciliation and negotiation on grounds of “normalizing” parliamentary politics and restoring international confidence after the upheavals surrounding ratification of the US-Japanese security treaty last spring. However, his vacillation at the end of the session caused

10 June 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
