Burma: Although there has been an over-all decline in insurgent activity during the past decade, the Shah and Karen separatist movements in the eastern part of the country have gained momentum since U Nu resumed the premiership last year. These movements, which have no strong ties with each other, are suspected by Rangoon of having obtained arms and recruits from the evacuating Chinese Nationalist irregulars. The government reportedly is now planning to expand its campaign against them, despite the onset of the rainy season.

Cyprus: Relations between the Greek and Turkish communities remain strained, with activists on both sides reportedly seeking arms and preparing for a possible breakdown of the Cypriot Agreements which established the present government. These political problems, and chronic economic difficulties facing President Makarios' government, have recently been compounded by a deteriorating situation in the organized labor movement. A Communist was recently chosen as the workers' representative in the Cypriot delegation to the June conference of the International Labor Organization. Simultaneously, the island's largest labor federation not already dominated by the Communists elected as its head an ineffective personality who appears to be falling under Communist influence.

(Backup, Page 7)

South Africa: The Verwoerd government has increased its security precautions as a result of a continuing threat of non-white strikes and demonstrations. An inter-racial committee heavily infiltrated by Communists, has called on non-European workers to stay at home on 29 and 30 May, in protest against the Union's assumption of republic status on 31 May. The government, which earlier had ordered several non-white and liberal European leaders to refrain from attending political gatherings, on 19 May imposed a sweeping ban on all meetings until 26 June. Four militia units and a number of Citizen Force units have been called up, and arrests of Black Africans in the last few days probably total more than a thousand.

23 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
