I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Reviews Soviet Position on Summit Topics

In his 25 April speech in Baku, Premier Khrushchev outlined in standard terms the Soviet position on the major East-West issues which he intends to take up at the summit. Prefacing his statements with a prediction that the present "favorable" trend in international affairs will continue after the meeting in Paris, Khrushchev singled out disarmament as the first item for discussion, to be followed by the German and Berlin questions.

The Soviet leader sought to build up pressure for Western concessions on Berlin by repeating his threat to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany. Although he did not spell out the timing, by discussing the problem in the general context of the May meeting he again gave the impression that lack of progress at the summit could be followed by such a treaty. In a further effort to urge the West to seek an interim solution on Berlin, he repeated, as he recently did in Paris, his claim that a separate treaty would end all Western occupation rights, including access to Berlin. In a private conversation with Ambassadors Thompson and Bohlen, Foreign Minister Gromyko also restated the standard Soviet position on a peace treaty and a free city, while hinting that an interim agreement could be negotiated.

Khrushchev adhered closely to the Soviet position taken at the disarmament talks in charging that the West continues to substitute control for disarmament. Gromyko stated that at the summit Khrushchev would be seeking a "concrete" decision on disarmament, which could be translated into future action. This approach provides further evidence that Moscow will press for a joint statement endorsing the main principles of a treaty for "complete and general disarmament" which the Soviet delegation at Geneva could represent as a directive to proceed with the Soviet plan.

On the question of nuclear tests, Khrushchev said he intended to conduct serious negotiations at the summit, adding an optimistic
