New Soviet Economic Aid to Indonesia

In an attempt to revitalize the Soviet Union's lagging economic aid program in Indonesia, Khrushchev climaxed his ten-day visit by concluding a $250,000,000 economic and technical cooperation agreement with Djakarta. Khrushchev presumably hopes that the new agreement will help to arrest what he feels to be Indonesia's drift toward the United States and will soften any antibloc sentiments in Indonesia occasioned by Djakarta's dispute with Peiping.

The new Soviet line of credit apparently is separate from the $126,300,000 in credits Moscow has previously extended, including $118,000,000 in economic assistance since 1958 and an earlier credit for 4,000 jeeps. The new line of credit is to be used for extensive industrial projects and agricultural development, presumably under Djakarta's five-year plan tentatively scheduled to begin in 1961. It also envisages Soviet technical and material assistance for constructing ferrous and nonferrous metallurgical enterprises, chemical plants, and textile mills. In addition, the USSR probably will build a nuclear reactor for research purposes.

The Soviet Union will provide technicians and skilled workers to carry out the projects called for under the agreement and will train Indonesian personnel both in the USSR and in Indonesia.

Indonesian Army leaders reportedly opposed the acceptance of extensive credit from the Soviet Union and tried to persuade Sukarno not to request it. Now that he has done so, however, it seems unlikely that there will be any significant army reaction.

Sukarno is anxious to receive and to publicize new foreign-aid offers in order to give the appearance that he is taking swift and decisive action with regard to the country's economic problems.

Indonesia hoped to realize 20 percent of its $2 billion five-year development program through Soviet aid, another 10 percent from other bloc countries, and the remainder from the West, Japanese reparations, and domestic resources.

29 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
