[PAGE 01]
12 April 1958

Copy No. 140

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

STATE, NAVY review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

12 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - Guided missile submarine: A submarine possibly equipped to launch guided missiles has been sighted in the Kola Gulf area.
(Page 1)

USSR - Satellites: Certain Eastern European satellites have apparently been called on to increase pressure on the peasants to join collective farms. The latest issue of the Soviet party journal Kommunist points out that while collectivization should be a gradual process, liquidation of

i

[PAGE 04]
peasant opposition is necessary and inevitable. If Moscow presses the satellites to take this course, it would be a reversal of previous Soviet policy that each satellite should decide its own speed of socialization and would seem to indicate Moscow's dissatisfaction with the rate of satellite collectivization.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

12 Apr 58      DAILY BRIEF      ii

[PAGE 05]
Ceylon: Widespread political unrest, and possibly violence, may develop in Ceylon as a result of Prime Minister Bandaranaike's abrogation on 9 April of an agreement with leaders of the Tamils, the island's minority population of Indian origin. This agreement had provided for "reasonable" use of Tamil as a national language. The prime minister's move was apparently forced by spokesmen of Ceylon's Singhalese-speaking majority population, who were protesting Tamil agitation. Singhalese is officially Ceylon's national language.
(Page 7)

Morocco - Spain: Difficulties have apparently developed in carrying out the agreement to transfer to Morocco on 10 April control of the Southern Morocco area which Spain has governed as a protectorate since 1912. Moroccan Foreign Minister Balafrej publicly warned Spain on 11 April that Morocco would retaliate if Spanish authorities "did not remove obstacles hindering Moroccan forces" from assuming control of the Tarfala area. Apparently Spanish authorities have refused permission for the Moroccan Army to use a portion of the main road which traverses the Saguia el Hamra Province of Spanish Sahara between Morocco and the coastal population centers.
(Page 8) (Map)

12 Apr 58      DAILY BRIEF      iii

[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Austria: The Austrian Government is considering joining the six-nation European Common Market because of the need for closer economic ties with Western Europe and Vienna's discouragement over prospects for the projected free trade area. Such a move would require "stretching" the Austrian neutrality law and might antagonize the USSR. The Austrians have already indicated concern over the reaction of the USSR, which has repeatedly attacked the Common Market as an instrument of Western imperialism.
(Page 9)

12 Apr 58      DAILY BRIEF      iv

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Possible Soviet Missile-Launching Submarine Sighted

A very reliable observer sighted a large submarine, apparently fitted to launch guided missiles, in the Kola Gulf area of the Murman Peninsula of the USSR on 14 March. This submarine, possibly a Z-class unit, had a large tank on the deck aft of the conning tower, which had been heightened, possibly to house electronics equipment. No launching ramp was reported, although it is possible that the ramp was stowed either in the hangar with the missile or retracted into the main deck.

This is considered the most reliable sighted report yet received on a possible missile-launching submarine. The USSR has 18 Z-class units, 11 of which are in the Northern Fleet and 4 in the Pacific. The Z-class is the largest postwar submarine known to have been built in the USSR and is suited for conversion to a missile-launching role. A photograph taken in August in the naval dockyard at Murmansk showed a Z-class unit with a modification to the top of its conning tower, but no tank was mounted on deck.

12 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Soviet Journal Calls for Stepped-up Satellite Collectivization

The USSR may be reversing its policy of permitting each satellite to determine the speed at which it carries out its internal socialization program. The latest issue of the Soviet party journal Kommunist, in an article discussing the inevitability of total agricultural collectivization in the satellites, calls for acceleration of this process in at least some of them.

Publication of the article in Kommunist gives it considerable authority and may signify increased Soviet readiness to intervene directly in satellite affairs. Fear that Khrushchev's MTS reorganization plan might induce relaxation of the collectivization effort in the satellites may have brought out the hard Soviet line at this time.

Although the article admits that collectivization must be carried through gradually, it points out that such a policy requires the "inevitable" liquidation of peasant opposition. Citing both Soviet and Chinese experience as useful models," the author singles out Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia "in particular," and Rumania and Albania secondarily, as countries where conditions are now favorable for eradicating the remaining peasant opposition. Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia are already highly collectivized and have been pushing the forcible liquidation of such opposition as remains. This article serves to reaffirm them in this policy.

Omission of any reference to East Germany, Poland, and Hungary is probably in recognition of the peculiar conditions in those countries which militate against increasing collectivization at this time. It is probably intended, however, as a strong hint to these regimes not to overlook the fact that they must eventually collectivize.

12 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 4

[PAGE 10]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
Renewed Communal Violence in Ceylon Possible

Prime Minister Bandaranaike of Ceylon is again under severe pressure from rival Singhalese- and Tamil-speaking elements over the status of the Tamil language.

Singhalese has been the official national language since July 1956. In mid-1957, Ceylon's 2,000,000 minority population of Indian origin threatened widespread revolt if their native language, Tamil, were not also granted official status. Agreement in July between Bandaranaike and Tamil leaders for the limited use of Tamil brought temporary peace. Bandaranaike, however, failed to implement the agreement and the Tamils renewed their agitation on 1 April 1958.

During a tense session of Parliament on 8 April, a majority of Bandaranaike's coalition firmly opposed the agreements, and some 25 coalition members reportedly threatened to bring down the government. The next day Bandaranaike, under Singhalese pressure, announced that his pact with the Tamils could not be implemented.

The Tamils on 11 April opened a civil disobedience campaign. Leaders of the Tamil Federal party said that the formation of a united front of all Tamil-speaking people, which would include most of Ceylon's plantation workers, would be suggested at the party's annual convention scheduled for 2 May.

This communal issue is one on which tempers can run high, and the possibility of serious trouble exists. Bandaranaike, however, has successfully maintained peace on previous occasions and may be able to reach some compromise again.

12 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 7

[PAGE 12]
ATLANTIC OCEAN
CANARY ISLANDS
Ifni
Tindouf
ALGERIA
MOROCCO
SPAIN
PORTUGAL
GIBRALTAR (UK)
Ceuta (Sp.)
Melilla (Sp.)
Rabat
Agadir
S. MOROCCO
SPANISH SAHARA
Villa Bensafia
El Aiún
SAGUIA EL HAMRA
RIO DE ORO
Ft. Trinquet
Ft. Gouraud
MAURITANIA
WEST AFRICA
Guera

12 APRIL 1958

[PAGE 13]
Moroccan-Spanish Difficulties Develop in Southern Morocco

Difficulties appear to have developed in implementing the scheduled 10 April transfer to Morocco of control over the protectorate of Southern Morocco, a 25,000-square-mile strip of territory which Spain has governed as part of Spanish Sahara. After some months of bargaining and under threat of a forcible take-over by the Moroccan Army, Spain finally agreed to this transfer during a secret meeting on 1 April between Foreign Minister Castiella and Moroccan Foreign Minister Balafrej. Except for the temporary retention of some Spanish troops in the area, Morocco apparently agreed to none of the concessions demanded by Spain, particularly a guarantee of the area's southern boundary.

Balafrej publicly warned Spain on 11 April that Morocco would retaliate if Spanish authorities "did not remove obstacles hindering Moroccan forces" from assuming control over the coastal area of Tarfala. Evidently Spanish authorities have refused the Moroccan Army permission to use a portion of the main route between Morocco and the Atlantic coast where the capital city and other principal population centers are located. Because of the terrain, this road cuts into the Saguia el Hamra Province of Spanish Sahara, which Morocco also covets.

12 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 8

[PAGE 14]
III. THE WEST

Austria May Seek Direct Accession to European Common Market

Discouraged by the prospects for the European free trade area, Vienna is actively considering the possibility of Austrian accession in some form to the European Common Market (EEC). The government has for some time recognized that the Austrian economy would be in serious straits if European economic integration should hinder Austrian access to markets in the EEC countries. In the cabinet's discussion of the Common Market on 9 April it was suggested that in view of Austria's neutrality law and long-standing Soviet objections to the EEC, Austria on joining might make "appropriate" reservations.

Vienna is perhaps being misled by the relatively mild response of Soviet Ambassador Lapin to an initial approach made by Chancellor Raab last month. Lapin is said to have been "negative, but not too much so." He warned Raab, however, that "those people (presumably the Common Market members) would have him by the throat." Moscow has in general viewed the six-nation community as an instrument of imperialism dominated by Bonn.

Raab may hesitate to make any further approach to the USSR until after his visit to Moscow in July, when he hopes to negotiate a reduction in Austria's reparations deliveries. A formal approach to the EEC for bilateral negotiations will also depend on whether the prospects for a free trade area improve during the negotiations scheduled for later this month and early May.

12 Apr 58      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 9

[PAGE 15]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

12 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - Guided missile submarine: A submarine possibly equipped to launch guided missiles has been sighted in the Kola Gulf area.
(Page 1)

USSR - Satellites: Certain Eastern European satellites have apparently been called on to increase pressure on the peasants to join collective farms. The latest issue of the Soviet party journal Kommunist points out that while collectivization should be a gradual process, liquidation of peasant opposition is necessary and inevitable. If Moscow presses the satellites to take this course, it would be a reversal of previous Soviet policy that each satellite should decide its own speed of socialization and would seem to indicate Moscow's dissatisfaction with the rate of satellite collectivization.
