[PAGE 01]
5 April 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department
review
completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. BRITISH URGE IMMEDIATE SECURITY COUNCIL MEET-
ING ON SUEZ

3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES HE WILL FORM INDONESIAN CAB-
INET

6. THE NEW IRANIAN CABINET

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
2. BRITISH URGE IMMEDIATE SECURITY COUNCIL
MEETING ON SUEZ

British UN delegate Dixon has informed
Ambassador Wadsworth that Britain
wants the United States immediately to
call a Security Council meeting for next
week regarding Egypt's Suez Canal memorandum. Ambas-
sador Wadsworth states that he did not feel that Dixon was
being frank regarding Britain's reasons for going to the coun-
cil, since he said only that London wants to "cancel out"
Egypt's legal position based on the memorandum and to get
on record its own legal and political attitude.

Dixon said the Foreign Office proposes
that a resolution be introduced calling for further negotia-
tions on the basis of the six points agreed upon with Egypt
and endorsed in a Security Council resolution on 13 October
last year. The resolution might be supported by arguing
that the unilateral Egyptian memorandum does not satisfy
the October resolution calling for a settlement, and other-
wise falls short of the six principles. Dixon did not indicate
what Britain would do if the Soviet Union vetoed the proposed
resolution.

Comment

Britain's pressure for Security Council
action in part reflects its desire to restore
the entire Middle East question to the council before the next
session of the General Assembly. More generally, however,
Britain's tactic appears to be to exhaust the recourses open to
the UN for settling with Egypt, possibly to clear the way for
future independent British moves.

On 3 April the French cabinet reportedly
decided to propose the Suez problem for UN Security Council
consideration but not until the results of American negotiations
on the problem were known.
[PAGE 07]
3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES HE WILL FORM
INDONESIAN CABINET

Indonesian president Sukarno has an-
nounced that he will personally under-
take to establish an "extraparliamentary
emergency business cabinet" to which
former vice president Hatta will be ap-
pointed. Sukarno has given no indication whom he wants as
premier.

It is probable that Sukarno will offer most
of the cabinet posts to members of the National Party and the
vacillating Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), but that some fellow travel-
ers--or outright Communists--will also be included. In the
interest of national "unity," he may offer minor portfolios to
the Moslem Masjumi. It is highly unlikely that Sukarno would
offer Hatta a position of real authority.

Sukarno undoubtedly calculates that he
can succeed in forming a cabinet by either bribing or intimi-
dating the opponents of his "concept." The NU, for instance,
is strongly attracted by offers of high positions and other
emoluments, and was on the verge of accepting those prom-
ised by the last formateur, Suwirjo.

Sukarno's action is something of a politi-
cal gamble. Never before has his prestige been committed
to this extent, and if he fails to form a government, the re-
sult may be chaos or the emergence of a military junta.
[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
6. THE NEW IRANIAN CABINET

The Shah appears to have given Iranian
prime minister Manuchehr Eqbal a
free hand in choosing his cabinet. Eqbal
has retained about one third of the old
cabinet and filled the remaining posts
with technically competent ministers who
have not been active in partisan politics
in recent years, although nearly all of
them have held a wide variety of cabinet, subcabinet or ad-
ministrative positions.

The new cabinet represents a victory
for Eqbal over his political opponents, notably the former
minister of interior and the former minister of justice. The
notoriously corrupt minister of finance has also been removed.
A key question still unresolved is the future relationship be-
tween Eqbal and Abol Hassan Ebtehaj, the controversial head
of the Seven-Year Plan organization, which will play a vital
role in any development plans for the country.

The new government is not expected to
make any significant changes in foreign policy. Iran's ties
with the West and with the Baghdad pact will remain unim-
paired.
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
ANNEX

Watch Report 348, 4 April
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the
Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities
against the continental US or its possessions in the imme-
diate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities
against US forces abroad, US allies or areas peripheral
to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. A deliberate initiation of hostilities against Israel by the
Arab states is improbable in the immediate future. Israel
may at any time renew hostilities if faced with one or more
provocations, such as an introduction of substantial Egyp-
tian military forces into the Gaza strip, a renewal of ex-
tensive fedayeen raids, or an attempted denial of passage
for Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran. Other
unsettled issues and tensions in the Middle East, espe-
cially in Syria and Jordan, also constitute possibilities
for violence.
