[PAGE 01]
5 April 1957

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]1. POSSIBLE SOVIET PREPARATIONS FOR FLIGHT TESTING OF INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC MISSILE OR EARTH SATELLITE[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (Page 3).

2. BRITISH URGE IMMEDIATE SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING ON SUEZ (page 5).

3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES HE WILL FORM INDONESIAN CABINET (page 6).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]4. LATEST SOVIET NUCLEAR TEST (page 7).

5. ADEN-YEMEN DEVELOPMENTS[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 8).

6. THE NEW IRANIAN CABINET (page 9).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]7. JORDAN REPORTEDLY ASKS USSR FOR ARMS (Secret Pivot[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]) (page 10).

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
[PAGE 04]
1. POSSIBLE SOVIET PREPARATIONS FOR FLIGHT TESTING
OF INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC MISSILE OR EARTH
SATELLITE

Reference:

Communications developments involving the Novokazalinsk/Dzhusaly and Klyuchi areas may reflect preparations for testing either a Soviet long-range missile or an earth satellite, although the timing of such a test is not evident. The orbiting of an earth satellite in 1957 is estimated by the IAC to be within Soviet capabilities. It is also estimated that the USSR could probably have a prototype ICBM ready for operational use in the 1960-61 time period. The first firing of an ICBM test vehicle would probably occur two to three years prior to the initial operational capability date.

SELECTED COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Radioprinter and /or Morse facilities with possible parallel landline facilities
Radioprinter and/or Morse facilities
Station on communication net
Missile-associated addressee noted in communications

4 APRIL 1957
[PAGE 05]
High-priority construction projects began in the Novokazalinsk/Dzhusaly and Klyuchi areas in mid-1955

Direct flights from Moscow to Dzhusaly by an aircraft associated with the Kapustin Yar rangehead suggest that a similar rangehead activity may be under development in the Novokazalinsk/Dzhusaly area. Stations on Kamchatka about 3,500 nautical miles away could be used for monitoring the terminal phase of an ICBM or for observation and tracking of an earth satellite launched from the Novokazalinsk/Dzhusaly area. International Geophysical Year stations have been listed by the USSR at Kzyl Orda (near Dzhusaly) and at Petropavlovsk, Kamchatka.

A special Soviet commission was formed in late 1954 to organize earth satellite work. Since then numerous public statements by Soviet scientists and officials have indicated their intention to launch an earth satellite at an early date.
[PAGE 06]
2. BRITISH URGE IMMEDIATE SECURITY COUNCIL
MEETING ON SUEZ

British UN delegate Dixon has informed Ambassador Wadsworth that Britain wants the United States immediately to call a Security Council meeting for next week regarding Egypt's Suez Canal memorandum. Ambassador Wadsworth states that he did not feel that Dixon was being frank regarding Britain's reasons for going to the council, since he said only that London wants to "cancel out" Egypt's legal position based on the memorandum and to get on record its own legal and political attitude.

Dixon said the Foreign Office proposes that a resolution be introduced calling for further negotiations on the basis of the six points agreed upon with Egypt and endorsed in a Security Council resolution on 13 October last year. The resolution might be supported by arguing that the unilateral Egyptian memorandum does not satisfy the October resolution calling for a settlement, and otherwise falls short of the six principles. Dixon did not indicate what Britain would do if the Soviet Union vetoed the proposed resolution.

Comment Britain's pressure for Security Council action in part reflects its desire to restore the entire Middle East question to the council before the next session of the General Assembly. More generally, however, Britain's tactic appears to be to exhaust the recourses open to the UN for settling with Egypt, possibly to clear the way for future independent British moves.

On 3 April the French cabinet reportedly decided to propose the Suez problem for UN Security Council consideration but not until the results of American negotiations on the problem were known.
[PAGE 07]
3. SUKARNO ANNOUNCES HE WILL FORM
INDONESIAN CABINET

Comment on:

Indonesian president Sukarno has announced that he will personally undertake to establish an "extraparliamentary emergency business cabinet" to which former vice president Hatta will be appointed. Sukarno has given no indication whom he wants as premier.

It is probable that Sukarno will offer most of the cabinet posts to members of the National Party and the vacillating Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), but that some fellow travelers--or outright Communists--will also be included. In the interest of national "unity," he may offer minor portfolios to the Moslem Masjumi. It is highly unlikely that Sukarno would offer Hatta a position of real authority.

Sukarno undoubtedly calculates that he can succeed in forming a cabinet by either bribing or intimidating the opponents of his "concept." The NU, for instance, is strongly attracted by offers of high positions and other emoluments, and was on the verge of accepting those promised by the last formateur, Suwirjo. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]Sukarno can also threaten to smear--or he can jail--his opponents as "imperialist agents" with evidence the army may have turned up in its current "anti-corruption" drive. In this connection, political leaders in Djakarta are already reported to be badly frightened[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].

Sukarno's action is something of a political gamble. Never before has his prestige been committed to this extent, and if he fails to form a government, the result may be chaos or the emergence of a military junta.
[PAGE 08]
4. LATEST SOVIET NUCLEAR TEST

Comment This is the third Soviet atomic test of the 1957 test series detected since the beginning of nuclear testing within the Soviet Union. Earlier low-yield tests this year took place on 19 January and 8 March.

The January test in the area northeast of Kapustin Yar was accompanied by aircraft activity which strongly suggests that the weapon was delivered by an air-to-surface missile launched from a BADGER (TU-16). The March test took place in the Soviet nuclear weapons proving ground near Semipalatinsk.
[PAGE 09]
5. ADEN-YEMEN DEVELOPMENTS

Comment on:

Britain is adding to its forces in Aden an armored car unit from Malaya and other heavy equipment from Jordan. The British may be preparing for further trouble on the Aden-Yemen frontier following the expected arrival of new heavy arms shipments from the Soviet bloc via the Suez Canal. In the last two months Yemen has received several hundred tons of light Egyptian and Czech arms and supplies from Egypt, while Syria and Saudi Arabia have contributed lesser quantities. In late March, moreover, 20 Czech antitank guns for Yemen arrived in Egypt by air.

The reinforcements will probably be used to keep open the key roads in the mountainous interior of Aden Protectorate, where Yemeni-supported dissidents have recently established roadblocks. New Yemeni plans for terrorism in the protectorate are suggested by the Imam's recent request that the ex-Grand Mufti of Jerusalem furnish three to five experienced fedayeen "to undertake actions which will satisfy Allah!" Egypt is planning clandestine activities in Aden--possibly to stir up labor unrest among port workers in Aden Colony.
[PAGE 10]
6. THE NEW IRANIAN CABINET

Comment on:

The Shah appears to have given Iranian prime minister Manuchehr Eqbal a free hand in choosing his cabinet. Eqbal has retained about one third of the old cabinet and filled the remaining posts with technically competent ministers who have not been active in partisan politics in recent years, although nearly all of them have held a wide variety of cabinet, subcabinet or administrative positions.

The new cabinet represents a victory for Eqbal over his political opponents, notably the former minister of interior and the former minister of justice. The notoriously corrupt minister of finance has also been removed. A key question still unresolved is the future relationship between Eqbal and Abol Hassan Ebtehaj, the controversial head of the Seven-Year Plan organization, which will play a vital role in any development plans for the country.

The new government is not expected to make any significant changes in foreign policy. Iran's ties with the West and with the Baghdad pact will remain unimpaired.
[PAGE 11]
7. JORDAN REPORTEDLY ASKS USSR FOR ARMS

Jordan has requested arms from the Soviet bloc.

The USSR reportedly demanded that Jordan first extend diplomatic recognition, and Jordan accordingly agreed to the exchange of diplomatic representatives. The attaché added that authorities in Syria "are working for Jordan to obtain these arms."

Comment If true, this would be another success for Jordanian Prime Minister Nabulsi's anti-Western government against King Hussain's recent attempts to stem Jordan's leftward drift.

Jordanian army chief of staff Nuwar returned from Damascus on 1 April with an offer of Soviet aid "at low prices." The cabinet decided next day that Jordan would establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. Since 30 March Soviet propaganda has strongly supported the Nabulsi government against King Hussain.

Implementation of major Soviet bloc arms assistance to Jordan would greatly increase Israel's sense of insecurity.
[PAGE 12]
ANNEX

Watch Report 348, 4 April
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against US forces abroad, US allies or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

A deliberate initiation of hostilities against Israel by the Arab states is improbable in the immediate future. Israel may at any time renew hostilities if faced with one or more provocations, such as an introduction of substantial Egyptian military forces into the Gaza strip, a renewal of extensive fedayeen raids, or an attempted denial of passage for Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran. Other unsettled issues and tensions in the Middle East, especially in Syria and Jordan, also constitute possibilities for violence.
