WESTERN EUROPE
3. West Germans seek Anglo-American intervention in Saar dispute:
West German officials now suggest that the United States and Britain jointly ask Bonn and Paris to discuss bilaterally a solution to the Saar question which would be submitted to the Saar population for approval. The formula for agreement should be based on transforming the Saar into an international territory, which, the German officials hope, would include a "small parcel of French territory."

The Germans suggest that the Anglo-American statement be made prior to the European Defense Community debates in the West German Parliament; that it call upon both France and West Germany to refrain from further polemics on the Saar question; and that it stipulate that the status quo be preserved in the Saar pending the outcome of the bilateral discussions.

French diplomats state that their government will not accept any cession of French territory as a condition of settlement.

Comment: Chancellor Adenauer is trying vigorously to obtain some kind of conciliatory gesture from the West prior to the 7 February German parliamentary debates to which he has now irrevocably committed himself. Coalition leaders have indicated that if no conciliatory move is obtained the Parliament will probably pass a resolution sanctioning continued talks on the European Defense Community, but with an admonition that Germany must obtain "satisfaction" in any resolution of the Saar and NATO membership problems.

4. French Defense Minister hints at resignation if budget is inadequate:
French Defense Minister Bidault declares that he might resign should the 1952 military budget be limited to the present prospective maximum of about 3.7 billion dollars; he estimates that an increase of approximately one-third is necessary in order to meet NATO requirements. He believes, however, that France's military budget will in any case exceed the 3.4 billion dollars which NATO has considered the largest feasible under present political conditions.

While Bidault considers that an extension of the military service period to 24 months may eventually be possible, he warns that this would have far-reaching implications for the entire population, since France, unlike other European countries, allows no deferments.

Comment: American officials in France recently concluded that no French government would be likely to press for a military budget greater than 3.4 billion dollars, exclusive of US aid. The government has advised the National Assembly, however, that a final budget figure would not be proposed until the NATO Council Meeting at Lisbon this month has considered levels of defense effort and financial contributions.
