II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iranian Elder Statesman Urges Appeasement of USSR

Seyed Zia Tabatabai, 73-year-old former prime minister who is traditionally neutralist, has been trying to promote a move to appease the USSR in order to end the five-month-old Soviet propaganda campaign against Iran.

The elder statesman has become greatly concerned over the Soviet threat and is convinced that Iran has only "a couple of months" before the Russians will incite a Baghdad-type revolution in Iran.

Tabatabai proposes that the Shah immediately send a goodwill mission to Moscow as a gesture to permit Soviet leaders to save face. He feels Moscow would overlook Iran's participation in the Baghdad Pact and in the bilateral agreement with the United States, providing Tehran agrees to sign a nonaggression pact.

To further pacify the USSR, Tabatabai believes a scapegoat must be found to take the blame for the unfortunate situation facing Iran. He proposes, therefore, that the Eqbal government be dismissed on a vote of no confidence and that a new government be formed to take its place. While Tabatabai could be seeking the premiership for himself, as rumored in 1954, this does not appear to be his primary motive. He apparently is sincere in his fear for the future of Iran and is said to be urging many influential persons to put pressure on the Shah.

Tabatabai is regarded by the American Embassy in Tehran as one of a small, highly respected group who can best be called the "old-fashioned elder statesmen" of Iran. These men view the country in its historical perspective and believe its independence can best be maintained by remaining inconspicuously balanced between more powerful countries. They want Iran protected by the shield of Western military power without going so far as to annoy Soviet might, and would accept limited economic aid from both sides.

Neither the Shah nor Eqbal has yet shown any sign of weakening in the face of threatening propaganda. Nevertheless, with foreign propaganda demanding their death--as in the East German Persian-language broadcast of 30 June--and with pressure mounting to end the impasse with the USSR, the Shah, who often feels isolated and is easily depressed, may agree to investigative moves to end the Soviet "cold war" against Iran.

6 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
