[PAGE 01]
1 January 1954
Copy No. 84
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Comment on border agreement between Greece and Bulgaria
(page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Yoshida recognizes need for austerity budget (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Further development in Viet Minh "peace strategy" noted (page 4).
4. Viet Minh attack on Dien Bien Phu held almost certain (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
5. India makes loan to Afghanistan (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6. Comment on proposed Israeli-Jordanian armistice talks (page 5).
7. Israel reportedly arming frontier settlements for attack on Arab
states (page 6).
8. Shah allegedly tries to by-pass Zahedi in negotiations with British
(page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Comment on border agreement between Greece and Bulgaria:

The border agreement signed by Greece
and Bulgaria on 30 December settles a 33-year-old dispute and eliminates a major barrier to the re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between the two countries. The agreement provides for the division
of the disputed Evros River Islands, which have been the scene of
recurring explosive incidents during the past two years and have been
claimed in their entirety by both countries.

The question of re-establishing diplomatic
relations has already been taken up by the Bulgarian and Greek ambassadors in Paris.

FAR EAST

2. Yoshida recognizes need for austerity budget:

The American embassy in Tokyo considers
that Prime Minister Yoshida has finally
realized his responsibility for decisions
affecting the Japanese economy, and that
the government is facing up to the deteriorating economic situation.

An austerity budget submitted for cabinet
consideration was dramatically supported by Yoshida, who announced
that the government was determined to reverse the current inflationary
trend and unfavorable balance of payments situation by adopting a severe
financial policy. Yoshida's stand has the support of powerful financial
leaders both within and outside the Liberal Party.

Comment: The need for austerity in order
to lower export prices and to discourage unnecessary imports has long
been apparent. This situation has been allowed to drift, however, because of Yoshida's preoccupation with political maneuvers.
[PAGE 04]
The original budget requests totaled
almost 5.5 billion dollars, but the present draft is about one half this
size. Expenditures for almost every item except defense were cut
below those of last year.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Further development in Viet Minh "peace strategy" noted:

American officials in Saigon believe that
a meeting of the Viet Minh National Assembly
shortly after Ho Chi Minh's interview on 29
November was an important move in the Viet
Minh's over-all "peace strategy."

The meeting, the first in seven years, is
believed to have been intended to give substance to claims that only
the Viet Minh is qualified to represent the Vietnamese people in negotiations with France. Viet Minh broadcasts concerning the assembly
present an effective picture of an energetic government with an elective
base in contrast to the confusion in the Bao Dai government, in which
the latest premier was unable to convoke a national assembly.

The Laos campaign is part of a plan to strengthen the Viet Minh's position
in possible talks with the French.

4. Viet Minh attack on Dien Bien Phu held almost certain:

considers a major Viet Minh attack
on Dien Bien Phu, the French strongpoint in
northwest Tonkin, to be "almost certain" in
view of the reported movement of enemy
artillery to the area. is concerned about the expected use of
artillery against Dien Bien Phu, where special terrain features make
it impossible for the French completely to deny the enemy close-in
observation.

expects the enemy will be ready
to attack Dien Bien Phu by 10 January.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: The presence of two Viet
Minh infantry divisions in northwest Tonkin is now confirmed.
The bulk of an additional infantry division, two artillery regiments
and two antiaircraft batteries are believed to be approaching the
area. Current bad flying weather is expected to favor enemy operations.

It is still possible that the main force
will by-pass Dien Bien Phu and occupy northern Laos. The artillery
regiments might remain behind with a smaller force to contain and
harass the strong French garrison at Dien Bien Phu.

SOUTH ASIA

5. India makes loan to Afghanistan:

The Indian deputy finance minister told
the upper house of parliament on 21 December that India had made a loan of 10,000,000
rupees (or about $2,000,000) to Afghanistan
for the purchase of Indian goods.

It would be consistent with the past pattern
of Afghan-Indian diplomacy if India's new "loan" were designed to
assure Afghan support against American military aid to Pakistan.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Comment on proposed Israeli-Jordanian armistice talks:

Israel's good faith in proposing armistice
talks with Jordan will be put to the test by Jordan's expected agreement
to confer. The Jordanian agreement is limited, however, to discussion
of local problems under the aegis of the UN Mixed Armistice Commission.
[PAGE 06]
Jordan will probably refuse to discuss an
over-all revision of the armistice agreement as requested by Israel.
Discussion within the commission would help to dispel Arab fears
that Israel's talk of peace is insincere.

Israeli statements on the matter, however,
suggest that the Sharett government will probably bring the issue before the Security Council. Such action would provide Israel with a
propaganda forum, but would also promote continued Arab-Israeli
bitterness.

7. Israel reportedly arming frontier settlements for attack on Arab states:

On 28 December the American embassy
in Amman reported that both the Arab
Legion and UN observers had received
information that Israel was planning to
raid Jordanian frontier villages with
commando-trained soldiers dressed in
civilian clothes. Both sources believed
that the Israeli attacks on 21 December
in the Hebron area were the first example
of these new Israeli tactics.

Comment: Large-scale Israeli attacks
on Arab countries are not anticipated. Nevertheless, the recurrence
of Israeli frontier raids since the Qibya incident in October suggests
that the present government is continuing former premier Ben-Gurion's
"active defense" policy, which has been largely responsible for the
present Arab-Israeli tension.
[PAGE 07]
8. Shah allegedly tries to by-pass Zahedi in negotiations with British:

The shah may be trying to negotiate with
the British without the knowledge of Prime
Minister Zahedi or Foreign Minister
Entezam, Ambassador Henderson reported
on 30 December.

Wright said that he had rejected this approach
but that he had indicated willingness to talk to the shah with the knowledge of the Iranian government.

Comment: The shah's apparent attempt to
reach a secret understanding with the British prior to the opening of
official negotiations will not be well received by either Zahedi or the
foreign minister. Since this action follows intervention by the shah in
the army and in the Mossadeq case, it may renew friction between the
prime minister and the throne. Wholehearted cooperation between them
is necessary for success in the approaching elections.
