[PAGE 01]
10 December 1960

Copy No. CZ4-2

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
10 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet central committee plenum post-
ponement may indicate some indecision
at the top level on how to treat certain
issues closely tied to success of Khru-
shchev's policies. (1)

Czechoslovakia may provide arms for
Ethiopian gendarmerie. (2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos. (3)

Government reacts firmly to demonstra-
tions during De Gaulle visit to Algeria. (4)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The unprecedented announcement that the Soviet
central committee plenum scheduled for 13 December has
been put off until January may reflect Khrushchev's desire
for additional time, particularly in view of his current ill-
ness, to prepare for the high party gathering. This step
comes on the heels of the prolonged Moscow conference of
Communist parties, which discussed Sino-Soviet differences,
and at a time when there are signs that important changes in
agricultural administration are being contemplated. The post-
ponement, therefore, may be indicative of some element of
indecision at the top level of the Soviet Government on how
these issues closely tied to the success of Khrushchev's pol-
icies should be treated at the plenum.

Bloc-Ethiopia: Czechoslovakia is negotiating with Ethio-
pia concerning the supply of 15,000 rifles and 4,500,000 rounds
of ammunition.
the rifles are a German-designed World War II
model. They may be destined for the gendarmerie, which is
poorly equipped at present. Earlier this year, Soviet offers
to provide substantial amounts of arms for the Imperial Body-
guard and the gendarmerie were turned down by Haile Selassie.

(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Premier Souvanna Phouma has flown with six cab-
inet members to Phnom Penh, Cambodia. His further inten-
tions are not clear. The Vientiane area remains in a state of
confusion, with Captain Kong Le still in control of the city it-
self and with forces loyal to Colonel Kouprasith and General

[PAGE 05]
Phoumi establishing a defense perimeter around Camp Chinaimo,
a few miles to the south of the city. Captain Kong Le issued a
blistering statement over Vientiane radio on 9 December attack-
ing Phoumi and the "US imperialists and their Thai agents" in
terms virtually indistinguishable from those used by the Commu-
nists.
(Page 2)

Algeria: President de Gaulle arrived in western Algeria on
9 December for a six-day tour in an atmosphere of considerable
hostility. Violence and strikes erupted in Algiers and Oran. The
government was prepared for trouble and has reacted firmly. By
the evening of 8 December extraordinary measures had been taken,
including detention of known agitators, searching of Europeans'
automobiles, and surveillance of airfields. The reinforced secu-
rity police had orders to fire if necessary. On 9 December, both
in Oran and Algiers, the security police were effectively assisted
by mechanized army units, although the government had appar-
ently hoped to avoid using the army. Although there were general
strikes in Algiers and elsewhere, no public buildings or essential
utilities have been captured by the demonstrators. The govern-
ment has announced that most of the 400 demonstrators arrested
will be sent to internment camps. This action, coupled with the
apparent lack of leadership among the rioters--the leaders of the
Front for Free Algeria have "disappeared," and there are no in-
dications that Pierre Lagaillarde's arrival in Algeria is immi-
nent--may make it difficult for the rightists to regroup

10 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
Czech Arms for Ethiopia

negotiations are in progress with the Ethiopian Government involve-
ing the supply of 15,000 rifles and 4,500,000 rounds of am-
munition. The rifles are not the standard military model
which the Czechs have supplied the Cubans, but the German-
designed Mauser 7.92, a World War II rifle. This would
suggest they are destined for the gendarmerie rather than
the Imperial Bodyguard or the army.

Haile Selassie has been seeking for some time to ac-
quire arms for the poorly equipped gendarmerie. However,
Soviet offers in the spring of this year to supply arms--in-
cluding tanks--for the Imperial Bodyguard and the gendarm-
merie were turned down by the Emperor, largely because
of a US promise to increase its military assistance to Ethio-
pia.

If this arms deal is consummated, it will be the first
time the Ethiopian armed forces have received aid from a non-
Western nation since 1948, when Prague supplied some
weapons, including tanks and mortars. Last year Czecho-
slovakia granted Ethiopia a line of credit of $10,000,000 un-
der which military equipment could be acquired. Haile Selas-
sie has relied almost entirely on United States assistance in
equipping his army and bodyguard, and American aid to the
police is under negotiation.

10 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 07]
The Situation in Laos

In the face of the mounting confusion in the Vientiane area,
Premier Souvanna Phouma, members of his family and six of
his ministers on 9 December took refuge in Phnom Penh, Cam-
bodia. Press accounts of his arrival in Phnom Penh attribute
Souvanna's flight to expectations that a major struggle for control
of the capital was imminent between the Communist-dominated
Pathet Lao and rightist forces led by Col. Kouprasith. Souvanna
earlier in the day had told that he was
powerless to head off impending armed strife and that he planned
to fly to Phnom Penh at the first sign of a clash between Kong Le's
forces in Vientiane and those of Kouprasith, located a few miles
south of the town at Camp Chinaimo.

No fighting has apparently occurred as yet, but Kong Le's
paratroopers are reported to have established themselves in a
blocking position on the road between Vientiane and Camp Chinaimo.
estimates that this position is manned
by about 100-150 of Kong Le paratroopers, supported by 4 armored
cars and an M-24 tank. He estimates that Kouprasith's force at
Chinaimo consists of about 1,300 men, including 200 paratroopers
taken from the pro-Phoumi garrison at Luang Prabang.

In an interview with on 9 December, Koupra-
sith expressed concern over his ability to defend his area, running
from Chinaimo south to the Mekong River boundary between Laos
and Thailand. He fears that the Pathet Lao may attack, either
alone or in conjunction with Kong Le. Kouprasith stated that he
did not at this point intend to move toward Vientiane, but was un-
certain what Kong Le would do.

Kouprasith will shortly receive reinforcements from Phoumi,
including possibly another company of paratroopers and infantry
elements drawn from the Phoumi force which took Pak Sane on
8 December. Thai Premier Sarit has reportedly granted Phoumi
permission to move these troops toward Vientiane on the Thai side
of the river.
Phoumi forces in Luang Prabang have been ordered to mount an
offensive against Vientiane as soon as possible; the resultant
weakening of the Luang Prabang garrison would make it more
vulnerable to any attack by Vientiane or Pathet Lao forces.

The nineteen National Assembly deputies who slipped off to
Chinaimo before Kouprasith's coup on 8 December are now en

10 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 08]
route to Savannakhet from Udorn, Thailand. With about an equal
number of deputies already in Savannakhet, there is now an as-
sembly quorum making possible a vote of no confidence against
the Souvanna government.

Souvanna's intentions are unclear. Should he choose not to
resign, from his safe haven in Phnom Penh he could conceivably
challenge the legality of any assembly vote in Savannakhet on
the ground that it was taken under duress. For some weeks, he
has publicly been on record that his government would not recog-
nize any action taken by King Savang in view of the fact that Phoumi's
rebel committee controlled Luang Prabang. He might thus attempt
to continue his government in exile and seek to focus international
attention on his predicament, either through a UN appeal or through
some other action.

There have been indications that the bloc may try to get the
Laotian situation before an international forum. On 7 December
Soviet Ambassador Abramov intimated an appeal would be made
to the UN Security Council and on 8 December North Vietnam issued
an official statement possibly intended to provide background for
any such move. In this statement, Hanoi charged that US-Thai
"intervention" in Laos "threatens the security" of North Vietnam
and called on participants of the 1954 Geneva Conference on
Indochina to "adopt effective measures to check US imperialism."
Moscow promptly rebroadcast a summary of this statement which,
like those before it, also may be intended to cast an air of fore-
boding over the Laotian situation in hopes of discouraging support
for Phoumi.

10 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
