I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Lack of Sino-Soviet Liaison on Communes

A recently completed study of Soviet party journals and newspapers published between March and September 1958--the period of conception and initial organization of the Chinese communes--suggests an absence of coordination between the Soviet and Chinese parties on this issue. During this period Soviet journals continued to treat Chinese agricultural policies with an approval greatly in contrast to their attitude after the full implications of the commune program emerged. The seeming lack of prior liaison on an issue of such importance to the bloc calls into question the effectiveness of Sino-Soviet consultation on other doctrinal matters.

The Chinese Communist party leadership was actively considering and making preparations for a nationwide commune program throughout the spring of 1958. Prototype communes were formed in April, the same month that Mao Tse-tung wrote an article--not published until June--in which he implied an intention to move into a more advanced stage of agricultural organization. At the same time, the Chinese stepped up their claims to be advancing toward the ultimate stage of Communism, in the face of the Soviet position that only the USSR had graduated from the preliminary "socialist" stage. The communes were almost certainly discussed at the Chinese party congress in May, although the proceedings were never published. The very term "people's commune"--Peiping has since said--was first adopted in June 1958.

While the Soviet leaders presumably knew some sort of change was impending in the Chinese countryside during this period, they do not seem to have been aware of the implications of Peiping's plans--not publicly revealed by the Chinese until September 1958 when the commune system had already reached an advanced stage. Had the USSR been fully informed, it would almost certainly have been alarmed. Yet in June 1958, at the Bulgarian party congress, Khrushchev himself bestowed an unusual accolade on the Chinese party for its "enormous contribution to the theory and practice of the socialist revolution."

29 Oct 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1
