Scope of Faysal's Authority in Saudi Government Defined
A text of a supplemental decree issued by King Saud on 22 March, which details the authority relinquished by him to Crown Prince Faysal, indicates that Faysal has taken on wider authority than had previously been indicated. When all the new authority has actually been assumed by Faysal, in his capacity as chairman of the Council of Ministers, the position of the King would seem to be considerably restricted. However, Saud apparently retains command of the relatively well-equipped royal guard, and his son, Prince Fahad, is still defense minister.

The scope of Faysal's control over conduct of foreign affairs, as set forth in the supplementary decree, has been confirmed. However, the scope of Faysal's authority in internal administrative and fiscal matters has not previously been defined.

By the terms of this decree Faysal has been given supervision of all "ministers, government departments, agencies and provinces," including the national guard (tribal forces which outnumber the army), directorate of intelligence, and the administrations of the city and province of Riyadh, of the northern frontiers, and of the Eastern Province. These entities have in the past answered directly to the King, and in practice the jurisdiction of the Council of Ministers has been confined largely to the western coastal province of the Hejaz.

In fiscal matters, all expenditures are to be within the general budget, and Faysal is specifically charged with supervising "privy purse" expenditures for the national guard, the royal guard, and payments to the Bedouin tribes. These matters were previously associated with the person of the King. The only authority specifically reserved to the King in this decree is supervision of payments to members of the royal family, once these amounts have been set, presumably by the council.

The foreign policy statement issued over Mecca radio on 18 April, affirming the government's belief in "positive neutrality," appears to confirm that the Saudi government under Faysal will return to a more neutral policy in intra-Arab matters and in relations with the rest of the world.
