the eight-year Indochina war. These three separate but interrelated commissions, responsible to the co-chairmen, were charged with maintaining the armistice and supervising implementation of political terms that varied according to country. The agreement for Laos provided for the integration of the Pathet Lao fighting forces into the national community and the subsequent holding of country-wide elections. The government claims its obligations were fulfilled by the short-lived 1957 "Vientiane agreements" under which the Pathet Lao agreed to relinquish military control of Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces in return for a legal status as the Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) party and two portfolios in the cabinet, and by the supplementary National Assembly elections held in May 1958 which resulted in a sweeping leftist victory. In July 1958, under increasing pressure by the Laotian Government to get out, the ICC adjourned sine die on a Canadian proposal which was carried over Communist objections. Then, as now, Vientiane resented the ICC's presence because it tended to equate the Pathet Lao with the royal government and hampered military efforts against the insurgents. The Indian chairman, on technical and legalistic grounds, frequently voted with the Polish representative against the Canadian.

On the military side, government troops advancing north from Vang Vieng on the Luang Prabang road are about three miles from Muong Kassy, where a combined force of Kong Le - Pathet Lao troops is expected to make a determined stand. The commander of the government forces has called for strikes against Muong Kassy by T-6 aircraft to soften the position, but operational plans also call for an attempted flanking movement to avoid enemy holding positions on the road. A temporary shortage of food and 105-mm. artillery ammunition has delayed the government's advance, giving the enemy more time to organize defenses. About 15 miles north of the Phou Khoun junction a government force consisting of two infantry battalions faces a Kong Le - Pathet Lao force presently estimated at about the

25 Jan 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
