Situation in the Congo

The UN is moving with alacrity to implement the UAR's request of 23 January that its battalion be withdrawn from the Congo. A UN official stated on 23 January that the evacuation was scheduled for 1 February and that all the battalion's equipment would be airlifted at the same time in order to give Cairo no opportunity to renege. India, Ethiopia, Sudan, and Iran have been asked to furnish replacement troops.

The announcement yesterday by Morocco that it also is withdrawing its troops from the Congo is a further sign of Rabat's growing ties with the militantly neutralist African bloc which includes the UAR, Ghana, Guinea, and Mali. The announcement said the UN was being asked for return of the troops to Morocco "before the end of this month," but the Moroccan Information Minister indicated a realization that logistical problems could keep this deadline from being met. Guinea's 700-man force in the Congo is already scheduled for withdrawal early next month. Mali now has no forces in the Congo. The Moroccan decision presumably will mean increased pressure on Ghanaian President Nkrumah to withdraw Ghana's 2,400-man UN contingent, despite his personal belief that the neutralists could wield more influence if their forces remained in the Congo.

Meanwhile, Lumumba's international supporters apparently are stepping up their pressure on Sudan to permit passage of clandestine shipments to Gizenga's Stanleyville government. Ghanaian Foreign Minister Ako Adjei, who recently visited Khartoum on the way to Cairo, reportedly joined the ambassadors of the USSR, Communist China, and the UAR in a plea to Sudanese officials to permit overflights by UAR aircraft. These efforts have so far been unsuccessful. However, pressure is likely to increase as a result of the consultations among Lumumba supporters at the recent meeting of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Organization's executive committee.

France apparently is joining Belgium in allowing army officers to serve as military advisers to the forces of Katanga's President Tshombé.
