[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
14 June 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Enemy increases capabilities on east central Korean front (page 3).
2. Muccio believes Rhee no longer effective leader (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
3. Indian Communists instructed to oppose American technical aid program (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Czech Government declines to intervene on Iran's behalf at The Hague (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Communists draft plan for cutting West Berlin utilities (page 5).
6. Pinay to ban Communists from administrative and military positions (page 5).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Enemy increases capabilities on east central Korean front:
The Chinese Communist 12th Army, thought to have been relieved in east central Korea on 9 June by the 60th Army, remains in combat, according to Far East Command.
Recently captured prisoners of war in the Kumsong-Yulsa sector indicate that one division of the 60th and two divisions of the 12th are in this sector, which was previously occupied by the 12th Army alone.
Despite the presence of elements of two armies in this area, the Far East Command points out that the pattern of enemy activity along the rest of the front has been one of "a series of reliefs in place."

Comment: Although the 12th Army may yet be withdrawn, hostilities in this sector have been intensified in the past few days.

2. Muccio believes Rhee no longer effective leader:
Ambassador Muccio believes that the United States can no longer expect effective leadership from President Rhee and that the power-seeking group headed by Lee Bum-suk "has practically taken Rhee over completely." The Ambassador sees as a probable development "a precipitous deterioration of the situation. . . which may even be in the form of a violent forceful move. . . by Lee Bum-suk acting ostensibly in the name of Rhee."

The Ambassador reached these conclusions following a "futile" hour-long meeting with the President on 12 June, in which Rhee was "so completely irrational that it is impossible to make a detailed summary of his wanderings." Muccio considers that the President is both physically and mentally exhausted and does not know to whom to turn.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

3. Indian Communists instructed to oppose American technical aid program:
Central Committee of the Indian Communist Party has instructed its provincial committees to boycott any American-sponsored village reconstruction movement and to obstruct by means of peasant non-cooperation any technical aid measures under the Point IV program. It also has advised widespread adoption of the slogan "Go home Americans."

Comment: These instructions indicate that the Communists are sufficiently concerned over the prospects of increased American aid in 1952 to institute stronger combative measures than the present propaganda contrasting the ability of the Soviet Orbit and the inability of the West to supply South Asia with needed goods.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Czech Government declines to intervene on Iran's behalf at The Hague:
The Czech Government had refused to intervene with the International Court on behalf of Iran. Czechoslovakia recognizes Iran's right to nationalize the oil industry but considers that the right of interpreting the UN charter is not within the competence of the court.

Comment: Iran is basing its case on the article in the UN charter which stipulates that the UN is not authorized to interfere in matters which are "essentially within the domestic jurisdiction" of any state.

The government in late April requested its diplomats abroad to find out whether any countries planned to make representations to the court in Iran's behalf.

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Communists draft plan for cutting West Berlin utilities:
Leaders of the Socialist Unity Party, meeting on 6 June with the Soviet Control Commission, made plans for a complete severance of public utilities between East and West Berlin. There is, however, no present intention to proceed with these measures.

Meanwhile, US observers in Berlin feel that the first phase of the Communist harassment campaign has passed without appreciably affecting the status or security of West Berlin. Drastic Communist measures have failed to materialize. The only actions which have aroused concern are the denial of free access for West Berliners to visit relatives or farms in the Soviet Zone, and the temporary interference with the daily routine of several suburbs. In general, life in West Berlin is normal.

6. Pinay to ban Communists from administrative and military positions:
Premier Pinay and Minister of Defense Pleven have agreed to take steps to ban Communists from positions in the French Government and armed services.

Comment: It now appears certain that the French Government intends to take every measure calculated to reduce the power of the Communist Party short of depriving it of parliamentary representation or outlawing it. The rightist press is demanding severe screening in the armed services and war industries, and vigorous government efforts to prove espionage charges are continuing.
