Israel-UAR: Israel, with the consent of the UN Truce Supervision Organization, has begun dredging 300 meters of the Jordan River channel south of the Banat Yaqub bridge in the Israeli-Syrian demilitarized zone. The UAR opposes this project, believing it to be part of an Israeli scheme for ultimate diversion of the river despite Israeli claims to the contrary. Syrian troops overlooking the river so far have not attempted to stop the dredging, but the situation contains elements of danger.

*Republic of the Congo: The refusal of the UN Command on 11 October to permit the arrest of deposed Premier Lumumba by the Mobutu government has maintained for the time being the uneasy stalemate of political forces in Leopoldville. Mobutu appears likely to continue to press for UN withdrawal of its protection of Lumumba, and a government spokesman has threatened a "nationwide uprising" if the UN does not do so. The UN statement that Lumumba could be arrested only if parliament were to withdraw his immunity may prompt Mobutu to reconvene parliament, whose members have lately been increasingly critical of Lumumba.
The US Embassy at Accra reports that a planeload of Ghanaian troops departed on the morning of 11 October, but returned, allegedly because of bad weather, without reaching its destination. According to an African diplomat in Accra, the purpose of this mission was to have been to rescue Lumumba in Leopoldville and establish him as head of a Congolese government-in-exile.

Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: Tension is likely to increase in the British-controlled Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland as white settlers react to pro-African proposals of the advisory Monckton commission report released on 11 October. The settlers are already highly incensed at African rioting this past week end in several urban centers in Southern Rhodesia. They will demand that their government strongly oppose the commission's recommendations that African influence be greatly increased in the Federation's legislature and in the administration of Northern Rhodesia. Prime

12 Oct 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
