[PAGE 01]
4 February 1955

Copy No. 9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Comment on Peiping's rejection of United Nations invitation (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Indian truce official irked by Polish stubbornness (page 5).
5. Viet Minh unit violates Laotian border (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Iraqi prime minister reported planning to sign pact with Turkey in next few weeks (page 7).

9. Britain opposes delay on Turkish-Iraqi pact (page 8).

11. Disorders in North Africa might follow should Mendes-France fall (page 9).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Comment on Peiping's rejection of United Nations invitation:

Chou En-lai's letter to UN secretary general Hammarskjold on 3 February supports other indications that the Peiping regime does not intend to conclude an early cease-fire, but means instead to promote tension in the China area.

It had been expected that Peiping would bid for more favorable terms of reference by insisting, as Chou has in his 3 February letter, on discussing the Soviet resolution about American "aggression." Chou has gone beyond this and beyond any previous Chinese Communist statement, however, in declaring that Chinese Communist representatives will not attend Security Council discussions until Communist China replaces the Chinese Nationalists in the council. The Security Council voted 10 to 1 against such action on 31 January.

Chou's letter, like other recent Chinese Communist comment on the concept of a cease-fire, suggests that even if Peiping's conditions for attending the UN debate were met, Chinese Communist representatives would maintain a stubborn attitude and would simply demand the withdrawal of American forces from the China area.

Both Moscow and Peiping are well aware that most non-Communist nations hope to avoid any hostilities which might lead to a world war. The Communists appear to believe that if tension is maintained many governments will intervene in an attempt to modify American commitments to Nationalist China.

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Indian truce official irked by Polish stubbornness:

The Indian chairman of the International Control Commission team in Saigon reports that for the first time his group has failed to reach a unanimous agreement on an issue referred to it. He informed the American embassy that he had finally had enough of the Polish delegate's monotonous reiteration of his position and had referred the matter to commission headquarters in Hanoi.

The embassy believes this action to be important because of the Indian representative's previous insistence that commission unanimity was absolutely essential.

Comment: This is a further indication that Indian truce officials in Vietnam, as well as in Laos and Cambodia, are developing a more realistic view of the local situation as a result of firsthand experience in dealing with the Communists. There is as yet no evidence, however, suggesting that New Delhi is wavering in its intention of maintaining strict neutrality.

5. Viet Minh unit violates Laotian border:

The first violation of the Laotian border by a Viet Minh unit occurred on 31 January when an understrength battalion moved into northern Laos in an apparent attempt to reinforce Pathet Lao troops now surrounding a small Laotian post east of Sam Neua. The Laotian government, meanwhile, has ordered a battalion into Sam Neua Province with the mission of preventing the Communists from gaining further control in an area southwest of the provincial capital.

The American army attaché in Vientiane sees a possibility for extensive hostilities in continued troop maneuvering.

[PAGE 06]
Comment: Talks between the royal government and the Pathet Lao were recently suspended. Armed clashes in the area have led the government to deploy several battalions northward, in readiness for action should further incidents occur. Although warned by the International Control Commission, the Pathet Lao continues to maintain a bellicose attitude in its ef-
