The Collapse of the French Military Insurrection

The military rising in Algeria ended yesterday almost as quickly and quietly as it started. Paratroop forces were withdrawn from Oran and Constantine during the day and by midnight police and regular army units loyal to Paris had moved into Algiers. Within two hours, and after only sporadic fighting, Generals Challe, Salan, and Jouhaud, the leaders of the insurrection, had left the government buildings in trucks loaded with paratroops, according to press reports. The whereabouts of the generals is uncertain, although they probably went first to the Foreign Legion base at Zeralda near Algiers. Other units actively engaged in the insurrection reportedly returned to their barracks.

The ending of the insurrection was largely the result of De Gaulle's tough stand and the popular backing he received. The US Embassy in Paris comments that public opinion rallied in a more determined way than in either May 1958 or January 1960. There is reason to believe that this popular support for De Gaulle was reflected in the behavior of those military units in Algeria predominately composed of conscripts. Although few of those units were willing to fire on the paratroops, they apparently gave no positive support to the rising. It is also possible that it was the demonstrations of popular support for De Gaulle which prevented any moves in metropolitan France by forces opposed to the government from materializing. When naval units at Toulon and regular army units in Germany responded to the government's orders of 25 April, the insurrectionists probably realized how narrow their support was.

De Gaulle is publicly committed to try the leaders of the insurrection for treason. The bulk of the military establishment, however, is likely to come in for high praise from De Gaulle, who is eager to press ahead with his plans to develop a modern national defense force.

Once the smoke clears De Gaulle will probably consider that his victory over the insurgents has given him a new mandate for negotiations with the Provisional Algerian Government (PAG) and additional flexibility once talks are under way. The leadership of the PAG, obviously concerned that the insurrection would be successful, sent word to Paris that it would be receptive

26 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
