[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
7 October 1960
Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 32
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
D DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: H6 12-2
DATE: 10 JUN 1980
REVIEWER:

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 October 1960
DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: American officials in Tokyo believe that the behavior of the Japanese Communist party toward the Sino-Soviet dispute indicates a reluctance to become publicly involved because of close ties with both Peiping and Moscow; party publications have assiduously tried to give the impression that no dispute exists. They believe that the party, if forced to choose now, would declare in favor of Moscow's current interpretation of Communist theory and doctrine, but that over the longer range the orientation of the Japanese Communists will be influenced by their long and close sympathetic association with the Chinese party and by the special attraction exerted by the mainland throughout Japanese society.
[PAGE 05]
Laos: Radio Vientiane, just prior to Premier Souvanna Phouma's departure for talks with the King in Luang Prabang on 6 October, issued a somewhat conciliatory appeal to leaders of Phoumi's Savannakhet Committee to assist the royal government in reaching "national concord." Meanwhile, the idea of moving the seat of the government to Luang Prabang is reportedly gaining increasing acceptance among leaders in Vientiane, including Souvanna. One reason for such a move, would be to get out from under the immediate influence of Captain Kong Le. Transfer of the government to Luang Prabang, however, would not only leave Kong Le in undisputed possession of Vientiane, Laos' major administrative and economic center, but would also in effect be an admission that neither Souvanna nor his ranking military commander has any real control over him.

7 Oct 60
DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Britain: Although Hugh Gaitskell suffered a major defeat when the trade union - dominated Labor party conference rejected his pro-NATO policies, he retained the support of the party's political arm--representatives from its organization in individual constituencies. This fortifies his position as he faces the continuation of the left-wing challenge when the new session of Parliament opens in early November. Although the Labor party membership in Parliament is likely to reject or bypass the conference's endorsement of neutralism and to retain Gaitskell as leader, its effectiveness as an opposition to the Macmillan government will necessarily be further reduced. (Page 4)

7 Oct 60
DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]
Japanese Communists Avoid Sino-Soviet Dispute

American officials in Tokyo believe that the Japanese Communist party (JCP) is reluctant to become publicly involved in the Sino-Soviet dispute because of close ties with both Peiping and Moscow. These officials consider that the JCP--if forced to choose now--would declare in favor of Moscow's current interpretation of Communist theory and doctrine. They feel that over the longer range, however, the orientation of the Japanese Communists will be influenced by their party's long and sympathetic association with the Chinese party and by the special attraction which the mainland exerts on Japanese society.

Prior to the meeting of Communist parties in Bucharest in late June, the JCP newspaper Akahata had urged readers to study the text of three statements of the Chinese thesis which had been reprinted on 5 June in the semimonthly organ of the JCP central committee, Sekai Seiji Shihyo. However, since JCP officials learned of the disagreement between the Soviet and Chinese delegates at Bucharest, the Japanese Communist press has published only those Chinese statements which support the Bucharest communiqué. In publishing excerpts from Khrushchev's speech at the Bucharest meeting, editors of Sekai on 10 July referred to it as giving the "position of the international Communist movement," and on 25 July they published editorials from both Pravda and People's Daily supporting the communiqué.

There are unconfirmed reports that JCP leaders delayed their support of the Bucharest communiqué until after Liu Ning-i, Chinese Communist party central committee member who visited Japan in late July, had assured them that his party "fully supported" the communiqué and that "there is no discord" between his and the Soviet parties.

7 Oct 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
British Labor Party Prospects

Although Hugh Gaitskell suffered a major defeat when the trade union - dominated Labor party conference rejected his pro-NATO policies, he retained most of the support of the political arm of the labor movement. Some 80 percent of the local party constituency representatives voted with Gaitskell. This will fortify his position in the face of the left-wing group, which now will carry its attack against his leadership to the moderate Labor members of Parliament.

When the Parliamentary Labor party organizes early next month for the beginning of the new session of Parliament, a large majority of the 255 Labor members will probably vote for Gaitskell's re-election as party leader. Last June, when left-wing sniping against his leadership was already extensive, he won a vote of confidence, with 179 Labor members of Parliament approving his leadership and only 7 opposing.

Faced with this line-up, the radicals are more likely to continue their agitation now on the unilateral nuclear disarmament issue than to make an immediate all-out effort to oust Gaitskell. In any case they are gaining representation in the top party hierarchy with the conference's election of Harry Nicholas, Cousins' principal assistant in the Transport and General Workers Union, as party treasurer. The left wing also supports Harold Wilson, chancellor of the exchequer in the "shadow" cabinet and the leading contender to succeed the late Aneurin Bevan as deputy party leader.

Even if Gaitskell is re-elected, his tenure as party leader will be more precarious. His prospects depend on the positions taken by moderate supporters such as George Brown and James Callaghan, who feel that his leadership has been inept and a major factor in the party's decline. In any event intensification of the rift over policy and leadership will further limit Labor's effectiveness as the parliamentary opposition.

7 Oct 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
