[PAGE 01]
7 October 1960

Copy No. C 52

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 OCTOBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Another cargo of bloc arms arrives in Cuba; two more Soviet vessels carrying arms expected this month.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japanese Communists avoid public alignment in Sino-Soviet dispute.
Laos--Souvanna Phouma sees King after conciliatory Vientiane radio appeal to Phoumi group; sentiment growing to move capital to Luang Prabang to escape Kong Le's influence.
Congo--Arrest of Lumumba adherents discredits Lumumba's claim to army loyalty outside Leopoldville.
Iraq--Clashes likely in Baghdad between Communists and Nationalists during student congress starting 8 October.

III. THE WEST
Gaitskell retains support of Labor party's political and parliamentary arm in defense policy dispute.
[PAGE 04]
7 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet Bloc - Cuba: This is probably a further substantial shipment of bloc arms being unloaded in Cuba from the Soviet vessel Sergo Zilikov. The ship departed the Black Sea port of Nikolaev on 6 September with more than 3,000 tons of "varied cargo"--a term recently used when military items were included. Its unloading in the port of Casilda along the northern coast of Cuba--38 miles west of Havana--apparently is being conducted under strict security cover, including the prohibition of all flights in the area. The type of equipment involved is not yet known. Two other Soviet vessels--the Nikolai Burdenko and the Atkar--with military cargoes approximately the same tonnage are scheduled to arrive in Cuba during October.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan: American officials in Tokyo believe that the behavior of the Japanese Communist party toward the Sino-Soviet dispute indicates a reluctance to become publicly involved because of close ties with both Peiping and Moscow; party publications have assiduously tried to give the impression that no dispute exists. They believe that the party, if forced to choose now, would declare in favor of Moscow's current interpretation of Communist theory and doctrine, but that over the longer range the orientation of the Japanese Communists will be influenced by their long and close sympathetic association with the Chinese party and by the special attraction exerted by the mainland throughout Japanese society. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
Laos: Radio Vientiane, just prior to Premier Souvanna Phouma's departure for talks with the King in Luang Prabang on 6 October, issued a somewhat conciliatory appeal to leaders of Phoumi's Savannakhet Committee to assist the royal government in reaching "national concord." Meanwhile, the idea of moving the seat of the government to Luang Prabang is reportedly gaining increasing acceptance among leaders in Vientiane, including Souvanna. One reason for such a move, would be to get out from under the immediate influence of Captain Kong Le. Transfer of the government to Luang Prabang, however, would not only leave Kong Le in undisputed possession of Vientiane, Laos' major administrative and economic center, but would also in effect be an admission that neither Souvanna nor his ranking military commander has any real control over him.

Republic of the Congo: Mobutu's success in securing the arrest of pro-Lumumba leaders in Orientale Province by the army on 5 October appears likely to discredit Lumumba's claim that he commands the loyalty of army units outside Leopoldville. Lumumba on 27 September asked the UAR for arms for ten to fifteen thousand men, claiming that army units outside of Leopoldville were loyal to him rather than to Mobutu. Although Orientale Province has been regarded as a Lumumba stronghold, leaders of Lumumba's National Congo Movement (MNC) there were less experienced than those who followed Lumumba to Leopoldville, and that Congo Army units there were "almost leaderless." (Page 2)

Iraq: Clashes between Communists and nationalists are likely during the Sixth Congress of International Students in Baghdad beginning 8 October. Baghdad security forces are

7 Oct 60 DAILY BRIEF 11
[PAGE 06]
taking stringent precautionary measures to head off trouble. The recent closure of several extremist newspapers is part of a general program of reducing friction between the opposing elements. where anti-Communist sentiment is strong, a violent demonstration had taken place there on 6 October and that most of the city's shops were closed

III. THE WEST
Britain: Although Hugh Gaitskell suffered a major defeat when the trade union dominated Labor party conference rejected his pro-NATO policies, he retained the support of the party's political arms--representatives from its organization in individual constituencies. This fortifies his position as he faces the continuation of the left-wing challenge when the new session of Parliament opens in early November. Although the Labor party membership in Parliament is likely to reject or bypass the conference's endorsement of neutralism and to retain Gaitskell as leader, its effectiveness as an opposition to the Macmillan government will necessarily be further reduced. (Page 4)

7 Oct 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
Japanese Communists Avoid Sino-Soviet Dispute

American officials in Tokyo believe that the Japanese Communist party (JCP) is reluctant to become publicly involved in the Sino-Soviet dispute because of close ties with both Peiping and Moscow. These officials consider that the JCP--if forced to choose now--would declare in favor of Moscow's current interpretation of Communist theory and doctrine. They feel that over the longer range, however, the orientation of the Japanese Communists will be influenced by their party's long and sympathetic association with the Chinese party and by the special attraction which the mainland exerts on Japanese society.

Prior to the meeting of Communist parties in Bucharest in late June, the JCP newspaper Akahata had urged readers to study the text of three statements of the Chinese thesis which had been reprinted on 5 June in the semimonthly organ of the JCP central committee, Sekai Seiji Shiryo. However, since JCP officials learned of the disagreement between the Soviet and Chinese delegates at Bucharest, the Japanese Communist press has published only those Chinese statements which support the Bucharest communique. In publishing excerpts from Khrushchev's speech at the Bucharest meeting, editors of Sekai on 10 July referred to it as giving the "position of the international Communist movement," and on 25 July they published editorials from both Pravda and People's Daily supporting the communique.

There are unconfirmed reports that JCP leaders delayed their support of the Bucharest communique until after Liu Ning-i, Chinese Communist party central committee member who visited Japan in late July, had assured them that his party "fully supported" the communique and that "there is no discord" between his and the Soviet parties.

7 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in the Congo

Mobutu's success in securing the arrest in Stanleyville of pro-Lumumba leaders in Orientale Province by the army on 5 October is his most notable show of strength outside the Leopoldville area. The arrest of three Lumumba adherents--including his half-brother--on charges of plotting a countercoup appears likely to discredit Lumumba's claim that he commands the loyalty of most army units outside Leopoldville.

Although Orientale Province has been regarded as a Lumumba stronghold, leaders of Lumumba's National Congo Movement there were less experienced than those who follow Lumumba to Leopoldville, and that Congo Army units there were "almost leaderless."

On 27 September, Lumumba asked the UAR ambassador for light arms for 10,000 to 15,000 men, claiming that army units outside Leopoldville were loyal to him rather than to Mobutu. On 4 October, however, Cairo for the first time conceded the need for some form of official contact with Mobutu and instructed its ambassador in Leopoldville to designate an embassy officer "to examine (Mobutu's) attitude and watch his conduct."

the commander of the UAR troops in the Congo has been reprimanded by General von Horn, who accused him of "insolence and insubordination." Following the rebuke, the senior UAR officer in Leopoldville canceled; his orders concerning the transfer of additional forces from Gemena to Leopoldville. Von Horn's reprimand was probably prompted by knowledge that the UAR contingent had failed to implement UN orders for the transfer of its Leopoldville company to Gemena.

a cargo of Czech aid to the Congo is scheduled to reach Matadi aboard a Portuguese ship between 6 and 8 October. The Czech Foreign Ministry, following Mobutu's expulsion of Communist diplomats

7 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
from Leopoldville, has requested that the UAR embassy take charge of the cargo, pending instructions from Prague concerning its disposal.

The activities of Soviet diplomatic personnel and cargo ships suggest that the USSR is marking time until the Congo situation clarifies. Diplomatic personnel evacuated from the Congo in mid-September are reported to be in Guinea "under wraps," although the former ambassador to the Congo is in Accra. Two cargo ships believed to be transporting equipment to the Congo have held their positions off the African coast since mid-September.

7 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 10]
British Labor Party Prospects

Although Hugh Gaitskell suffered a major defeat when the trade union - dominated Labor party conference rejected his pro-NATO policies, he retained most of the support of the political arm of the labor movement. Some 80 percent of the local party constituency representatives voted with Gaitskell. This will fortify his position in the face of the left-wing group, which now will carry its attack against his leadership to the moderate Labor members of Parliament.

When the Parliamentary Labor party organizes early next month for the beginning of the new session of Parliament, a large majority of the 255 Labor members will probably vote for Gaitskell's re-election as party leader. Last June, when left-wing sniping against his leadership was already extensive, he won a vote of confidence, with 179 Labor Members of Parliament approving his leadership and only 7 opposing.

Faced with this line -up, the radicals are more likely to continue their agitation now on the unilateral nuclear disarmament issue than to make an immediate all-out effort to oust Gaitskell. In any case they are gaining representation in the top party hierarchy with the conference's election of Harry Nicholas, Cousins' principal assistant in the Transport and General Workers Union, as party treasurer. The left wing also supports Harold Wilson, chancellor of the exchequer in the "shadow" cabinet and the leading contender to succeed the late Aneurin Bevan as deputy party leader.

Even if Gaitskell is re-elected, his tenure as party leader will be more precarious. His prospects depend on the positions taken by moderate supporters such as George Brown and James Callaghan, who feel that his leadership has been inept and a major factor in the party's decline. In any event intensification of the rift over policy and leadership will further limit Labor's effectiveness as the parliamentary opposition.

7 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
