Ethiopia Faces Growing Instability

Emperor Haile Selassie has failed to follow up his success in crushing the recent attempt to depose him by taking positive steps to reconstruct his regime. As a result, normal governmental operations have become paralyzed, and there are indications that some Ethiopians are beginning to doubt his ability to reassert his one-man rule in Ethiopia. The Emperor's inaction and his recent public pronouncements reveal an intense preoccupation with the security of his regime and with the lack of personal loyalty displayed toward him during the abortive coup. Meanwhile he is completely disregarding the need for reforms.

Continued instability in the capital was demonstrated on 3 January when a high security official made an appeal over Radio Addis Ababa for calm and declared that rumors circulating in the capital were groundless. One rumor--that the army has threatened to "take action" unless it receives an immediate pay raise--is causing considerable apprehension in government circles, in part because the short-lived coup government promised such a raise. The American ambassador observes that even if this rumor has no factual basis, it might create sufficient discontent to cause possible action by the army or by individual soldiers. Regarding another rumor--that Ethiopian foreign officials have defected and are seeking political asylum--the ambassador indicated that a number of officials are known to be dissatisfied with the prevailing situation in Addis Ababa and that there now is much more criticism of the Emperor than before the attempted coup.

Despite indications that his shaky regime may face even more serious difficulties, the Emperor is reported opposed to making concessions to progressive younger elements who advocate some of the reforms also promised by the rebels. He is said to be seeking advice only from the surviving members of the conservative old guard who oppose changes in present government policy, in the hope of maintaining the status quo. While the ambassador foresees no immediate breakdown of public order, he believes there may be trouble if the Emperor fails to take early steps to quell the discontent.
