[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

28 December 1960

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

28 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Burma - Communist China:
has confirmed the existence of a secret Sino-Burmese agreement--resulting from the recent border treaty--authorizing troops of both countries to operate against Chinese Nationalist irregulars up to 15 miles on either side of the border.
about 2,000 Chinese Communist troops have been operating in Burma since late November.
Communist troops have not pursued the irregulars after driving them from this border zone,
the armed irregulars do not intend to retreat into Laos.
(Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
Nepal: The Communist party in Nepal is reportedly divided in its interpretation of King Mahendra's 15 December takeover of the government. One wing views the King's move as a swing to the right, while the other argues that the King's ouster of the Nepali Congress government will actually help the Communist party. Mahendra is reportedly withholding action against the Communists at least for the time being. Several of the party's top leaders, en route home from the Moscow conference, are in India; those in Nepal were not arrested in the King's roundup of politicians. The moderate composition of the King's caretaker council of ministers, announced on 26 December, may strengthen the Communist faction which is urging opposition to the King's "rightist" actions.
[PAGE 06]
Activities in Burma

has confirmed reports that about 2,000 Chinese troops are operating against Chinese Nationalist irregulars in the China-Burma-Laos border area. These operations have been undertaken, he stated, under a secret military agreement--resulting from the Sino-Burmese border treaty.

Troops from both countries have been authorized to operate up to 15 miles on either side of the border; he claimed that the Chinese Communists have inflicted heavy casualties on the irregulars.

The agreement is said to have been drafted at initiative; he reportedly guaranteed to the Chinese that their military actions would receive no publicity in Burma. Only a handful of Burmese officials know of the agreement, and even Prime Minister Nu professes not to have been officially informed. Nu stated flatly in a press conference on 20 December that there was no agreement, and that if there were Chinese Communist troops in Burma who refused to leave, "they would be driven out." Official acknowledgment of this military cooperation would arouse widespread apprehension in Burma.

So far, the agreement appears to be of a temporary nature, restricted to the protection of the joint Sino-Burmese demarcation teams operating in the eastern Shan border area. However, it appears that the Chinese Communists have taken the initiative in attacking groups of KMT irregulars within the border area.

neither the Chinese Communists nor the Burmese have pursued the irregulars outside the immediate border zone.
discounted reports that the armed irregulars, estimated at 3,500, plan to retreat into Laos. He asserted that only noncombatants and a field hospital have been withdrawn from Burma into Laos.
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
