CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Ambassador-designate to the United States Menshikov states he is personally convinced, as are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, and Bulganin, of the necessity for improvement in US-USSR relations. He has told Ambassador Thompson that his identity of views was apparently the reason for his appointment--a hint that one of Menshikov's primary assignments is to arrange high-level bilateral negotiations.
(Page 1)

The USSR is now suggesting a nuclear-free zone throughout the Middle East to include specifically the Baghdad Pact area. The 21 January TASS statement is timed to influence any discussions on strengthening the northern-tier concept in the Baghdad conference starting Monday.
(Page 2) (MAP)

The Egyptian and Syrian governments probably will announce formally in the near future plans to open negotiations for Syrian-Egyptian union under a federal constitution. The target date for completion of a draft constitution is said to be August 1958, prior to Syria's scheduled parliamentary elections. Should serious negotiations be undertaken, they would be arduous because of widely different economic and political conditions in the two countries. Nasir will presumably continue his efforts to remove Syrian Army Chief of Staff Bizri and neutralize Defense Minister Azm.

The large plurality won in Guatemala's 19 January election by rightist presidential candidate Ydigoras has presented the congress and the army with a dilemma. Congress, which is constitutionally charged with choosing between the two top runners, contains a strong anti-Ydigoras majority. If it refuses to name Ydigoras president after it convenes on 24 January, serious public disorders are likely.
(Page 6)

*The position of Venezuelan President Perez is threatened by a general strike which began in Caracas on 21 January. Street rioting has resulted in 33 deaths, many injured, and about 1,000 arrests. A state of siege has been declared and further violence may be expected. If the strike continues, the military now backing Perez may decide to oust him to check the mounting civilian opposition.
(Page 7)
