Soviet Party Leader Demoted

Averky Aristov as early as October 1952 had worked his way into the inner party circle around Stalin, but he lost out in the shake-up in March 1953 following Stalin's death and was exiled to a remote provincial post. He was recalled to Moscow in 1955 as a party secretary and in June 1957, when Khrushchev won his victory over Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich, was again made a member of the ruling party presidium. By December 1958 he had become Khrushchev's only deputy on the important party Bureau for the RSFSR (Russian Republic), which supervises party affairs in the Soviet Union's largest republic. In the May 1960 reshuffle of the Soviet top leadership Aristov, in what now appears to have been a prelude to his current demotion, was relieved as party secretary "to devote full time to his duties as deputy chairman of the RSFSR Bureau."

Aristov continued active in RSFSR affairs through last fall, and the RSFSR was credited at the recent party central committee plenum with relative success in the agricultural field as compared with other republics. There have been no signs of dissatisfaction with his work on the RSFSR Bureau.

His demotion to the post of ambassador in Warsaw appears to be the outcome of competition among Khrushchev's lieutenants. The removal of Aristov from Moscow appears to strengthen the authority of party secretary Frol Kozlov, apparently marked to succeed Khrushchev in the event of the latter's death or disability, and to give RSFSR Premier Dmitry Polyansky a dominant voice in that republic's affairs. Polyansky has been increasingly in the public eye, visiting the provinces and acting as principal spokesman for the republic, and he may have resented sharing authority with Aristov.

Gennady Voronov, one of the new candidate members elected to the party presidium at the central committee plenum in January, replaced Aristov as deputy chairman of the RSFSR Bureau. As a newcomer, he probably will be in no position to challenge Polyansky's authority in the RSFSR.

Petr Abrasimov, who had been ambassador to Warsaw since September 1957, was recalled last week. On his farewell visit he told US Ambassador Beam that he was returning to a ministerial job or to "party work." and added that his successor had not been chosen.

7 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
