The Situation in the Congo

Two hundred Congo Army paratroops left Leopoldville on 27 December for Luluabourg on the first leg of a flight to Bukavu, Kivu Province.

Although the ostensible reason for the movement was to protect President Kasavubu on a visit to Luluabourg, the paratroops reportedly are scheduled to emplane on about 30 December for Bukavu. The Congo Army battalion there--one of three in Kivu Province--is said to be leaning toward the dissidents.

The commander of the paratroop force reportedly has been instructed to seek an "understanding" with the Bukavu garrison and, failing that, to occupy the city by force. The cautious nature of the operation--which appears to have been hastily organized following Gizenga's 25 December "invasion" of Kivu Province--suggests that Mobutu's immediate interest is to contain the dissidents within Orientale Province and not to mount an offensive action against the dissidents in Stanleyville.

According to Ambassador Timberlake in Leopoldville, the dissidents opened communications from Stanleyville to Cairo on 18 December by means of a UAR network which includes a relay station at Juba in the Sudan. Cairo's willingness to serve as the communications link between Stanleyville and the outside world may stem from a desire to monitor Gizenga's operations as well as from an eagerness to assist the dissidents at no great expense to the UAR.

According to a senior Belgian official, Mobutu's foreign minister, Justin Bomboko, has indicated to Brussels that he feels the time is ripe for the re-establishment of the diplomatic relations which were broken off by Lumumba in August. The Belgians regard the restoration of full diplomatic relations as premature, but they are prepared to reopen consulates in the Congo while retaining the one now operating in Katanga. Bomboko's initiative appears to have been motivated in part by a desire to enhance the prestige of the interim government.

30 Dec 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
