Japan's New Foreign Policy Toward Communist China

The recent signing of an expanded trade agreement with the USSR and concern aroused by the US dollar-conservation program have increased pressures in Japan for improved trade relations with Communist China and induced the Ikeda government to undertake a review of its policy toward Peiping.

The Japanese Socialist party, inspired by the impact made earlier this year by the campaign against the US-Japanese security treaty, decided on 26 December to launch a new national movement directed this time toward establishing relations with Peiping. The Socialists, abetted by business circles, the press, and even some members of Ikeda's own party, are using effective arguments, although the political climate in Japan lacks the volatile elements which led to the downfall of the Kishi government.

The doubling of Soviet-Japanese trade both in 1959 and 1960 and the conclusion of an agreement on 20 December to expand 1961 trade to a total of $160,000,000 have aroused new interest in the possibility of similar success with Communist China. Although Japanese trade with the bloc remains relatively small, it has assumed a political importance out of all proportion to its actual volume. Asahi Shimbun, Japan's largest and most influential newspaper, has adopted the Socialist theme that decreased opportunity to earn US dollars makes important an increase of trade with the bloc.

A Foreign Ministry official has stated that Ikeda does not want to be accused, as was Kishi, of "militant uncooperativeness" toward Communist China. The government, he asserts, already has decided that certain contacts with Peiping, short of recognition or a government-to-government trade agreement, are vital. He has indicated that a study is already under way to determine the form of such contacts.

Official Japanese thinking currently envisages the promotion of private trade, cultural exchanges, and--on the governmental level--technical agreements such as postal and meteorological arrangements. In addition, the Japanese are giving preliminary thought to escaping Afro-Asian criticism by dropping their support for the moratorium on Chinese representation in the United Nations.

30 Dec 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
