[PAGE 01]
13 September 1956

Copy No. 105

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. EDEN PROPOSES USERS' ASSOCIATION FOR SUEZ

5. REPORT CLAIMS VENEZUELAN TROOPS WILL TAKE
OVER ARUBA ON 15 SEPTEMBER

7. BELGRADE MAY ADOPT ATTITUDE MORE CRITICAL OF
SOVIET BLOC

8. HONDURAN CHIEF OF STATE RESIGNS

* * * *

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. EDEN PROPOSES USERS' ASSOCIATION FOR SUEZ

Eden's announcement before the House
of Commons of plans for a users' asso-
ciation to control transit through the
Suez Canal has been quickly followed by
signs that transit may break down within
a few days.

In Egypt, a spokesman for a majority of
the non-Egyptian pilots announced they plan to quit Friday
night. In anticipation of an early breakdown in traffic, Brit-
ish oil companies in London announced a halt to the charter-
ing of tankers carrying oil from the Persian Gulf to Britain.

Foreign Minister Pineau on 12 September
told Ambassador Dillon that the old canal company had agreed
to keep those pilots who return to France available for the
new users' association, and is already sending to Cyprus 60
pilots who have completed their vacations in Europe and have
not returned to work.

Faced with Laborite demands for his res-
ignation, Eden announced he would seek a vote of confidence
on the proposed users' association. Laborites were evidently
particularly disturbed by Eden's statement that Britain has no
intention of relaxing its military build-up in the eastern Med-
iterranean since military action may still be necessary.

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
5. REPORT CLAIMS VENEZUELAN TROOPS WILL TAKE
OVER ARUBA ON 15 SEPTEMBER

According to a report received by the
American consul on Aruba, revolu-
tionary action on the island will be
sparked by a strike at power and water
plants at midnight on 15 September. The report asserted
that within four hours, ten companies of Venezuelan troops
would arrive to take over on the pretext that the govern-
ment has lost control.

The local police have informed the
American consul that they would be powerless in the face
of the reported plan, but additional Dutch police and ma-
rines are on the way to the island.

The consul notes that Irausquin, presi-
dent of the Aruba legislative council, and Jonckheer, another
political leader on Aruba, have had private meetings with
the Venezuelan president in recent months. He adds that
Venezuelan troop maneuvers with ferry boats have recently
taken place in Venezuela on the Paraguana Peninsula, 15
miles from Aruba.

Comment
Despite nationalist sentiment in Vene-
zuela which advocates the eventual in-
corporation of the island into Venezuela, there is no indi-
cation that Venezuela has ever contemplated direct armed
action against the island.

Irausquin has been known as the chief
advocate of closer economic relations between Aruba and
Venezuela. He sponsors a workers' group which early
this month reportedly planned to seek recognition as a
union at the Lago refinery on Aruba. The refining facil-
ities on Aruba are second only to those of Abadan, Iran, and,
according to a July 1956 US navy report, supply over 50 per-
cent of the fuel for the US navy and air force.

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. BELGRADE MAY ADOPT ATTITUDE MORE CRITICAL
OF SOVIET BLOC

According to British ambassador Rob-
erts and other Western diplomats in
Belgrade, Yugoslav leaders, including
Vice President Kardelj, now realize
they have "gone too far" in their uncritical sympathy with
the Soviet bloc and in their disregard of the West's criticism
of Yugoslavia's posture.

Specifically, Yugoslav foreign under
secretary Prica told Roberts that the USSR's unfavorable
press treatment of Yugoslavia's recent trials of former
"Cominformists" had caused the Yugoslavs to question
their interpretation of "favorable developments in Eastern
Europe." Prica said that a recent Yugoslav editorial at-
tacking Cominform supporters, which had mentioned "var-
ious foreign papers," had in fact been directed specifically
at Pravda. The latter had inaccurately reported the trials,
and had sparked a series of articles on Yugoslav policy
throughout the Satellites.

The American embassy notes that this
is the first significant issue on which Belgrade has chal-
lenged Moscow since the joint Yugoslav-Soviet declaration
in June.

Comment
The dispute over the Cominformist trials
harks back to the question of who was at
fault in the 1948 Tito-Soviet split, hence is part of the larger
controversy between Belgrade and Moscow concerning the
meaning of "national Communism." Belgrade feels that if
Moscow means what it says about "many roads to socialism,"

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9
[PAGE 11]
the trial of Yugoslav Cominformist "traitors" is none of
Moscow's concern. The Yugoslavs were probably dissatis-
fied with the midsummer Soviet statements about the need
for international Communist unity, especially since one
Pravda editorial in mid-July attacked the "national Commu-
nism" concept by name.

The "many roads to socialism" concept
and its concomitant, Satellite independence from Moscow,
will probably be a long-term subject of pulling and hauling
between Belgrade and Moscow. Although for the present
the dispute does not appear serious enough to endanger the
basic rapprochement, the Yugoslavs may take a less pro-
Soviet line to obtain further concessions toward Satellite
independence. This would have the corollary advantage of
impressing the West that Belgrade is not being "taken in"
by the USSR.

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 10
[PAGE 12]
8. HONDURAN CHIEF OF STATE RESIGNS

Julio Lozano resigned as de facto chief
of state of Honduras on 11 September
after a second heart attack. Former
president Juan Manuel Galvez, though
reluctant, will probably agree to assume
control of the government. Foreign
Minister Mendoza believes the elections
for a constituent assembly, set for 7
October, may now be postponed.

Comment
Galvez was a popular president, enjoys
the support of key army officers, and
will probably be able to maintain public order in a period of
transition from de facto to constitutional government. He
shares with Lozano the goal of forming a three-party consti-
tutional government and may be able to reach agreement with
political elements recently antagonized by Lozano.

An indefinite postponement of the constit-
uent assembly elections might increase political discontent.

13 Sept 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 11
[PAGE 13]
