[PAGE 01]
2 January 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
II. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: Khrushchev used a New Year's eve reception at the Kremlin to end any speculation that a US apology for the U-2 incident remained a precondition to top-level negotiations with the new US administration by stating his willingness to drop UN debate on the matter.

The USSR's New Year's greetings to Western leaders were cordial in tone and stressed the prospects for settling international issues--disarmament and the German question--during 1961. Among other recipients of greetings from Khrushchev were Souvanna Phouma of Laos and Lumumba of the Congo, both addressed as "premier."

III. ASIA-AFRICA

*Nationalist China: The commanding general on Chinmen issued orders on 30 December for Nationalist artillery to fire warning shots across the bows of all British ships entering Amoy and to fire at the ships themselves if they fail to heed the warning. The Nationalists reportedly decided on this action because the British have not been giving prior notice of this recent ship sailings for Amoy--now averaging one per week. Taipei has not attempted to enforce the port closure in the last three years, except for one occasion--on 25 September 1959, when an artillery battery fired and hit the British ship Tai-chungshan as it was entering Amoy harbor.

2 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 04]
*Mali: Sizable quantities of small arms and ammunition, presumed to be from supplies recently delivered to Conakry by Soviet ships, have been transshipped by truck from Guinea to Mali at regular intervals last month. Now stored at Bamako, Mali's capital, the arms are believed intended for distribution to internal security forces--especially the new paramilitary units now being formed--and for stockpiling. Acquisition of bloc arms in this way, reportedly arranged during the early December meeting between top Guinean and Malian leaders, reflects the growing influence of the pro-Guinean extremist faction in Mali's single-party regime. It also will heighten the concern of President Senghor's government in neighboring Senegal, which Mali leaders are anxious to see overthrown, and may lead to early Senegalese requests to the US and France for additional arms.

2 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

TOP SECRET DINAR

[PAGE 05]
IV. THE WEST

*East Germany - West Germany: West Berlin Mayor Brandt has indicated that in the recently concluded interzonal trade talks, the East Germans acceded to all of Bonn's demands and agreed not to implement the restrictions on West German travel to East Berlin which last September had led Bonn to cancel the trade pact. West Germany has not yet informed its allies of the detailed formulation of the new agreement, and

West Germany accepted weaker wording than it originally desired on several points in order to reach agreement. The East Germans were successful in insisting that their concessions would remain in effect only if the strictest secrecy were maintained,

*El Salvador: The provisional government appears moving to reduce US economic and military assistance. The defense minister told a group of US officials on 28 December that his government intends to replace US advisers to the National Police

2 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    v

[PAGE 06]
with Chileans or Italians or both, terming all US assistance programs "void of beneficial results for El Salvador." These statements, which completely reverse expressions of support for US assistance made by the defense minister within the past three weeks, apparently reflect the influence of the pro-Communists and Castro sympathizers in the government. One US-supported project was abruptly closed by the government on 24 December, and the embassy understands that a second is shortly to be closed,

2 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    vi

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Advisor to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
