Indonesia: Several reports are circulating in Indonesia of growing differences between President Sukarno and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution. Sukarno is said to be considering further steps, including cabinet changes, to diminish the army's political influence, possibly by granting a few more concessions to the Communists. Such developments would be in line with Sukarno's usual tactics aimed at preventing either the army or the Communists from becoming too powerful. These reports apparently stem both from Sukarno's recent moves to re-emphasize the civilian role in government and from the continuing efforts of Communists and possibly other leftists to prejudice Sukarno against the chief of staff.

Burma: U Nu, the prospective premier, has stated that he plans to maintain the Ne Win government's domestic and international policies. Although his party's popular and parliamentary majority is overwhelming, he says that he favors two-party democracy in Burma and that the "Stable" party opposition provides a non-Communist alternative to the Communist-dominated National United Front, which won almost one third of the popular vote in 1956 but has made an inconsequential showing thus far in the current balloting. U Nu plans to continue the American aid projects in Burma, but prefers loans to grants. Recognizing General Ne Win's supra-political stature, U Nu notes that, should his government again become inefficient and corrupt, "there is the possibility of the army's taking over again."

Iraq: The "orthodox" faction of the Iraqi Communist party has suffered a setback in its efforts to achieve legal status as a political party. The party's application was not accepted by the Interior Ministry, probably at Qasim's orders, ostensibly because of objections to the phraseology in the application form. After complying with the ministry's objections, the party resubmitted its application. However, the Qasim regime may interpose further objections in an effort to give a boost to the Communist splinter faction led by Daud Sayigh, whose application, along with those of the National Democratic and Kurdish parties, reportedly has been approved.

10 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
