Britain - France - Communist China: The American Embassy in London believes that the Macmillan government will find it difficult to continue to support the moratorium on the question of Chinese representation in the UN this year. The government assumes that Communist China will inevitably be voted into UN membership this year or soon thereafter, replacing Taiwan in both the General Assembly and Security Council. In the embassy's view, the Macmillan government further believes that it has become impossible successfully to attach any conditions to the seating of Peiping. The embassy concludes that recent public statements by Foreign Secretary Home and others are part of a British initiative designed to secure United States acquiescence to the shift in seats.

Queried about the French position by the US Embassy in Paris, a Foreign Ministry official said his government will probably soon undertake a high-level review of French policy on diplomatic recognition of Communist China and Chinese representation in the United Nations. He denied, however, that any shift in the French position is imminent. In the past, Peiping's support of the Algerian rebels has been a major stumbling block, but Foreign Ministry officials are now considering whether a French ambassador in Peiping would be useful for influencing the representatives of new French-speaking African states which have recognized Communist China or may do so. (Backup, Page 3)

Communist China: Peiping is negotiating additional grain purchases with Australia, Canada, and Argentina which may result in new orders for as much as two million tons. The Chinese have already purchased about $200,000,000 worth of foodstuffs in recent months, including about three million tons of food grains. Peiping has undertaken a variety of emergency measures, such as selling silver bullion and securing short-term credits from Hong Kong banks, to ease the pressure of these purchases on its foreign currency resources. Although there has been speculation that the USSR has advanced a hard currency loan to China to cover the emergency grain imports, there is no reliable evidence that such financial backing has been arranged. However, Sino-Soviet economic talks, which have been under way in Peiping since early February, may result in an accommodation designed to ease the Chinese balance of payments with the USSR by rescheduling Peiping's debt repayments.

4 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
