by Lord Home was unlikely to change the French Government's opposition to seating Peiping. He indicated, however, that Paris was going to restudy the question. He himself believed that the situation within the UN was changing, although he felt that Communist China would probably spoil its own chances of admission by demanding unacceptable preconditions.

Official circles in Paris apparently feel that the British experience in recognizing Communist China has been disappointing and that there is little likelihood of a major expansion of trade possibilities. If at some future date de Gaulle decides that to recognize Peiping would give France an advantage in its over-all power position, he would face no serious domestic opposition to doing so. Propaganda activity in support of Communist China is being stepped up in France. The Sino-French Friendship Society reportedly feels that its campaign in favor of official recognition of Communist China and its admission to the United Nations has made enough progress to warrant extending its drive into the French provinces. The New China News Agency also plans increased activity in France. The prominent Paris weekly L' Express, which has hitherto concentrated on criticizing the Algerian war, is running a series of pro-Peiping articles by the non-Communist leftist political leader Francois Mitterrand about his visit to China and his interview with Mao Tse-tung.

Other countries are reconsidering their position. The new Quadros administration recently announced that Brazil will support inclusion of the Chinese representation question on the UN General Assembly agenda at its next session. Malayan Premier Rahman, according to an unconfirmed report, plans to vote for the admission of Communist China next September. While Canada is reviewing its support of the moratorium, a preliminary paper on the subject contains no recommendation for a change in position.

Taipei retained its seat in the UN last fall by the slimmest margin since 1951; 42 members supported the moratorium, 34 voted against, and 22--mostly African and Asian members--abstained.

4 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
