Ambassador Peurifoy also reports that Yugoslavia now wishes at least a basic military understanding with Greece and Turkey. According to Venizelos, the three countries should now agree on what forces they would put into the field in the event of a Balkan war, but made no concrete suggestion for implementing this idea.

Comment: Believing that an independent and Western-oriented Yugoslavia would hinder a successful Soviet-inspired invasion of Greece from the north, Greece has consistently supported Western efforts to tie Tito more closely to the West. Yugoslavia has thus far resisted Greek overtures regarding military cooperation, but it may be revising this position because of heightened concern over the possibility of a Satellite attack.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Considerable disagreement evident as final Schuman Plan talks opened:

The Foreign Ministers of the Schuman Plan countries met on 12 April to clear up the remaining problems before signature of the draft treaty. While Monnet, the real author of the Plan, entered the conference "still guardedly optimistic," his uncertainty was obvious and his advisers were professedly expecting trouble. German negotiator Hallstein was reportedly pleased with the tentative compromise that had been reached on the Saar issue, but sharp disagreement was evident among all the participating countries with respect to the composition of the High Authority, national voting strength in the advisory Council of Ministers and the location of the coal-steel pool's capital. In talks with Monnet, Belgian Foreign Minister Van Zeeland has intimated that he will raise at least two questions not on the agenda, one of which -- a provision for future re-examination and perhaps renegotiation of the treaty -- Monnet fears may lead to "serious difficulties."

Comment: Disagreement to this extent in the final conference was to be anticipated, inasmuch as basic decisions determining the voice to be allotted to each participant were deferred in mid-March in order to gain the publicity advantage of having the treaty at least initialed. Van Zeeland's critical attitude is probably sincerely based on the Belgians' misgivings that their high-cost coal industry will suffer disproportionately under the Plan.
