Approved For Release 2002/10/21 : CIA-RDP79T00975A004700350001-1

Ghana Expanding Relations With Bloc

Ghana now appears to be implementing its long-professed policy of "positive neutralism and nonalignment" in a more active manner as far as its relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc are concerned. Motivated apparently by an increasing interest in exploring the possibilities of bloc economic and technical aid as well as by a desire not to appear appreciably less "neutralist" than Guinea, the Nkrumah regime is exhibiting increased receptivity toward bloc efforts to promote contacts. These efforts have been progressively intensified since late 1958.

Although the Soviet Embassy established in August is the only bloc diplomatic mission in Accra at present, Prime Minister Nkrumah has apparently been giving serious consideration to an early exchange of ambassadors with Communist China. An announcement to this effect may possibly be made in connection with the current visit to Peiping by a Ghanaian trade and good-will mission. Since its independence in 1957, Ghana has held that it "inherited" recognition of Peiping from Britain and has consistently voted in the UN against postponement of the Chinese representation issue. Guinea's decision to establish diplomatic relations with Communist China was announced on 4 October.

Meanwhile, the European satellites--especially East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, which have permanent trade missions in Accra spearhead the bloc's drive in Ghana. Their representatives, including trade delegates and technicians, now account for over 60 of the estimated 80 bloc personnel resident in Ghana. Most of the Communist-bloc countries send periodic special delegations which have offered technical assistance and conducted industrial feasibility surveys. The East Germans, striving for international recognition, have been particularly active. Last month they induced Ghana to sign agreements providing for the training of 50 Ghanaian students in East German universities, technical schools, and factories.

10 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
