[PAGE 01]
17 July 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. Ambassador Kennan comments on Soviet policy in Rumania (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Burmese Communist chief reported retreating toward India (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Tito desires strategic talks with the United States (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French President makes unusual plea for American aid (page 8).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Ambassador Kennan comments on Soviet policy in Rumania:

Ambassador Kennan, in commenting on the Bucharest assignment of A. I. Lavrentev, says that Moscow is placing the Rumanian situation in the hands of its ace trouble shooter for the Satellite area. In the Ambassador's opinion, Rumania's strategic position is the key factor. The Kremlin would like to make the Dobruja area a direct defensive responsibility of the Soviet Army, but leave the Western area a Rumanian responsibility in order to avoid Soviet military contact with the Yugoslavs.

Ambassador Kennan feels that the appointment of Bughici as Rumanian Foreign Minister signifies a virtual Soviet take-over of the Bucharest Foreign Ministry and that Rumania is quietly being changed into a Soviet constituent republic, although for the present without formal incorporation. He notes that Lavrentev was previously assigned to Rumania in 1940 to arrange for the separation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina and their subsequent annexation by the USSR.

The Ambassador concludes by noting that while three Deputy Foreign Ministers have recently left Moscow, only one replacement has been announced. In his opinion this may presage a shake-up in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in which Vishinsky's position will bear watching.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Burmese Communist chief reported retreating toward India:

The leader of the Burma Communist Party, Thakin Than Tun, with 300 followers is reliably reported to have crossed the Irrawaddy River about 100 miles southwest of Mandalay in late June. The report states that the Communists have proceeded toward the mountains of Western Burma and that if blocked in an attempt to escape by turning to the north, they will try to reach Manipur Province in India. If not interned, they will later infiltrate back into Burma. (See map on following page)

Comment: The Burmese Army during the past months has successfully dispersed large concentrations of Communists in the same area of north-central Burma. The reported route of Than Tun's flight suggests an intent to circle around Burmese forces and establish a new Communist base in upper Burma near the China border.

Other reports, however, state that Than Tun fled eastward into the Shan foothills after government forces overran his headquarters in the Pyinmana area in May. Recent Communist raids on towns and communications, in central Burma and elsewhere in the country, are evidence that the party still maintains organized forces.

[PAGE 05]
THE UNION OF BURMA
Reported movement of Communist force from area of recent concentration

[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Tito desires strategic talks with the United States:

Marshal Tito has told Assistant Secretary of Defense Nash and Ambassador Allen that American-Yugoslav conversations on strategic and operational questions were "highly desirable." Tito agreed that Britain and France should be included. He added that his government also wished to consider the participation of Greece and Turkey, but he stressed that he did not wish to deal with an "organization."

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Yugoslavia has clearly indicated that it wishes to avoid direct contact with NATO. This is the first official Yugoslav statement of willingness to engage in talks which presumably will lead to limited joint military planning.

[PAGE 08]
7. French President makes unusual plea for American aid:

President Auriol of France has strongly urged that the United States reconsider its decision not to finance French military production to the extent requested by Defense Minister Pleven in May. He twice expressed his personal disappointment to Ambassador Dunn during the Bastille Day reception.

The Ambassador notes that the President very rarely intervenes in matters of this nature and interprets his action as an indication of the government's "serious concern."

Comment: President Auriol's intervention highlights the French Government's reluctance to publicize its bad budgetary position.
