[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

22 March 1958

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 March 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Two new Soviet nuclear explosions—
one at Semipalatinsk on 20 March
the other at Novaya Zemlya on 21 March.

USSR may have acquired re-entry
data from 30 January ICBM test
vehicle firing.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Army now said to plan
attack on Padang in second week
of April.

Japan planning to proceed with
private trade agreement with Com-
munist China, but seeks way to
satisfy some Chinese Nationalist
objections.

Libya - King Idriss may be con-
sidering important shifts in per-
sonnel and structure of government.

III. THE WEST

Gaillard continues to stall for
time on Tunisian issue; further
delay may lead Bourguiba to ap-
peal to UN Security Council.

France may test first nuclear
weapon late this year, possibly
in November.

[PAGE 04]
22 MARCH 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Two new Soviet nuclear explosions—
one at Semipalatinsk on 20 March
the other at Novaya Zemlya on 21 March.

USSR may have acquired re-entry
data from 30 January ICBM test
vehicle firing.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Army now said to plan
attack on Padang in second week
of April.

Japan planning to proceed with
private trade agreement with Com-
munist China, but seeks way to
satisfy some Chinese Nationalist
objections.

Libya - King Idriss may be con-
sidering important shifts in per-
sonnel and structure of government.

III. THE WEST

Gaillard continues to stall for
time on Tunisian issue; further
delay may lead Bourguiba to ap-
peal to UN Security Council.

France may test first nuclear
weapon late this year, possibly
in November.

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Latest Soviet nuclear tests: Two new Soviet nuclear
explosions have been reported by the US Atomic Energy
Detection System. The first occurred at the Semipalatinsk
proving ground on 20 March and the second in the Novaya
Zemlya area on 21 March.
(Page 1)

Soviet missile activity:
Tyura Tam launchings are intended to impact in the waters adjacent
to Kamchatka, and that the USSR may have acquired some
re-entry data from the 30 January firing.
(Page 2)

II. ASIA -AFRICA

Indonesia: The Indonesian army G-3 states an attack
on the dissident center of Padang is planned for the second
week of April. A dissident warning that an attempt will be
made to sabotage Caltex and Stanvac installations in Central
Sumatra rather than permit Djakarta to benefit from re-
newed operations is causing concern to company officials.
In North Sumatra, government forces claim to be success-
fully dispersing the dissident forces which withdrew from
Medan on 17 March.
(Page 3) (Map)

[PAGE 06]
Japan - Taiwan - Communist China: The Japanese
Government apparently has been prepared to endorse the
controversial private trade agreement with Communist
China, but, as a result of the severing of commercial
relations by Nationalist China, Tokyo is reviewing the
agreement. The Japanese probably will make their posi-
tion ambiguous in an attempt to placate both Peiping and
Taiwan. Tokyo states that for political reasons it cannot
risk rejecting the agreement and legally cannot prevent
a Communist mission from flying its national flag in
Japan.
(Page 4)

Libya: King Idriss may be considering important
shifts in both the personnel and structure of the Libyan
Government. He is reported to have decided that the
present federal system must give way to a strong central
government if Libya is to survive external pressures,
especially from Egypt.
(Page 5)

III. THE WEST

France - Tunisia: Gaillard continues to stall for time
on the Tunisian issue. Even if he defies rightist threats to
break up the coalition, Gaillard's poor opinion of Bourguiba
and the general political atmosphere in Paris make likely
continued French pressure for further Tunisian concessions
either through the good offices mission or in protracted
direct negotiations. Bourguiba, however, has probably al-
ready made the maximum concessions possible and further
prolonged delay would probably cause him to press for UN
Security Council action.
(Page 6)

France-- nuclear weapons: France's first nuclear weap-
on test appears to be planned for late 1958, possibly during
November, and will probably involve a low-yield device.
Several such experiments, some of them involving higher
yields, will probably be held in the ensuing months.
(Page 7) (Map)

22 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Latest Soviet Nuclear Tests

Two new Soviet nuclear explosions have been reported
by the US Atomic Energy Detection System as having oc-
curred in the widely separated Semipalatinsk and Novaya
Zemlya proving grounds on 20 and 21 March respectively.

The Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee at
0900 EST on 21 March issued the following statement:

An explosion has been reported by the Atomic
Energy Detection System as having occurred at about
1430 GMT 20 March 1958 in the vicinity of Semipalatinsk.

At 1600 EST on 21 March a second statement was is-
sued by the committee:

An explosion has been reported by the Atomic
Energy Detection System as having occurred at 0853
GMT 21 March 1958 in the vicinity of Novaya Zemlya
(74°N 55°E).

These tests bring to a total of 53 the number of nu-
clear explosions in the Soviet Union detected by the
USAEDS, ten of which have occurred since 1 January
1958. On two occasions, 27 February and 14 March, two
tests were conducted on the same day. The density of nu-
clear tests in the first three months of 1958 has been the
heaviest observed in the history of the Soviet nuclear weap-
ons development program.

[PAGE 08]
Soviet Missile Activity

Tyura Tam launchings are intended to im-
pact in the waters adjacent to Kamchatka, and that the USSR
may have acquired some re-entry data from the 30 January
firing.

The waters adjacent to the Kamchatka Peninsula were
the intended impact area, possibly for both the 30 January
and 12 March operations. Water impact has previously
been predicted as very likely by US intelligence.

In any event, it
seems clear that this test ICBM launched from Tyura Tam
achieved its intended range of about 3,500 nautical miles
and that the USSR may have acquired some re-entry data
from this firing.

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA--AFRICA

Situation in Indonesia

The Indonesian army G-3 states that an attack on Padang
is now set for the second week in April. It is likely that the
postponement of this operation from its previously scheduled
date of mid-March resulted at least partially from dissident
activity in North Sumatra in and around Medan.

The central government claims that its forces have sur-
rounded 300 men led by dissident leader Nainggolan who were
withdrawing from Medan and have cut off a possible escape
route by way of Lake Toba by destroying lake shipping. If
this is true, there appears to be little possibility that the
two battalions of dissident troops from Tapanuli who were
attempting to rendezvous with Nainggolan can reach him.

South Sumatran commander Lt. Col. Barlian, who has
remained neutral, is reported to have relieved a prodissi-
dent officer as town commander of Palembang on 17 March.
According to earlier evidence, some of Barlian's officers--
apparently led by the Palembang commander--had been con-
sidering a coup against him unless he declared for the dissi-
dents.

A threat by the revolutionary government that it may
sabotage Caltex and Stanvac installations in Central Sumatra
rather than permit Djakarta to benefit from their operations
is causing concern to company officials.

Djakarta has announced the return to a Dutch shipping
company of 37 merchant ships which had been impounded by
the Indonesian Government during the anti-Dutch campaign
in December. The ships, however, will not be permitted to
operate in Indonesian waters. Djakarta explained that they
are no longer needed since it has arranged to obtain Soviet
and other shipping. The government probably wants to avoid
further incidents resulting from Dutch seizures of these vessels
and prevent their possible use by the dissidents.

[PAGE 11]
Japan Considering Action on Trade Agreement With
Communist China

The Japanese Government apparently has been pre-
pared to endorse the controversial private trade agree-
ment with Communist China, but, as a result of the sever-
ing of commercial relations by Nationalist China, Tokyo
is reviewing the agreement. The Japanese probably will
make their position ambiguous in an attempt to placate
both Peiping and Taiwan.

Considerable controversy has resulted from provi-
sions in the agreement which would, if implemented, ex-
tend certain diplomatic privileges to a Communist trade
mission and permit it to fly the Chinese Communist flag
in Japan. Peiping has insisted that these provisions must
be accepted before Japanese trade with the China mainland,
pressures for which are severe in Japan, can increase.

The Kishi government has indicated that it cannot, in
the face of national elections this year, risk rejecting the
agreement nor can it legally prevent the Communist mis-
sion from flying the flag. Tokyo consistently has main-
tained that endorsement of the agreement would not con-
stitute recognition of Peiping.

[PAGE 12]
Libyan King May Re-organize Government

King Idriss is reported planning to abolish Libya's
present provincial federation and replace it with a strong,
centralized government. The King's plan, motivated
largely by his concern over rising Egyptian influence in
Libya, would include the appointment of a new cabinet to
succeed the one now headed by Prime Minister Kubaar,
who is said to have lost the King's confidence. No action
is to be taken until after the Moslem holy month of Ramadan,
which ends on the night of 19-20 April.

A reorganization would require an understanding with
such influential provincial leaders as the governor of
Cyrenaica, Husayn Maziq, who may be a strong candidate
for the new premiership. Failure to compensate key polit-
ical figures for their loss of autonomy under a central gov-
ernment would probably cause local dissatisfaction of signif-
icant proportions. The King's popularity in Cyrenaica and
the support which he appears to have from Maziq and the
commander of the powerful Cyrenaican Defense Force,
General Bu Qwaytin, would guarantee the approval of the
province.

Tripolitania, where a newly elected legislative as-
sembly reflects strong pro-Egyptian sentiment, is likely
to react unfavorably, however. Libya's remaining province,
the Fezzan, is also jealous of its autonomy and has resented
central government interference in the past but possesses
little opposition potential.

Libya's internal security forces, including the Cyre-
naican Defense Force, are probably capable of enforcing
the King's will.

[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

France - Tunisia

French Premier Gaillard continues to stall for time on
the Tunisian issue. He appears to be making every effort to
keep cabinet discussion away from the specific terms of
Bourguiba's recent proposal through the good offices mis-
sion and to concentrate instead on the possibility of resum-
ing direct negotiations. Paris observers now are more opti-
mistic about chances for a solution, largely on the strength
of the favorable impression made on French political leaders
by President Bourguiba's relatively moderate Independence
Day speech on 20 March.

The success of Gaillard's delaying tactics, by which he
hopes to avoid a cabinet crisis before the beginning of the vaca-
tion period on 28 March, will depend on rightist willingness to
risk a showdown. Die-hards in the Independent party's right
wing continue to be opposed to any concessions and they have
Social Republican, Dissident Radical, and Poujadist support.
Nevertheless, they still have to convince the rest of their par-
ty that Gaillard is arranging a giveaway in North Africa and
his careful avoidance of specifics will increase their difficulty
in securing a decision to abandon the coalition.

Even if successful in this maneuver, however, Gaillard's
poor opinion of Bourguiba and the general political atmosphere
in Paris make likely continued French efforts to obtain further
Tunisian concessions. This may be done either through pres-
sure on the good offices mission or in protracted direct negotia-
tions.

Bourguiba, however, has probably already made the maxi-
mum concessions possible in the face of continued criticism that
his reliance on American-British good offices has thus far proved
fruitless. Unless he achieves at least partial fulfillment of his
objective--the evacuation of French forces--in the near future
he probably will press for UN Security Council action.

[PAGE 14]
Phillisville
Algiers
Bougie
Tunis
TUNISIA
Gabes
Zuara
Tripoli
LIBYA
Casablanca
Colomb Bechar
In Salah
ZAOUIET REGGANE
ALGERIA
MAURITANIA
SUDAN
NIGER
TCHAD
FRENCH WEST AFRICA
FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA
FEZZAN

[PAGE 15]
France Reported Planning Nuclear Weapon Test
In November

France intends to test at least one, and probably
several, nuclear weapons "within the next calendar year."
He said the first test would take place in late 1958,
possibly November, and might involve a 25-kiloton device.
A "small series" of tests "running over into the summer
of 1959," some of them involving higher yield devices, is
envisaged. A previous report pinpointed the planned
French test site at Zaouiet Reggane in southern Algeria,
where construction of the testing facilities is to begin
this spring.

French politicians are
agitating for early testing of at least one nuclear weapon,
and that the Special Arms Service of the French AEC ex-

Reports of French nuclear capabilities and intentions
which indicate that production at the Marcoule atomic
center in southern France will yield enough plutonium
by the end of 1958 for one and possibly two 25-kiloton
weapons. Some opposition to the nuclear weapons pro-
gram still exists within the French Government, but
military and other elements seem determined to go ahead
with it.

[PAGE 16]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

22 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Latest Soviet nuclear tests: Two new Soviet nuclear
explosions have been reported by the US Atomic Energy
Detection System. The first occurred at the Semipalatinsk
proving ground on 20 March and the second in the Novaya
Zemlya area on 21 March.
(Page 1)

Soviet missile activity:
Tyura Tam launchings are intended to impact in the waters adjacent
to Kamchatka, and that the USSR may have acquired some
re-entry data from the 30 January firing.
(Page 2)
