Salvadoran Communists Join in Strong Leftist Bid for Power

Communists and other leftist elements in El Salvador launched a strong bid for power on 1 November, less than a week after the military coup that ousted the Lemus administration. Leftist demands, circulated in street manifestoes and in Communist-prepared radiobroadcasts, call for the immediate elimination from the governing junta and the cabinet of the "tools" of ex-President Osorio, who, they charge, is responsible for "all the political, moral, and administrative ills" of the country. The three military members of the six-man junta and the three military cabinet members are all known supporters of Osorio, who is probably the most influential military figure in the country. The demands, therefore, are in effect a call for the removal of all military officers from leading positions in the civil government. Under present circumstances, this would mean turning the regime over to the highly articulate leftists, who are strongly influenced by the Communists.

Osorio, who as president from 1950 to 1956 inaugurated moderate reforms designed to alleviate the country's deep-seated socio-economic problems, masterminded the coup against Lemus. He retains wide popularity among lower income groups and sought to win leftist backing for the junta by having leftists included in the provisional government. Osorio apparently intended to play a dominant role in the provisional government from behind the scenes. Now, however, he is reported to be very uneasy and worried, and his friends fear he may lose control.

The situation appears to be moving rapidly toward an open clash between the military and the civilian mobs stirred up by Communist agitation. Although the military is still the major force in the country, sources of the American Embassy claim that the army is split with internal dissension and may be seriously weakened. Unless Osorio or another popular military figure shows decisive leadership in meeting the leftist challenge, the Salvadoran Government could soon become completely dominated by pro-Communist elements. Such a development would have very serious implications for the stability of other Central American governments, particularly Guatemala and Nicaragua.
