LATE ITEM

Dissident Iraqi Tribal Elements Continue Resistance

The Iraqi Army's show of force in the Kurdish mountain coun-
try near Iraq's frontier with Iran and Turkey appears to have pro-
voked tribal resistance to such an extent that in some instances
the position of isolated security posts has been described as "crit-
ical." tribal
attacks were still being carried out against scattered police posts
in the area northeast of the town of Erbil, although it had been
reported that resistance in the northernmost portion of the area
was overcome on 1 May. The army operation, which began about
27 April, involves one brigade.

The strength of the tribal forces involved is not known, but the
700-800 Kurdish refugees who obtained asylum in southern Turkey
last week allegedly left behind 1,500 able-bodied fighting men.
They are attacking the police posts probably to capture additional
arms.

the tribes are using hit-and-run tactics,
firing two-inch mortar shells,
"bombs" suspended from their belts, and
the attack was being pressed with machine guns
and hand grenades.

"foreign
soldiers" were "believed" to be among the dissidents and that the
"rebels" were being reinforced with Turkish and Iranian tribes-
men will strengthen Baghdad's belief that these troubles are a re-
sult of foreign intervention. Prime Minister Qasim last week
voiced to Ambassador Jernegan his suspicion that the United
as well as Turkey and Iran, was involved in these activities.

There is as yet no evidence that the fighting in northeastern
Iraq has been coordinated with any new effort by the dissident
Shammar tribal elements, armed and encouraged by the UAR,
along Iraq's northwestern frontier with Syria. The UAR began
on 3 May to give heavy propaganda play to the Kurdish trouble,
however, and Cairo and Damascus may seek quickly to develop
new operations by the Shammar.
an intertribal clash involving the Shammar and the nor-
mally loyal Yazidi, probably in the area north of Mosul.
