[PAGE 01]
29 March 1961
Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
29 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. France: Fourth nuclear test planned for 15 April.
(Page i)

4. South Vietnam: Army officers discontented over gov-
ernment's failure to check Communist guerrilla activ-
ities. (Page ii)

5. Iraq: Anti-regime demonstrations continued in Baghdad
on 28 March. (Page ii)

8. Tanganyika: Britain to be urged to announce early date
for independence. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

29 March 1961

DAILY BRIEF

France: The next French nuclear test is planned for 15
April at the Reggane test center, or as soon thereafter as
meteorological and operational conditions permit.
this test, the fourth conducted by France
since 13 February 1960, will be France's last atmospheric
test, and further tests beginning in the fall of 1961 will be un-
derground. Since the resumption of the Geneva talks, the So-
viet delegation has emphasized that continued French testing
would make a test ban treaty "pointless," and Moscow is likely
to issue an official warning to the US and Britain following the
next test.

The French test is certain to bring re-
newed protests from African states and may possibly compli-
cate negotiations between France and representatives of the
Algerian rebel government which are scheduled to open on 7
April.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
South Vietnam: Growing discontent is reported among
middle- and junior-grade officers of the South Vietnamese
armed forces over the government's failure to check Commu-
nist guerrilla successes and to rally popular support; in addi-
tion, the officers are fearful that the Communists themselves
might initiate an ostensibly non-Communist coup.

discontent in the officer corps is greater than at any time
since last November's attempted coup d'etat against President
Diem. A restraining factor, however, is the realization that,
without effective alternative leadership, any effort to replace
Diem could lead to a Communist takeover.
(Backup, Page 6)

Iraq: The anti-regime demonstrations in Baghdad con-
tinued on 28 March despite troops firing on demonstrators
late Monday. Baghdad University is closed and its students

29 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 08]
TANGANYIKA

29 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page

[PAGE 09]
have joined the strike. A large part of the population is ac-
tively in sympathy with the strikers. Military Governor Abdi
has cordoned off the nationalist quarter of Baghdad with troops
and ordered a curfew. Troops have been ordered to shoot on
sight anyone entering the quarter.
(Map)

Tanganyika-UK: Julius Nyerere, chief minister of Tanganyi-
ka, is expected to urge British Colonial Secretary Macleod, who
is chairing the constitutional conference now under way in Tan-
ganyika's capital, Dar es Salaam, to announce an early date--pos-
sibly 1 October--for the independence of this East African trust
territory.

29 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 10]
territory. While Macleod is expected to agree to eliminate
the few remaining British controls over Tanganyika's internal
affairs, he will probably attempt to maintain Britain's present
schedule, which calls for independence in 1962, unless he is
convinced that Nyerere's prestige would otherwise seriously
decline.
(Backup, Page 10) (Map)

29 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 11]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 12]
Growing Discontent Among South Vietnamese Military Officers

Professional officers in South Vietnam have long felt
that their operations against the Communist guerrillas were ham-
pered by political interference in assignments and field orders
as well as by inadequate intelligence and faulty command
structure. They have also been concerned that President Diem's
reluctance to reform his authoritarian rule and his suppression
of non-Communist political opponents are facilitating the Commu-
nist drive to take over South Vietnam.

While the bulk of army units remained loyal to Diem in
last fall's paratroop revolt, the coup attempt increased the of-
ficers' awareness of the army's political potential. The govern-
ment's subsequent mistrust of officers who did not give all-out
support to Diem has also had an unsettling effect. Diem's foot-
dragging in carrying out a promised government reorganization
prompted to express doubt that Diem
intended to do more than replace one group of "yes men" with
another; a similar complaint was made recently by
Early this month, a rank-
ing officer of the 1st Infantry Division defected to the Commu-
nists.

Uneasiness in the armed forces is intensified by the pros-
pect of a major Communist political and military effort to dis-
rupt the presidential election on 9 April. Recent open Commu-
nist efforts to win the cooperation of non-Communists in front
activity aimed at Diem's overthrow reportedly have led to
some military talk of a "preventive coup."

29 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 13]
IRAQ

29 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page

[PAGE 14]
Baghdad Demonstrations Growing More Serious

Prime Minister Qasim returned to Baghdad from Basra
on the night of 27 March in the face of increasing open hos-
tility throughout the country. The strike began as a protest
by taxi and bus drivers against an increase in the price of
gasoline but expanded into an anti-regime movement by var-
ious elements, including the Communists. Led by Baghdad
University students, demonstrators stoned buses again on 28
March in downtown Baghdad. Numerous shops have closed
after pressure from students for a general strike. Al-
though troops fired on demonstrators on 27 March, they may
be reluctant to carry out extreme repressive measures against
a cause supported by the general populace. Sympathy strikes
have broken out in Kirkuk and Mosul in the north and Najaf
and Karbala in the south.

Recurring strife between groups of Kurdish tribesmen
in the Mosul-Kirkuk area appears to be increasing, although
Iraqi security authorities so far have relied on police detach-
ments to maintain order. While army troops have not yet been
involved in the tribal difficulties, the regime is not likely to
call them to Baghdad to assist in putting down the rioting there.

The disorders in Baghdad may weaken the effect of recent
moves against the Communists by the Qasim regime, unless
Communist participation can be demonstrated. Qasim, in a
speech on 28 March, blamed "imperialists and foreign com-
panies," an apparent slap at the Iraq Petroleum Company, with
which he has been engaged in fruitless negotiations for some
months.

29 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 15]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 16]
Tanganyika to Seek Independence at Constitutional Conference

The conference began on 27 March in an atmosphere of
general good feeling and is expected to adjourn on 30 March
without serious difficulties. The only problems expected to
arise are those related to the actual date for independence
and the terms of separation pay for the departing British civil
servants.

London has already promised early independence for
Tanganyika but is reluctant to set a date earlier than 1962 be-
cause of the political situation in Britain and in its other Af-
rican territories. Nyerere, an able and moderate national-
ist, reportedly told Minister of Home Affairs Kahama that
he is determined to hold out for independence in 1961. Nyerere
probably hopes that by taking a strong position at the confer-
ence he can appease the more radical members of his own
party and undermine the popularity of the tribal--and increas-
ingly extremist--African National Congress (ANC).

The Colonial Office has already assured Nyerere that
Tanganyika can achieve "full internal self-government" at his
discretion--probably in June 1961. This would include re-
moving Governor Sir Richard Turnbull as chairman of the
Council of Ministers (cabinet) and replacing him in that capac-
ity by Nyerere, possibly eliminating the post of deputy gover-
nor, and replacing the two remaining government ministers
with elected African ministers acceptable to Nyerere. Macleod
is also expected to agree to an early transfer to the Tanganyika
Government of control over the remaining expatriate civil serv-
ants and to make a generous offer regarding salaries and sep-
aration pay.

29 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 10

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 19]
TOP SECRET
