Japanese Government Plans Election Test

Prime Minister Ikeda announced on 15 August that the lower house of the Diet would probably be dissolved in early November and that general elections would be held soon thereafter. An official spokesman in the prime minister's office indicated later that dissolution and elections might be held even earlier.

Ikeda is anxious to satisfy public expectations that he will seek an early popular mandate in order to dissociate his administration completely from the Kishi government. In addition, he has been encouraged by decisive conservative victories in gubernatorial contests in Aomori, Saitama, and Gumma prefectures. In these elections, the Socialist party failed to arouse public opinion against the US-Japanese security treaty, and apparently suffered because of its strong-arm tactics in the Diet and encouragement of mob action outside. Like the Socialists, the more moderate Democratic Socialist party is short of funds and lacks an exploitable issue.

Ikeda has promoted popular support by announcing his intention to reduce some taxes and expand social welfare services, including financial assistance for retraining and relocating unemployed workers. Ikeda may also be consolidating his control of the conservatives, a cardinal element in his efforts to achieve political stability in Japan. He has an able, if not well known, cabinet supported by most LDP factions. A threat by Ichiro Kono, a bitter intraparty rival, to form a new conservative party in order to preclude "despotic rule" by Ikeda thus far has not been supported by other LDP factions and may actually be an acknowledgment of Ikeda's strength.

Nationwide polls conducted in August by the large Asahi and Mainichi newspapers indicate that the LDP has regained the public support it lost during the May-June political crisis and that both Socialist parties have less support. Results of the Asahi poll indicate that the Ikeda cabinet now has public support second only to that accorded the Yoshida cabinet which was in office at the time the peace treaty was signed in 1951. In both polls, almost two out of every three persons who responded indicated a preference for the LDP. They also reveal that all but a small, active minority of the Japanese populace continues to be politically apathetic toward the security alliance with the United States.

18 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
