[PAGE 01]
22 June 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Venezuela breaks relations with Czechoslovakia (page 3).
2. Venezuela reportedly will give no further basis for Soviet complaints (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Militant Moslem organization plans outbreaks in Indonesia (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

4. Pakistan intends to terminate Kashmir negotiations by 28 June (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Pinay conciliates Gaullist dissidents on foreign policy (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

7. Agrarian reform law may cause revolution in Guatemala (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Venezuela breaks relations with Czechoslovakia:

Venezuela broke diplomatic relations with Czechoslovakia on 20 June after the Czech Minister presented a Soviet note which the Venezuelan Foreign Ministry considered unacceptable.

Comment: The break with Czechoslovakia occurred within a week of the Venezuelan rupture with the USSR. In both cases, Venezuela apparently seized an opportune moment to make a break. There are no other Orbit diplomatic missions in Venezuela.

Czech diplomatic missions in Latin America have been active in gathering intelligence and in promoting trade transactions, both legal and illegal, designed to alleviate the "dollar shortage" in Czechoslovakia.

2. Venezuela reportedly will give no further basis for Soviet complaints:

In an interview with the Venezuelan Foreign Minister, Ambassador Warren received the impression that the Venezuelan Government is now fully aware of the possible international repercussions of its treatment of Soviet Embassy personnel.

The Foreign Minister asked for suggestions on how to handle the departure of the Russians most courteously and indicated that, following their departure, he would counter TASS accusations with a communique stressing the courtesies extended.

Ambassador Warren states that the report on the incident by the International Red Cross representative is favorable to Venezuela.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Militant Moslem organization plans outbreaks in Indonesia:

the Darul Islam, a fanatic Moslem organization, plans to create disturbances in the cities of West Java, including Djakarta, during the Moslem New Year holiday, 22-24 June. Authorities are taking precautions to prevent serious trouble.

Comment: The Darul Islam is a well-armed organization with possibly 10,000 members which is seeking to establish a theocratic state in Java.

While government forces will probably be able to suppress any Darul Islam outbreaks in the West Java cities, this report demonstrates the continuation of insecure conditions in Indonesia, which are seriously hampering the development of the country's economy and reducing popular confidence in the government.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Pakistan intends to terminate Kashmir negotiations by 28 June:

Pakistan's Chief UN delegate, Bokhari, informed American delegates in New York on 19 June that Pakistan would break off the Kashmir discussions by 28 June. He added that since UN representative Graham has made no proposals of his own, the Security Council should now concern itself with this question.

According to Bokhari, Pakistan has in the past acquiesced to proposals only to have India reject them. Pakistan would in the future, therefore, require prior agreement by India before it would consider any new proposals.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
Comment: It is unlikely that Pakistan intends to break off all further discussion or to take steps leading to military action. It appears that Pakistan wants India to be forced into a more conciliatory position on compromise either by the Security Council or by the United States and Great Britain.

Discussions in the Security Council might lead to further complications while the USSR has the chair this month.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Pinay conciliates Gaullist dissidents on foreign policy:

The American Embassy in Paris believes that the rapprochement between the French Government coalition and the Gaullist dissidents has made further progress and is already influencing French foreign policy.

In recent talks held by Premier Pinay and Defense Minister Pleven with Gaullists who are cooperating with the government, the Premier played down the European Defense Community treaty as an obstacle to their cooperation. In subsequent debates this group showed "remarkable" restraint toward the treaty. The Embassy concludes that, as a concession, the government will continue to postpone scheduling parliamentary debate on the treaty's ratification.

Comment: This development reduces the possibility that De Gaulle can force the fall of the government later this year on foreign policy issues.

On the other hand, the already evident coolness within the Pinay government toward present defense policies can now be expected to develop into a more critical approach in relations with the United States.

LATIN AMERICA

7. Agrarian reform law may cause revolution in Guatemala:

Unrest in Guatemala has been aggravated by the passage on 17 June of the agrarian reform law. There have been scattered riots in rural areas, attempts have been made to dynamite hydroelectric plants in several cities, and there have reportedly been numerous arrests. A revolution may be inspired by large landowners and other anti-Communists.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
President Arbenz and administration leaders had repeatedly stated their determination to see the law enacted "even at the risk of civil war." The President has ordered all firearm licenses revoked. Military planes have started patrol flights over the entire country.

Comment: There is no evidence that the widespread antigovernment and anti-Communist activity is now sufficiently coordinated for a successful revolution.

The Chief of the Armed Forces has declared his firm support for the government and the agrarian reform law, but some elements of the army may turn against the government. If rioting gets out of control, however, the army may feel compelled to take over the government to restore order.

- 7 -
