[PAGE 01]
12 December 1960

Copy No. Ed-5

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

12 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

International Communism: The second document issued by the November Moscow meeting of world Communist lead-ers--a so-called "Peace Appeal"--is similar in form and content to the Peace Manifesto issued in 1957 at the conclu-sion of an earlier meeting of world Communists, emphasize-ing both their "overwhelming desire for peace" and their be-lief that war can be prevented. The recent appeal is a pedes-trian propaganda statement whose calls for "complete and controlled disarmament," nuclear-free zones, and opposition to testing of nuclear weapons merely repeat long-standing Soviet foreign policy themes.

Paralleling some of the ambiguity of the much longer declarations issued on 6 December, the "Peace Appeal" takes an aggressive tack on colonialism and imperialism and reit-erates that war is a continuing danger because of the existence of imperialism generally, and "American imperialism" specif-ically.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
*France-Algeria: Disturbances in Algeria have assumed critical proportions with thousands of Moslems participating for the first time. French Army troops have been forced to act against the Moslems. The French troops had adopted a "passive" defense against European demonstrators, leaving the active burden to security police. The European group, who will be angered by the Moslem action, has appeared poorly or-ganized but might gain cohesion if either or both of the rightist leaders Pierre Lagaillarde and General Salan reach Algeria from Spain.

Laos: Military reinforcements for a possible attack on Vientiane by General Phoumi apparently are continuing to ar-rive in that area. In the capital itself, an extreme leftist cab-inet minister, Quinim Pholsena, reportedly has taken charge of the government in the absence of Souvanna and the remain-der of his cabinet. Souvanna, now in Phnom Penh, is said by his associates to be planning to send some cabinet members to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping to seek active support for the neu-tralization of Laos as formerly proposed by Cambodian chief of state Prince Sihanouk. Meanwhile, observed four howitzers, approximately equivalent to US 105-mm. howitzers, being unloaded from two Soviet aircraft at Vientiane airfield; this material, probably the forerunner of other supplies, may have been arranged for during Quinim Phol-sena's recent trip to Hanoi.

12 Dec 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in Laos

Vientiane continues under the threat of an early attack by General Phoumi's forces, which apparently are continu-ing their buildup in the area.

The Savannakhet troops under the command of Phoumi are being organized into three groups for an attack on the capital from the north, east, and west and will have two batteries of 105-mm. howitzers for artillery support. Phoumi is said to be planning his attack on 12 or 13 December, the precise timing dependent on the arrival of his troops at their positions. Kong Le's forces, who still con-trol the airfield, apparently have received some artillery brought in by Soviet aircraft. On 11 December report they saw four howitzers, approximately equivalent to US-105s, unloaded from two Soviet planes and towed to an im-provised gun park within an old aircraft revetment on Vientiane airfield.

Quinim Pholsena, extreme leftist minister of information in Premier Souvanna Phouma's cabinet, is reported to have taken over the government in Vientiane in the absence of Souvanna and other cabinet ministers who flew to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, on 9 December. An 11 December communique of the military committee that assumed control when Souvanna fled stated that it had, as of noon, returned all civil and military powers "to the government"--presumably to Quinim as the remaining min-ister. Quinim visited Sam Neua on 9 December, probably to discuss Pathet Lao intentions with Prince Souphanouvong, and on 10 December made a hurried visit to Hanoi, where he may have arranged for the supply of artillery and possibly other ma-teriel to follow.

In Phnom Penh, Souvanna Phouma plans to remain there for a time but intends to send some of the cabinet ministers now with him to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping in order to seek support for the plan of Cambodian chief

12 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
of state Sihanouk for neutralization of Laos. Souvanna hinted that his emissaries would also "publicize" Vientiane charges of US intervention in Laotian affairs.

Efforts are still being made, meanwhile, to convene a meeting of the National Assembly, a large number of whose members are now in Savannakhet, for the purpose of taking steps to establish a new legal government in Laos.

SECRET

12 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
