[PAGE 01]
12 December 1960

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
12 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Communist meeting's new "Peace Appeal" sharply attacks colonialism and imperialism as breeding danger of new war.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo--Colonel Mobutu agrees to formation of permanent government and reopening of parliament next month if proposed new government is acceptable to him and Kasavubu.

Algerian rioting forces French Army troops to act against Moslem demonstrators.

The situation in Laos.

III. THE WEST

Pressure mounting in Ecuador for establishing relations with USSR and Communist China owing guarantor powers' declaration on Ecuadorean-Peruvian border dispute.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
12 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

International Communism: The second document issued by the November Moscow meeting of world Communist leaders--a so-called "Peace Appeal"--is similar in form and content to the Peace Manifesto issued in 1957 at the conclusion of an earlier meeting of world Communists, emphasizing both their "overwhelming desire for peace" and their belief that war can be prevented. The recent appeal is a pedestrian propaganda statement whose calls for "complete and controlled disarmament," nuclear-free zones, and opposition to testing of nuclear weapons merely repeat long-standing Soviet foreign policy themes.

Paralleling some of the ambiguity of the much longer declarations issued on 6 December, the "Peace Appeal" takes an aggressive tack on colonialism and imperialism and reiterates that war is a continuing danger because of the existence of imperialism generally, and "American imperialism" specifically.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo: Colonel Mobutu reportedly has agreed to the formation of a permanent government and the reopening of parliament on 10 January 1961, provided that most members of parliament are able to reach Leopoldville by then and any proposed government is acceptable to himself and Kasavubu. He remains contemptuous of Kasavubu's supporters, however, and might still try to install a government of his own choosing.

Meanwhile, Ghanaian President Nkrumah appears to be attempting to persuade Nasir to leave the UAR's troops in the Congo. Nkrumah apparently has secured Nasir's agreement to begin the formation of an African military command outside the UN framework, and two Egyptian officers are to be sent to Ghana for this purpose. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
France-Algeria: Disturbances in Algeria have assumed critical proportions with thousands of Moslems participating for the first time. French Army troops have been forced to act against the Moslems. The French troops had adopted a "passive" defense against European demonstrators, leaving the active burden to security police. The European group, who will be angered by the Moslem action, has appeared poorly organized but might gain cohesion if either or both of the rightist leaders Pierre Lagaillarde and General Salan reach Algeria from Spain.

Laos: Military reinforcements for a possible attack on Vientiane by General Phoumi apparently are continuing to arrive in that area. In the capital itself, an extreme leftist cabinet minister, Quinim Pholsena, reportedly has taken charge of the government in the absence of Souvanna and the remainder of his cabinet. Souvanna, now in Phnom Penh, is said by his associates to be planning to send some cabinet members to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping to seek active support for the neutralization of Laos as formerly proposed by Cambodian chief of state Prince Sihanouk. Meanwhile, observed four howitzers, approximately equivalent to US 105-mm. howitzers, being unloaded from two Soviet aircraft at Vientiane airfield; this materiel, probably the forerunner of other supplies, may have been arranged for during Quinim Pholsena's recent trip to Hanoi. (Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Ecuador: Anti-US sentiment is increasing in Ecuador and pressure is building up for the establishment of relations with the USSR and Communist China as a result of the 7 December declaration by the guarantor powers of the Rio Protocol. The guarantors are the United States, Brazil, Chile, and Argentina. The declaration upheld the validity of the Rio Protocol of 1942, which provides for a definitive settlement of the border dispute between Ecuador and Peru, and denied the right of either country to renounce the protocol unilaterally. Anti-US fervor has been whipped up by speeches of the

12 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Situation in the Congo

Colonel Mobutu, who earlier had threatened to continue the college of commissioners in office indefinitely as the de facto cabinet of the Congo, reportedly has agreed to the reopening of parliament and the formation of a permanent government on 10 January 1961. He stipulated, however, that most members of parliament must be in Leopoldville by then and that any proposed government must be acceptable to himself and Kasavubu. At the same time, Mobutu is moving to confirm his support among Congolese Army officers. He remains contemptuous of Kasavubu's supporters and might still try to install a government of his own choosing.

In Orientale Province, although the Lumumbist-dominated government has not implemented its reported threat to behead some Belgians, tension remains high. The African population of Stanleyville reportedly has been made extremely anti-white by Lumumbist propaganda. Whites are also at the mercy of pro-Lumumba troops, who reportedly retain much of their military discipline. Forces loyal to Mobutu apparently remain in their camp across the river from the city and are afraid to interfere.

Meanwhile, Ghanaian President Nkrumah has attempted to persuade Nasir to leave the UAR's troops in the Congo. Nkrumah, stating that he would not withdraw Ghana's forces, told the ambassador on 9 December that withdrawal would mean a "victory for imperialism." Instead, he urged that troops from the two countries be the nucleus for a unified African command which would operate outside the framework of the UN. Nasir apparently has agreed to begin the formation of a unified command, and two Egyptian officers are to be sent to Accra for this purpose. Although Nasir has urged several Afro-Asian states to withdraw their forces and has announced that his own will go, the UAR contingent in northern Congo apparently has not received orders to leave.
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in Laos

Vientiane continues under the threat of an early attack by General Phoumi's forces, which apparently are continuing their buildup in the area.

the Savannakhet troops under the command of Phoumi are being organized into three groups for an attack on the capital from the north, east, and west and will have two batteries of 105-mm. howitzers for artillery support. Phoumi is said to be planning his attack on 12 or 13 December, the precise timing dependent on the arrival of his troops at their positions. Kong Le's forces, who still control the airfield, apparently have received some artillery brought in by Soviet aircraft. On 11 December report they saw four howitzers, approximately equivalent to US-105s, unloaded from two Soviet planes and towed to an improvised gun park within an old aircraft revetment on Vientiane airfield.

Quinim Pholsena, extreme leftist minister of information in Premier Souvanna Phouma's cabinet, is reported to have taken over the government in Vientiane in the absence of Souvanna and other cabinet ministers who flew to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, on 9 December. An 11 December communique of the military committee that assumed control when Souvanna fled stated that it had, as of noon, returned all civil and military powers "to the government"--presumably to Quinim as the remaining minister. Quinim visited Sam Neua on 9 December, probably to discuss Pathet Lao intentions with Prince Souphanouvong, and on 10 December made a hurried visit to Hanoi, where he may have arranged for the supply of artillery and possibly other materiel to follow.

In Phnom Penh, Souvanna Phouma plans to remain there for a time but intends to send some of the cabinet ministers now with him to Hanoi, Moscow, and Peiping in order to seek support for the plan of Cambodian chief
[PAGE 09]
of state Sihanouk for neutralization of Laos. Souvanna hinted that his emissaries would also "publicize" Vientiane charges of US intervention in Laotian affairs.

Efforts are still being made, meanwhile, to convene a meeting of the National Assembly, a large number of whose members are now in Savannakhet, for the purpose of taking steps to establish a new legal government in Laos.

General Phoumi has received a favorable preliminary response from King Savang to a plan to hold such a meeting at an early date in Luang Prabang.
[PAGE 10]
Developments in the Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute

Anti-US sentiment and pressures for the establishment of relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc are building up in Ecuador as a result of the 7 December declaration by the guarantor powers to the 1942 Rio Protocol, which provides for definitive settlement of the long-standing boundary dispute between Peru and Ecuador. The guarantor powers are the US, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile; the declaration, which was issued largely because of Ecuador's provocative campaign denouncing the protocol as null and void, upheld its validity and denied the right of either Peru or Ecuador to denounce it unilaterally.

Although Argentina, Brazil, and Chile have expressed grave concern over President Velasco's frequent attacks on the protocol and have insisted on a firm guarantor position supporting it, pro-Communist and other extremist elements in Ecuador have thus far concentrated most of their attacks on the US. These attacks include inflammatory speeches and releases by public information media and demonstrations against the US Embassy in Quito. In view of earlier Ecuadorean Government warnings that there would be strong anti-US reactions if the guarantors made any statement upholding the validity of the protocol, the inadequate security protection provided at first for the US Embassy suggests tacit official approval or even complicity in the present outbreaks. The pro-Castro anti-US minister of government, Manuel Araujo, who controls the police forces and is responsible for maintenance of law and order, reportedly told demonstrators that the US was no friend of Ecuador and the nation would have to turn to the USSR and the Soviet bloc--presumably for support on the border issue and other types of aid.

he believed the US position in Ecuador was "lost for ten or twenty years" and also blamed the US for the declaration.
demands from unidentified quarters for the establishment of relations with the USSR
[PAGE 11]
and Communist China and asserted he would not be surprised if Cuba shortly sent a "mission" to Ecuador. He had previously implied that Ecuador could win Cuban and Soviet bloc support for its case in the UN. President Velasco, whose attacks on the protocol began even before he took office last September, has reportedly made a similar threat to ally with Cuba to win backing for Ecuador's position.

Ecuador has solicited and received expressions of sympathy from Cuba for its attitude toward the treaty, which Peru seeks to enforce to the letter because of its favorable award of territory disputed for more than a century.

Castro influence in Ecuador is relatively strong, especially among leftist student, intellectual, and political groups. Araujo, a strong supporter of Velasco, is the key pro-Castro supporter in the government, although a number of other officials may also be sympathetic.

In Peru, where the declaration is considered a vindication of the sanctity of treaties and international law, the official and public reaction has been unanimously favorable and bordering on elation.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
