[PAGE 01]
8 February 1953
Copy No. 59
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Soviet service attaches in Mexico reportedly expect war in about
six months (page 3).
2. Owner professedly seeking pretext to divert China-bound Finnish
tanker (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

NEAR EAST -- AFRICA
(page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
5. Yugoslav Government reportedly anxious over US Seventh Fleet
decision (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

Soviet service attaches in Mexico reportedly expect war in about six
months:
Soviet Military and Naval
Attaches stated in late January that they
believed war might begin in about six months. They hoped to leave Mexico soon in order to avoid internment.

The Military
Attache and his assistant were scheduled to leave Mexico on 5 February. No reservation was made for the Military Attache's wife.

Comment: There is no indication of a general exodus of Soviet diplomatic personnel from posts outside the Orbit.

Soviet representatives in the field are probably
not informed either on the Kremlin's estimate of the situation or on war
intentions. The views expressed by these attaches are presumed to be
personal; they are, however, consonant with Communist propaganda on
alleged American plans to enlarge hostilities in the Far East.

Owner professedly seeking pretext to divert China-bound Finnish tanker:
The owner of the tanker Wiima, which is now
en route to Communist China loaded with ker-
osene, told the American Legation in Helsinki
on 6 February that he would be glad of a "legit-
imate pretext" to cancel the charter and divert the vessel from its des-
tination. He said that an American declaration of a blockade of the China
coast would be grounds for breaking the contract.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: The owner did not indicate whether
a Chinese Nationalist blockade would be a "legitimate pretext."

A Nationalist Navy spokesman stated on 6 Feb-
ruary that the navy had been alerted to "watch for" the Wiima, which
should be in Formosan waters about 20 February if not diverted. The
Wiima could avoid the Nationalists by putting in at Canton or by sailing
far east of Formosa.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

NEAR EAST -- AFRICA
dissension within Egyptian army:
opposition to the Nagib
regime had developed in the Egyptian Army
as a result of the 15 January arrest of 25
army officers, including Colonel Mohanna,
former member of the Regency Council.

[PAGE 05]
The Ambassador said that artillery units in
Cairo had "acted in a rebellious manner" and demanded the release of
those arrested, most of whom were artillery officers. He added that
anti-government sentiment had also appeared among the army's non-
commissioned officers.

Comment: This is the most specific report
yet received of serious dissension within the Egyptian Army.

EASTERN EUROPE

Yugoslav Government reportedly anxious over US Seventh Fleet decision:
The lifting of the blockade of the Formosa
channel and President Eisenhower's message
to the United States Congress are causing anx-
iety in Yugoslav government

Comment: The government-controlled Yugo-
slav press has expressed dissatisfaction with the decision to lift the
Formosa channel blockade on the grounds that it increases the possi-
bility that the Korean war will be extended and thus enable the Soviet
Union to tighten its grip on China.
