[PAGE 01]
9 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
Japan-USSR: Tokyo apparently is prepared to break off the current annual fishery negotiations with the Soviet Union and to conduct fishing operations in the western Pacific without an agreement if Moscow refuses to agree to reasonable quotas for the Japanese salmon catch.

Arab League - France: The UAR-dominated Arab League Council will hold an emergency session in Cairo today to discuss, among other questions, an Arab states boycott of French goods and the freezing of French assets, as a protest against French nuclear tests. In mid-March Cairo quietly banned further permits for importing French goods, and Saudi Arabia reportedly has followed suit. Since economic relations with France are important to many Arab states, the league members present probably will remain split over the issue, and unanimous action by all Arab states appears unlikely. Some members of the league, however, may follow Cairo's lead and boycott French goods. Afro-Asian UN members are continuing their campaign for a special General Assembly session.

9 Apr 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
U S S R
ALASKA
CHINA
SEA OF OKHOTSK
Vladivostok
Nakhodka
Korsakov
Kunashiri
SEA OF JAPAN
KOREA
JAPAN
EAST CHINA SEA
PACIFIC OCEAN
Islands
Fishing area open to Japanese only under restrictions defined by Soviet-Japanese fishery treaty of 1956.
Area previously prohibited to Japanese salmon fishing.
Prohibited areas proposed for 1960

8 APRIL 1960
NAUTICAL MILES 1000
304650408 3
[PAGE 11]
Soviet-Japanese Fishing Talks

Tokyo is apparently prepared to break off the annual negotiations with the USSR for a fishery agreement in the northwestern Pacific and to proceed with its fishing operations if Moscow refuses to agree to reasonable quotas for the Japanese salmon catch in 1960.

Agricultural Minister Fukuda, who is leaving for Moscow to become chief Japanese delegate in the two-month-old talks, told Ambassador MacArthur on 6 April that the Soviet proposals for this year would reduce the Japanese salmon catch by 70 percent. Fukuda believes Japan's best chance is to insist on a reasonable agreement and to be prepared to fish without an agreement, if necessary. He emphasized, however, that in such case the Japanese would limit their salmon catch to a reasonable figure.

The chief Soviet aim in the current negotiations appears to be an extension of the salmon fishing ban south of the existing line into an area where the Japanese take more than half of their entire salmon catch. The Soviet Union has as yet made no attempt, as it has in past years, to use the fishing terms as a lever to obtain political concessions from Japan.

The Japanese stand this year is more firm than in past negotiations. Partly as a result of pressure by former Prime Minister Yoshida, the government has ruled against elements who would barter political concessions such as surrender of Japanese claims to the Kuril Islands for favorable fishing terms.

The Japanese position also reflects a gradual regrowth of national confidence, which in the past year has been evident in the conclusion of a repatriation agreement with North Korea and the emergence of a firmer policy toward South Korea.

9 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
