Moscow Presses for Special UN Session on Disarmament

The Soviet UN delegation is attempting to clear the way for top-level contacts with the new US administration at a special session of the General Assembly next spring. Chief Soviet delegate Zorin has contended in private talks that early completion of the debates on such "contentious items" as Tibet and Hungary before the new US administration takes office would improve the atmosphere for a US-Soviet rapprochement. Zorin has suggested that, after a Christmas recess, the current assembly session reconvene on 3 January to deal with outstanding issues except for disarmament. According to the current Soviet plan, discussion of disarmament would be carried over into a special session of the General Assembly to be attended by the heads of government.

Moscow apparently feels that a proposal for the heads of government to consider the issue of disarmament would command wide support in the UN and be difficult for the West to reject. The main purpose of such a session from Moscow's viewpoint probably would be to provide an opportunity for Khrushchev to meet with the new President and lay the groundwork for a formal summit conference later in the year. The Soviet premier probably recognizes that his actions since the collapse of the Paris meeting have complicated the convening of another four-power conference this spring. In his recent talk with Ambassador Thompson, Khrushchev stated he was fully aware that an improvement of relations with the US would be a gradual step-by-step process. A meeting with Western leaders at the UN would also provide Khrushchev with a justification for further delaying unilateral action on the Berlin question.

Since Afro-Asian opinion favored the abortive five-power resolution last September calling for renewed contacts between President Eisenhower and Khrushchev, the USSR probably feels these states can be brought into line behind a proposal for heads of government to attend a session on disarmament. During negotiations on the Soviet-Finnish communiqué of 24 November, Moscow attempted unsuccessfully to gain Finnish agreement to a statement calling for a special assembly session on disarmament. The Soviet-Cambodian communiqué of 3 December contained the first formal nonbloc endorsement of the proposal for the special session.
