[PAGE 01]
21 December 1959
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed.  Referral to DOE not required.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
21 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Submarines:  The four Soviet W-class submarines which left the Baltic on 5 December reached Albania on 18 December.  This raises to eight the number of Soviet long-range submarines currently based at Valona Bay.  The T-43-class minesweeper which escorted the units from the Baltic is scheduled to enter the Black Sea on 26 December.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey:  Turkish security forces arrested 30 "key members" of a Kurdish underground organization on 17 December.  Many of those arrested are university students, and at least some are believed to have Communist connections.  The government-imposed press ban on information relating to the arrests is indicative of Ankara's sensitivity to the Kurdish problem and also reflects Turkish sensitivity to any expression of political opposition.

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

Cuba:
the government is planning to instigate, possibly with Cuban Communist party assistance, mass demonstrations of support for Castro on 22 or 23 December by spreading false rumors of counterrevolutionary activity.  The purpose would be to smoke out or intimidate bona fide opposition.
some tightening of military precautions and a general increase in tension have been noted recently, and Castro used similar tactics successfully in the revolt simulated by his agent, William Morgan, last summer.  If such mass demonstrations do occur, anti-American violence is possible.

21 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkish Security Forces Arrest Kurdish Underground Leaders

Thirty "key members" of a Kurdish underground organization in Turkey were arrested on 17 December.  The action was ordered by Premier Menderes following four years of monitoring Kurdish activities by the security and police services.

Two of the Kurds were arrested in Diyarbekir, a Kurdish center in eastern Turkey, while the rest were detained in Istanbul and Ankara.  Many were reported to be young university students.  All 30, after being placed in jails in Istanbul by 20 December, will be tried for "engaging in activities dangerous to the security of the nation."  A search of their homes revealed at least one document indicating a link with Iranian Communists, and one of the Kurds arrested is described by the Turkish official as a known Communist sympathizer.

The Turkish Government has imposed a press ban on all information related to the arrests beyond the fact that such action has been taken.  Representatives of the press were informed, however, that the arrests involved a secret political organization "with foreign connections."  With this treatment, the limited Kurdish organization could serve as a pretext for a general tightening of controls on domestic political opposition.

Ankara has always been extremely sensitive on matters involving the estimated 2,000,000 members of the Kurdish minority in Turkey.  Officials frequently have denied publicly that there is a Kurdish nationalist movement in Turkey, maintaining that this minority has been assimilated into the Turkish nation.  Reports

21 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 06]
of a movement for an autonomous Kurdistan have persisted, however, and some Turkish leaders privately concede that a problem exists.

While the Kurds hardly pose a serious threat to the security of a nation of 26,000,000, and in general are relatively inactive at present, they do present a potential target for Communist exploitation.  This threat is largely countered at present by the apparent effectiveness of the Turkish security system and by the personal and tribal rivalries which exist throughout the Kurdish population.

21 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
