[PAGE 01]
29 May 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. EGYPT URGING OTHER ARAB STATES TO RECOGNIZE
PEIPING (page 3).

2. AUSTRIAN BUSINESSMEN MAY ACCEPT INVITATION TO
VISIT COMMUNIST CHINA (page 4).

3. EAST GERMAN STUDENTS STAGE ANTIREGIME DEMON-
STRATIONS (page 5).

4. MARSHAL ROKOSSOWSKY MAY BE REPLACED
(page 6).

5. ALBANIA REFUSES TO MAKE CONCESSION TO TITO
(page 7).

6. BURMESE PREMIER COMPLAINS OF FOREIGN INTER-
VENTION IN ELECTIONS (page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 9)
[PAGE 04]
1. EGYPT URGING OTHER ARAB STATES TO
RECOGNIZE PEIPING

Libyan prime minister Ben Halim told
Ambassador Tappin on 23 May that the
Egyptians were applying pressure on
Libya and other Arab states to follow
Egypt's lead in recognizing Communist
China. The Egyptian ambassador, Ben
Halim said, had told him that other Arab
states, including Lebanon and Syria,
were giving the matter serious consideration. The prime minister said he had told the Egyptians
Libya would not recognize Peiping.

The government-controlled Cairo radio
reported on 25 May that the Arab League secretariat had been
informed Saudi Arabia would soon recognize Communist China
and had nearly completed arrangements for re-establishing
diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.

Comment
Although Egypt is almost certainly working to bring other Arab states to follow its
lead, only Syria and possibly the Sudan are likely to recognize
Communist China in the immediate future.
[PAGE 05]
2. AUSTRIAN BUSINESSMEN MAY ACCEPT INVITATION TO
VISIT COMMUNIST CHINA

Austrian businessmen will accept at
least one of several invitations they have received to visit
Communist China. An invitation from the Peiping government through its trade representatives in East Berlin for
a delegation of Austrians to come to China in June is said
to have been discussed with an Austrian Foreign Ministry
official who expressed the view that Austrian businessmen
could go anywhere as private individuals.

Comment
East German proposals, reportedly made
last February, that Austria accept substantial orders for deliveries of industrial items to Communist China, were discussed within the Austrian government
in March. Despite great interest expressed in such trade by
spokesmen for the Chamber of Commerce and the League of
Industrialists, it was decided to take no action until after the
13 May elections. The Austrian government has indicated
that it will try to keep trade with China in harmony with established control procedures. (Concurred in by ORR)
[PAGE 06]
3. EAST GERMAN STUDENTS STAGE ANTIREGIME
DEMONSTRATIONS

East German university students
demonstrated in Dresden between
24 and 27 May to protest the regime's
opposition to students taking vacation
trips to West Germany.

Comment
Keeping East German youth in line has
been one of the major problems of the
regime. Other reports indicate that university students have
been increasingly critical of the party and its policies since
the Soviet Twentieth Party Congress.
[PAGE 07]
4. MARSHAL ROKOSSOWSKY MAY BE REPLACED

Polish minister of defense Marshal
Konstanty Rokossowsky was to be replaced by Lt. Gen. Zygmunt Berling
at a plenary meeting of the central
committee of the Polish United Workers (Communist)
Party scheduled to meet on 27 May, according to rumors
reaching the American embassy in Warsaw on 25 May.

Comment
The removal of Marshal Rokossowsky,
a World War II Soviet general, would
be a logical part of the present campaign to build up the appearance of Polish independence. Such a move would be
welcomed by the Polish people to whom he symbolizes
Poland's subservience to the USSR. He was in command
of the Soviet forces that refused to come to the aid of the
Poles at the time of the Warsaw uprising against the Germans in 1944.

General Berling, presently under secretary of the Ministry of State, was the commander of the
Kosciuszko Division which was organized in the Soviet Union
during World War II. He was removed from this position
late in 1944, reportedly for attempting to send forces to aid
in the Warsaw uprising, and has occupied only minor posts
during the past decade. However, he was recently awarded
the Banner of Labor First Class.
[PAGE 08]
5. ALBANIA REFUSES TO MAKE CONCESSION TO TITO

Albanian Communist Party boss Enver
Hoxha announced on 25 May to his party's
third congress that the execution in 1949
of Koci Xoxe, former interior minister
and the leading Albanian Titoist, was "completely justified."
He denounced Xoxe's activities as having been hostile to the
party and state, and claimed that Xoxe's crimes, along with
fabrications by Beria and other "misunderstandings," were
the cause of the bad relations with Yugoslavia.

Comment
The failure to rehabilitate Koci Xoxe indicates the extreme sensitivity with which
the Tirana regime still regards its relations with Yugoslavia.
Albania's refusal, unique among the Satellites, to make any
significant concessions to Yugoslavia presumably stems from
a fear that any move in this direction would be interpreted as
an invitation for the resumption of Yugoslav influence in Albania.

The strong support of Xoxe's condemnation
suggests that no major effort to placate Tito, such as demotion of Tito's archenemy, Premier Mehmet Shehu, will be made
at the congress.
[PAGE 09]
6. BURMESE PREMIER COMPLAINS OF FOREIGN
INTERVENTION IN ELECTIONS

Comment
The Burmese government has publicly
attributed much of the good showing by
pro-Communist candidates last month to intimidation of voters
by the Communist underground. There are strong indications,
moreover, that Burmese leaders are particularly disturbed
because the Chinese Communist embassy, both directly and
through the local branch of the Bank of China, has been subsidizing the activities of the pro-Communist Burma Workers and
Peasants Party and its satellite fronts.

Some Burmese officials also
believe that the United States has been financing opposition
parties which are sympathetic to Karen insurgents and the Chinese Nationalist irregulars.

Whatever advice Nehru may give, the
Burmese are unlikely to take any overt action that would antagonize Peiping.
[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 May)

An Israeli army spokesman stated on
28 May that Israeli troops in the El Auja area were fired on
by Egyptian forces on the night of 27 May. No casualties
were reported. (Press)

Egyptian ambassador to the United States
Hussein, now in Cairo for consultations, told Ambassador
Byroade, following his meeting with Prime Minister Nasr last
week, that (1) he personally was completely reassured that Nasr
had no intention of attacking Israel but that (2) Nasr's feelings
"were intense" on the question of arms for Israel and he believed there was a definite decision made to try to keep Israel
as strong as the Arab states. Nasr apparently feels that the
British are behind the rumors of a plan for a UN arms embargo,
and that they envisage a plan whereby Israel could circumvent
it as in the past. Hussein, on Nasr's orders, stated that Egyptian recognition of Communist China was not "to slap the United
States," but was related solely to establishing a new source of arms
because of Nasr's feelings on the question of arms for Israel.

Major General Nuwar, new commander in
chief of the Jordan Arab Legion, told the press on 25 May that
the days of meeting Israeli aggression with complaints are gone
forever. Hereafter, aggression would be met with force.

The American air attaché in Athens reports
that Greece on 27 May granted clearance for landing and refueling of six French-built Ouragan jet fighters en route to Israel.
These planes have not yet been reported as landing in Athens.
They are apparently French deliveries to Israel in addition to the
24 Mysteres already agreed upon. A strong Arab reaction, particularly from Egypt, is likely should this become public.

According to a usually reliable source
Egypt has concluded a deal with Poland for
[PAGE 11]
a supply of gun tubes and spare parts for British-made field
artillery.

A usually reliable source reports that the
66 Soviet air technicians who arrived in Egypt on 9 May departed on 16 May. The technicians may
have come to Cairo regarding plans for a proposed Moscow-
Cairo direct commercial air connection. The field comments
there is a possibility that this report may be an official cover-
up explanation for the Soviet crews who accompanied the recent
delivery of IL-14 transport aircraft.

Syrian chief of staff Shuayr told the
American army attaché in Damascus on 25 May that the Syrian
army was in the process of receiving enough Czech SU-100
assault guns for a regiment. Syria had been
tentatively offered more T-34 tanks but he had refused and had
selected the SU-100's instead, presumably to use as tank destroyers. The attaché comments that a Syrian armored regiment has 54 tanks or tank destroyers.
