[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

11 December 1959

Copy No. C 15

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Cyprus - Communist Bloc: The Soviet bloc apparently is preparing to bid for diplomatic representation when Cyprus becomes independent in February. Polish and East German officials visited the island recently. Hungary has asked permission to open a consulate and, the Soviet ambassador in Athens is planning a trip to Nicosia. While Moscow propaganda has criticized the London and Zurich agreements providing for the independence of Cyprus, bloc countries can be expected to extend prompt recognition and to concentrate their efforts on stimulating Cypriot opposition to remaining British base rights. In mid-1959 Moscow and Peiping indicated to a delegation of local Cypriot officials their willingness to give economic aid to the new republic.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
Nigeria: Nigeria's general parliamentary election on 12 December is expected to determine the make-up of the federal government which will be in power when the country--with an estimated 35,000,000 people--becomes independent next October. The election is therefore regarded as crucial by Nigeria's three major parties--each of which is largely tribal in composition and controls one of the federation's three self-governing regions. One of these, the party of the conservative Moslem rulers of the north, is especially determined to secure a controlling voice in the new federal government. Should it fail to achieve this, its adherents may react violently and possibly attempt to secede. (Page 3) (Map)

Yemen: Yemeni officials have told the American chargé that the recent economic agreements with the United States and a private American firm result from a definite Yemeni policy decision "in favor of the West." They are now urging prompt American action to prove the wisdom of this decision. Yemeni assurances have often been unreliable, but the agreements cited by the Yemenis, together with other recent actions, reflect the Imam's growing suspicion of Soviet and Chinese Communist motives.

Fiji Islands: The American consul in Suva, on Viti Levu Island, reports riots and anti-European violence have resulted from efforts by the British government of the islands to suppress an oil workers' strike now spreading to other industries. He suggests that evacuation of Americans may become necessary. There is basic antagonism between Fijians and the Indians who comprise more than half the islands' population.

11 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

Britain-Geneva: UK Foreign Office Minister of State Ormsby-Gore, sent to Geneva to examine the atmosphere of negotiations at the conference on cessation of nuclear tests, believes that the political need to achieve agreement has become so great that it may be necessary "to deviate slightly from our traditional position of 'no disarmament without thoroughly effective control.'" Ormsby-Gore told US Ambassador Wadsworth that international political pressures for an agreement have doubled in the past year, and that a special session of the UN General Assembly will be convened if the conference breaks down without any treaty. Ormsby-Gore proposes that "comparatively minor" issues be cleared away quickly in order to focus attention on the major questions of on-site inspection and the phasing of the control system.

Cuba: The Soviet technical and cultural exhibit now showing in Mexico will open in Havana on 5 February, according to Moscow radio. Mikoyan publicly offered the exhibit to any Latin American country when he visited Mexico to inaugurate the fair. The Cuban showing gives the Castro government further occasion to invite a high-ranking Soviet official to the opening, and might serve as a prelude to an offer to resume diplomatic relations with the USSR.

11 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]
IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE
REPORTS AND ESTIMATES

(Available during the preceding week)

Prospects for Indonesia.  NIE 62-2-59.  8 Dec 59.

Short-term Prospects for Ecuador.  SNIE 95-59.  8 Dec 59.

11 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Nigeria

NIGER
CHAD
BRITISH CAMEROONS (Trust Terr.)
CAMEROUN (Fr. Trust Terr.)
NORTHERN REGION
WESTERN REGION
EASTERN REGION
SOUTHERN CAMEROONS
DAHOMEY
TOGO (Fr. Trust Terr.)
GHANA

GULF OF GUINEA

MILES 300

10598
[PAGE 12]
The Nigerian Election

Nigeria's general election on 12 December is expected to determine the make-up of the federal government in power when this most populous of all African countries--it has an estimated 35,000,000 inhabitants--gains its independence from Britain next October. The election, which is to fill 312 seats in the House of Representatives, is regarded as crucial by Nigeria's three major parties--the Northern People's Congress (NPC), the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC), and the Action Group (AG). Respectively, they represent, for the most part, Fulani, Ibo, and Yoruba tribal interests and control the federation's self-governing Northern, Eastern, and Western Regions.

Especially concerned about the outcome are the traditional Moslem rulers of the north--the controlling elements in the NPC--whose greatest fear is domination by the more dynamic Christian and pagan tribesmen of the south. These rulers and their adherents may react violently if they fail to secure a controlling voice in the new government, and might even attempt to secede. Neutral observers have predicted an almost even three-way division of seats among the major parties and their minor-party allies--a result that would probably enable the NPC, which has an "understanding" with the NCNC leadership, to achieve its minimum goal. However, the election is unprecedented in many respects and forecasting is more than normally hazardous--especially after the NPC's unexpected major defeat in last month's UN-supervised plebiscite in the Northern Cameroons trust territory, an area long administered as an integral part of Nigeria's Northern Region.

Although tribal and regional loyalties will be the most influential factors, intimidation and harassment of opposition forces may also play a significant role in determining the final result, particularly in the north. There the traditional rulers enjoy a freer hand with respect to control over local police than do the southern governments. Moreover, the British, anxious to avoid the complications likely to follow a defeat of the NPC, appear to have taken a more lenient attitude toward that party's use of repressive measures against its opponents.

11 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 13]
Yemeni Officials Now Profess to Be Pro-Western

Crown Prince Badr and other prominent Yemeni officials recently assured the American chargé in Taiz that Yemen has made a significant policy decision "in favor of the West." The assurances followed Yemeni approval of a basic aid agreement with the United States as well as the signing of several private and government contracts with an American investment company early last month. The officials stated that they and the Imam--who made the decision to accept American assistance--are now "on the spot" to prove the wisdom of their action and dispel the doubts of Yemeni proponents of a "closed door" policy. The chargé, who feels that "at least for the time being" Yemen has indeed "turned the corner," has received numerous pleas from Yemeni officials for prompt implementation of the assistance program.

The Yemeni assurances are given some credibility by the fact that no new aid agreement was announced following the recent Soviet-Yemeni negotiations in Moscow. Significant factors in the new policy may be Cairo's improvement of its relations with the West and the Imam's growing suspicion of Soviet and Chinese Communist motives. The cordial reception granted the British governor of Aden during his November visit to Yemen also seems indicative of the Imam's change of heart.

11 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
