[PAGE 01]
14 April 1958
Copy No. 140

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Iran: Soviet Ambassador Pegov continues to press the Shah to accept "unconditional" Soviet economic assistance. The Shah will probably continue to refuse to accept major Soviet credits, but this will not affect the expansion of existing trade relations between the two countries. Survey work on joint development of three border rivers is to begin soon. Negotiations on a civil air agreement are still deadlocked.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: A 13 April report from Padang states that a government destroyer and four corvettes are standing offshore, and that the dissident command expects them to shell the beaches prior to a landing by government forces. Indonesian army headquarters claims that two dissident battalions in the Padang area have defected, a development which would drastically reduce dissident strength. The pro-American army vice chief of staff, Colonel Jani, is concerned over the growing belief in the Indonesian Army that the United States is helping the dissidents. He is also worried about the fact that the expected delivery of bloc weapons may weaken the Indonesian Army's generally anti-Communist attitude. Army Chief of Staff Nasution--who is, in the opinion of Indonesian army officers, strongly anti-Communist--is achieving broad political and economic power as well as enhanced prestige from government military successes in Sumatra. He does not appear strong enough, however, to change President Sukarno's attitude toward the Communist party.

[PAGE 04]
Pan-African conference: The 15 April Pan-African conference in Accra will not be the African "summit meeting" envisaged by Ghana's prime minister who sponsored the meeting. Egypt, Ethiopia, Libya, Morocco, the Sudan, and Tunisia will be represented by foreign ministers or lower-ranking officials. Only Liberia and Ghana will have heads of government in attendance. Tunisia and Morocco will undoubtedly try to focus attention on the Algerian question, but political issues may be generally subordinated to cultural and economic issues in view of the absence of leading area personalities. Soviet propaganda has already begun commenting favorably on the conference, stating that the meeting will play a great role in the African peoples' struggle against colonialism.

III. THE WEST

Britain - free trade area: Macmillan apparently intends to press Adenauer very hard, during the Chancellor's 16-19 April visit to London, to exert German influence on France to accept the projected free trade area. Macmillan told the American ambassador on 11 April that abandonment of the free trade area project would exclude Britain from Europe and would lead to the complete withdrawal of British troops from Germany.

French tactics on Tunisian issue: Gaillard will be under strong pressure from some rightist elements for immediate reference of the Tunisian-Algerian border question to the UN Security Council when the National Assembly emergency debate begins on 15 April. Moderating counterpressure from the Socialists, next Sunday's cantonal elections, and general

[PAGE 05]
fear of the possible political consequences of a long crisis now will probably deter his opponents from an all-out attack. Nevertheless, an early move to "apprise the Security Council" cannot be ruled out as a face-saving move, particularly in view of public complaints about "American pressure."

Cuba: The rebels, though posing no immediate threat to the Batista regime, are continuing their hit-and-run attacks in many localities, even outside Oriente Province. Despite some recriminations over last week's failure, they evidently hope to launch some further concerted action against the government.

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Indonesia

Army Chief of Staff General Nasution has achieved broad political and economic power as well as enhanced prestige as the result of government military successes in Sumatra, according to the American ambassador in Djakarta. Various sources confirm that all important decisions are made either by him or by President Sukarno. Despite Nasution's increased power, however, he does not appear sufficiently strong to challenge Sukarno on the issue of Indonesian Communism. An example is Sukarno's blocking of Nasution when he tried to remove the pro-Communist deputy town commander in Djakarta.

The American Embassy believes that after government forces occupy Padang and Bukittinggi, Nasution may favor negotiation with the dissidents in an effort to prevent long-drawn-out guerrilla warfare. There is some indication that President Sukarno may adopt the same attitude.
the military campaign alone cannot solve the dispute with the rebels and that a political approach should be adopted.
dissident guerrillas recently have appeared around Pakanbaru.

Col. Kawilarang, recently Indonesian military attaché in Washington, is undecided as to whether to accept the dissident offer to become commander in chief of all dissident forces. In North Celebes, dissident leader Lt. Col. Sumual directed an appeal in his order of the day for 13 April to the commanders of the revolutionary air force who were appointed on 9 April to "carry out your task as best as possible for the sake of the safety of our fatherland."

[PAGE 07]
Colonel Jani, vice chief of staff of the army, told the assistant US army attaché he was worried over the growing belief in the army that the United States is helping the dissidents. He was further concerned that the expected delivery of Soviet bloc weapons may weaken the army's generally anti-Communist attitude. Soviet Ambassador Zhukov allegedly has officially informed the Indonesian Government that the USSR will provide training for Indonesians in the USSR. The offer includes training in "practically any field desired," with initial emphasis on pilot training, aircraft and technical equipment maintenance, and various fields of maritime training.

[PAGE 08]
Independent African States to Confer in Accra This Week

Representatives of eight independent African states convening in Accra on 15 April will endeavor, by their manipulation of issues of broad and immediate concern to all Africans, to project a distinctively African "personality" onto the international scene. Complex cultural and political differences and conflicting policy objectives among the participating states--Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Liberia, Libya, Morocco, the Sudan, and Tunisia--will, however, tend to inhibit agreement on joint action except in the less controversial spheres.

As all the conferees are committed to rapid political advancement for Africans, they can be expected to condemn European colonial policies and racial discrimination. The Algerian problem, included in the revised draft agenda at the behest of the North African states, is certain to come in for special attention.

Liberian President Tubman, if he attends as now expected, will be the only chief of state present, most of the other countries being represented by their foreign ministers. Although Ghanaian officials have insisted that no observers from dependent areas will participate officially, Algerian rebel representatives en route to Accra will apparently be attached to the Tunisian delegation. It seems probable that nationalist leaders from other nonindependent territories will likewise be on hand and in close touch with the official delegations. Observers for Sino-Soviet bloc countries may also be in Accra as news correspondents.

Moscow has already begun to publicize its favorable attitude toward the Accra meeting but will probably avoid any overinterference in the expectation that conference pronouncements will in themselves further the USSR's immediate policy aims in Africa.

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Britain to Press Adenauer Hard for Support on Free Trade Area Project

Prime Minister Macmillan indicated to Ambassador Whitney on 11 April his strong concern over the impasse in negotiations over the free trade area caused by French opposition. He said he proposed to tell Chancellor Adenauer during his 16-19 April visit to London that only Adenauer's influence with France can avoid a "Balkanization" of Europe which would force Britain to form a competitive economic unit of its own. Macmillan said he also will tell Adenauer that Britain would withdraw its four divisions from Germany "the minute it became clear that the free trade area was not to be basic in the new economic concept for Europe."

Britain has on various previous occasions sought US support for its concept of a comprehensive European trade agreement to be reached before the six-nation Common Market tariff reductions start coming into effect on 1 January 1959. France has held out for a slow and piecemeal approach, reserving the right to maintain special protection for certain sectors of French industry until after the effects of the first Common Market tariff cuts can be evaluated.

West German Economic Minister Erhard, who is accompanying the Chancellor to London, agrees with the British concept of a European free trade area, but Bonn has not yet supported it as strongly as London would like. Adenauer thus far has shown relatively little interest in the project, being apparently more concerned with improving relations with France in his efforts toward making Europe strong politically.

[PAGE 10]
Gaillard Still Under Pressure to Take Algerian Frontier Issue to UN

Despite the French cabinet's acceptance on 12 April of the US-UK good offices mission proposals as a basis for negotiations with Tunisia, Premier Gaillard is still under strong pressure from some elements of the right for immediate reference of the Algerian frontier question to the UN Security Council. The cabinet's decision is to be debated by the National Assembly, which was recalled from its Easter recess for an emergency session beginning 15 April, and there is no indication that the rightists' demands have lessened.

Gaillard may be able to ward off some of the rightists' pressure by moving to raise the French-Tunisian dispute in a special session of the North Atlantic Council. A French diplomat hinted on 11 April that such a move might be made very soon. While the Assembly's propensity for rallying to nationalistic positions would normally favor the rightists, a number of domestic considerations will act as a partial brake. The Socialist party is slowly evolving toward dissociation from tough policies regarding North Africa. All parties want to avoid a government crisis during the cantonal elections of 20 and 27 April, and there is widespread fear that a prolonged political stalemate might end in General De Gaulle's return to power.

Nevertheless, an early move by Gaillard to "apprise the Security Council" cannot be ruled out as a face-saving device, particularly in view of public complaints about the cabinet decision's having been taken under "considerable pressure from Washington."

[PAGE 11]
Cuban Rebel Activity Continues

The Cuban rebels, although unsuccessful in their first major attempt to call a general strike and incite a popular uprising, appear determined to continue their attacks against the Batista regime and may be preparing another large-scale effort. They have resumed their hit-and-run attacks in many localities, causing considerable destruction on 11 April at El Cobre, shrine of Cuba's patron saint, about 12 miles west of Santiago in Oriente Province. Other incidents have occurred throughout the island, and the US consul in Santiago reported on 12 April that the transportation situation remains uncertain.

Despite the charges of inadequate support for last week's effort, exile groups in several Middle American countries have apparently been sending arms and men to the Castro rebels.
There are other reports of a new rebel landing in Las Villas Province, where clashes between rebel and government troops have occurred in at least two towns.

[PAGE 12]
Next 10 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 13]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Directors
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 14]
Cuba: The rebels, though posing no immediate threat to the Batista regime, are continuing their hit-and-run attacks in many localities, even outside Oriente Province. Despite some recriminations over last week's failure, they evidently hope to launch some further concerted action against the government.
