[PAGE 01]
30 December 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. NEW UPSURGE OF VIOLENCE LIKELY IN ALGERIA

3. ISRAELI NEWSPAPER CHARGES US IS UNFRIENDLY TO ISRAEL

4. SYRIAN CABINET CRISIS

5. NASR SAID TO FEAR ARMS ACQUIRED BY EGYPTIAN COMMUNISTS

7. U NU VICTORY AVERTS OPEN POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BURMA

10. MOSCOW NAMES AMBASSADOR TO JAPAN
(page 12).

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. NEW UPSURGE OF VIOLENCE LIKELY IN ALGERIA

Violence in Algeria, where urban terrorism rose sharply last week, may reach a new peak on or about 1 January as a result of new incidents perpetrated by nationalist extremists and European counterterrorists. The anticipated upsurge is likely to be felt most severely in the cities and especially in the capital, Algiers, where a new record of over 30 incidents was recorded last week.

A rebel pamphlet distributed in Paris proclaims that a "new phase" of the rebellion is about to begin. A strike by Moslem trade unions and business associations expected in several cities over the New Year holiday contributes a further element of uncertainty.

Prospects for widespread reprisals by European counterterrorists are also increasing. Inflamed by a long series of provocations culminating in the assassination on 28 December of a prominent right-wing local French official, European extremists leaders used his funeral the following day to stage a massive and disorderly demonstration of anti-Moslem and to some extent anti-American, settler solidarity. These developments appear to support persistent but unconfirmed reports that European extremists have been organizing militarily and are prepared to use force to prevent the government from instituting basic political reforms which would undermine the dominant position long enjoyed by the resident Europeans.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. ISRAELI NEWSPAPER CHARGES US IS UNFRIENDLY TO ISRAEL

The Jerusalem Post, a newspaper which usually reflects the views of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, said in a front-page article on 28 December that American officials had recently become "singularly unfriendly to Israel." The article asserted that these officials "derided" Israel's recent note on fedayeen activity as an excuse for Israel to remain in Gaza, and that the American reaction to Israel's position portends a "crystallization of a policy against Israel and has given rise to speculation that the United States is about to embark on another massive effort to win over Nasr and the Arabs."

Comment
This article may be the beginning of a full-scale Israeli campaign to elicit an American policy statement in advance of the date when Israel will be faced with the necessity of deciding whether to complete the evacuation of Sinai and the Gaza strip. Prime Minister Ben-Gurion recently said such a decision would have to be made by his government early in January.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. SYRIAN CABINET CRISIS

Syrian prime minister Asali appears to be blocked at least temporarily in his efforts to form a new, more "harmonious" cabinet. Asali's main obstacle is the conservative Populist Party, which has refused to provide more than nominal representation unless given specific portfolios in a new cabinet, while President Quwatli allegedly has vetoed the appointment of at least two leading leftists. The Egyptian embassy in Damascus is playing an active role in the attempt to form a new government and to introduce leftist influence into it, but so far has been unable to overcome the president's opposition.

A continued impasse of this kind, while by no means unusual in Syrian politics, might under present conditions lead leftist or rightist army factions to try to impose a solution.

Some recent troop movements inside Syria may have been made for political purposes.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. NASR SAID TO FEAR ARMS ACQUIRED BY EGYPTIAN COMMUNISTS

Egyptian president Nasr has revised his former opinion that he could handle the Communist problem in Egypt by routine police action, according to an Egyptian publisher apparently acting as Nasr's emissary to the American embassy. Nasr allegedly feels the new element in the situation is the arms distributed to the Egyptian populace during the hostilities. The Communists, who received arms at that time, are now refusing to give them up and are conducting training in their use with manuals obtained "from somewhere."

Nasr hopes the United States will press Israel to withdraw promptly and completely, since he feels he cannot take strong measures to get the arms back while foreign troops are on Egyptian soil.

Ambassador Hare observes that this approach should probably be regarded as a "classic example" of the use of the Communist issue to influence the United States, although there is evidence that Communists are becoming more active and are taking an ultranationalistic line to keep emotions aroused.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. U NU VICTORY AVERTS OPEN POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BURMA

Comment on:

The announcement on 29 December by the Anti-Fascist Peoples' Freedom League (AFPFL), Burma's ruling party, that U Nu will soon return to office as premier indicates that a serious political crisis has been at least temporarily averted. The AFPFL action, which represents a rebuff to such powerful leaders as Premier Ba Swe and Deputy Premier Kyaw Nyein, was probably taken to avoid an open showdown between the Socialist faction of the AFPFL and Nu, who threatened to bring down the government when parliament meets if he was not returned to office. Nu still commands a wide popularity throughout the country and strong support in parliament.

The Socialists, however, will continue to exert a strong, if not dominant influence on the day-to-day operation of the government, as they did before Nu resigned last June. Moreover, at least two Socialists, one of them Ba Swe, will serve as deputy premiers under Nu, and several others will undoubtedly be included in the cabinet.

The chief loser in the reshuffle would appear to be Kyaw Nyein, who led the fight against Nu's return to power. Kyaw Nyein has been widely regarded as the real "brain" of the government and has in the past felt that Nu should serve primarily as a front man for the AFPFL. Whether or not he remains in the government, Kyaw Nyein is likely to take advantage of any future opportunity to undermine U Nu.

Major changes in Burmese policies are unlikely to result from the switch in premiers. Nu may incline, however, toward a stricter neutrality in foreign relations than Ba Swe, who recently took the lead among the Asian neutralists in denouncing Soviet intervention in Hungary.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
10. MOSCOW NAMES AMBASSADOR TO JAPAN

Comment on:

Ivan F. Tevosyan, newly appointed Soviet ambassador to Tokyo, has been a deputy premier since December 1953 and is regarded as the outstanding Soviet metallurgical expert.

Ambassador Bohlen believes Tevosyan's assignment abroad probably results from the reshuffle of deputy premiers and the reorganization of the Soviet economic planning by the recent central committee plenum. Bohlen doubts that the appointment is motivated by considerations of relations with Japan.

Failure of the metallurgical industry to fulfill its plans may have been a factor in Tevosyan's appointment, as well as the possibility that he opposed the cutback in capital investment announced by the plenum.

The removal of Tevosyan as a deputy premier, following that of Kosygin, Kucherenko, Matskevich, Malyshev, and Khrunichev on 25 December, leaves only two deputy prime ministers, Malenkov and Zavenyagin. While the other five were appointed to the new high-level State Commission for Short-Range Planning where they will presumably concentrate on their special fields, Tevosyan's appointment as ambassador represents a considerable demotion for him.

30 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
