[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

3 October 1960

Copy No. C 2% - 4

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 October 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China: Communist China has used its 1 Oc-
tober National Day celebrations to rebut criticism that China
is belligerent and to make a show of "socialist unity." Under-
lying these themes, however, current propaganda makes clear
that Peiping continues to adhere to hard-line positions in its
dispute with Moscow. The absence from the Peiping celebra-
tions of high-ranking personalities from any bloc country ex-
cept Albania points up continuing Soviet efforts to isolate
the Chinese. Peiping confined its comments on the domestic
economy to complaints about bad weather for agriculture.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Jordan-Iraq-UAR: Mutual Jordanian-Iraqi resentment
of UAR subversive activities against the regimes of King Husayn
and Qasim probably is the most important reason for Jordan's
recognition on 1 October of Qasim's revolutionary government.
The two countries now may cooperate in efforts to reduce Nasir's
influence and strength in the Middle East, particularly by sup-
porting secessionist tendencies in the Syrian region of the UAR.
The reported Iraqi denunciation of the murder of King Faysal,
Iraq's former ruler and Husayn's cousin, in the revolution of
July 1958 satisfies the main prerequisite demanded by Husayn
for a rapprochement.

i

[PAGE 04]
Laos: Laotian Army commanders representing the rival
Vientiane and Savannakhet camps are beginning to cooperate in
certain spheres, but these tentative steps toward reunification
of the army command may be quickly undone by Premier Sou-
vanna's reported order calling for dismissal of General Phoumi
and 26 other officers. A tenuous cease-fire between the Vienti-
ane and Savannakhet forces in the Paksane area has apparently
been arranged in belated implementation of the agreement reached
in Luang Prabang on 28 September. The Communist Pathet Lao,
meanwhile, has announced readiness to enter into immediate ne-
gotiations with the Souvanna government.

3 Oct 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Berlin: Bonn appears to be waiting for East German re-
actions to its 30 September denunciation of the 1961 interzonal
trade agreement before deciding what actual steps will be
taken against interzonal trade shipments. Bonn and West Ber-
lin authorities are considering one plan whereby, if a new pact
is negotiated, all interzonal trade shipments would funnel
through West Berlin, thereby making it difficult for the East
Germans to tamper with Berlin access without disrupting their
own imports from the Federal Republic. East German officials
although obviously prepared for the denunciation of the trade
agreement, treated the affair cautiously, probably in order to
determine exactly what sanctions would be imposed. East Ger-
man controls over access to Berlin remain in force, and on 30
September East Germany announced that visitors to the West
Berlin exclave of Steinstuecken, which is completely surrounded
by East Berlin territory, would henceforth need East German
residence permits.

(Page 6)

Britain: British Labor party leader Hugh Gaitskell still
faces an uphill fight to defeat an uncompromising nuclear
disarmament position at the party's annual conference from
3 to 7 October. Despite recent indications that he has gained
the support of some small trade unions as well as of several
local Labor party branches, the left-wing resolution sponsored
by the transport workers' Frank Cousins still appears to com-
mand a majority of votes from trade union and constituency
delegations. Even if Gaitskell ekes out a narrow victory, his
hold on the leadership will continue to be precarious.

(Page 7)

3 Oct 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Chinese Communist National Day Celebrations

Communist China has used its 1 October National Day
celebrations to rebut criticism that China is belligerent. A
principal theme of the celebrations has been China's adherence
to peaceful coexistence, and Peiping is saying that the Sino-
Burmese boundary treaty--signed on 1 October by Prime Min-
ister U Nu and Premier Chou En-lai--is proof of its intentions.
Possibly for the same reason, Peiping eliminated its usual
military parade.

The Chinese have also attempted to gloss over current
Sino-Soviet differences by emphasizing "socialist unity" in
their 1 October propaganda, but they continue to adhere to hard-
line positions in the dispute. At a public lecture on ideology
in Moscow on 29 September--two days before the Peiping cele-
bration--the speaker identified the Chinese as "dogmatists" and
asserted they should engage in self-criticism and admission of
error. Ambassador Thompson speculates that this public label-
ing of the Chinese may foreshadow a sharper stage in the quarrel.

The absence from the Peiping celebrations of high-ranking
personalities from any bloc country except Albania points up
continuing Soviet efforts to isolate Peiping. The celebrations ap-
parently were snubbed by Polish Premier Cyrankiewicz, who
was scheduled to complete a visit to Ceylon on 30 September
and could easily have arrived in Peiping in time for the festivi-
ties. Albanian party leader Hoxha's 30 September speech in
Tirana endorsed several Chinese positions in contrast to East
German Premier Grotewohl's restatement of his regime's "cor-
rect" position in the dispute.

Peiping confined its comments on the domestic scene to
complaints that agriculture has suffered the most serious "nat-
ural calamities" since the regime came to power, but said
that the communes had minimized the damage to crops. Al-
though there is no evidence that industrial plans--which sched-
ule a 29-percent increase in value of industrial production as
against a 40-percent increase achieved in 1959--have bogged
down, Peiping continued silent on the performance of the econ-
omy in 1960.

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
The Situation in Laos

The American Embassy in Vientiane reports indications
that Laotian Army commanders representing the Souvanna
Phouma government and the Savannakhet Revolutionary Com-
mittee are beginning to carry out their pledge, given to the
King in Luang Prabang on 28 September, to work toward the
reunification of the army command structure and to present
a common front toward the Pathet Lao.

Progress in this direction seems especially noticeable in
the Second Military Region, which has jurisdiction over Sam
Neua and Xieng Khouang provinces. Following the ouster of
the pro-Savannakhet commander of that region on 28 Septem-
ber by his subordinate in Xieng Khouang, both sides apparent-
ly agreed to install General Amkha, who had been acting as
Vientiane garrison commander, as temporary commander of
the Second Military Region. He was ordered to launch a united
effort, involving both pro-Vientiane and pro-Savannakhet ele-
ments, against the Pathet Lao in Sam Neua. According to press
reports, the pro-Savannakhet garrison which abandoned Sam
Neua town on 28 September and subsequently established it-
self at Muong Peun has declared its loyalty to Vientiane. It
is presumably at Amkha's disposal for whatever action he
chooses to take.

The actual military situation in Sam Neua remains obscure.
The embassy reports no indications of any fighting after 28 Sep-
tember. Pathet Lao propaganda has hailed the "liberation" of
Sam Neua town from the "traitorous" Savannakhet group. Pathet
Lao guerrilla units may be in control of the town, although the area
is nominally under the Souvanna government.

Tentative progress toward reunification of the army com-
mand structure could be quickly undone by Premier Souvanna's
order calling for dismissal from the army of General Phoumi
and 26 other pro-Savannakhet officers. This order is a follow-
up of a previous warning issued by Vientiane that all officers
must declare their loyalty to the Souvanna government by 30
September. The order now is before the King for signature.

[PAGE 09]
Souvanna probably does not expect the King to sign it and in
all likelihood took this action merely as a tactical ploy; how-
ever, Phoumi may consider the order a grave personal af-
front and in any case might seize upon it as an excuse to end
further efforts at a compromise.

Vientiane and Savannakhet forces facing each other east
of Paksane appear finally to have ceased fighting, in belated
implementation of the agreement reached at Luang Prabang.
The cease-fire could prove short-lived, however, inasmuch
as the Vientiane forces in the area may be more responsive to
Captain Kong Le's orders than to those of the nominal high com-
mand.

The Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS)--the Pathet Lao's legal politi-
cal front--on 1 October announced its readiness to enter into
immediate negotiations with the Souvanna government, pro-
fessing itself satisfied that the Vientiane government had purged
itself of representatives of the "traitor" Phoumi. The Commun-
ists apparently now feel themselves in a strong position to ex-
tract major concessions from Souvanna or, failing this, to gain
representation in the forthcoming political talks under the King's
aegis. They may even harbor the hope that NLHS leader Prince
Souphanouvong will be included in the new government of nation-
al unity which the King is trying to promote. Willingness to enter-
tain this possibility has in recent days been variously ascribed
to all of the major participants in the current conflict, including
Phoumi.

[PAGE 10]
Future of German Interzonal Trade Still Uncertain

The Bonn government is apparently awaiting East German re-
actions to its 30 September renunciation of the 1961 interzonal
trade agreement before deciding on specific steps to take against
interzonal shipments. The cabinet--meeting on 30 September,
with the unprecedented attendance of opposition Socialist leaders,
including West Berlin Mayor Brandt--made no decision on wheth-
er a new agreement with East Germany would be negotiated in
the face of continued Communist harassment of West Berlin, or
whether any moves would be made against interzonal shipments
during the rest of 1960; it even recognized the possibility that
interzonal trade could continue after 31 December 1960 in the
absence of a new pact.

Bonn and West Berlin authorities are considering a plan designed
to enhance West Berlin's position. If a new pact is negotiated, all
interzonal trade shipments to East Germany would go through West
Berlin, thereby making it difficult for the East Germans to tamper
with Berlin access routes without blocking their own imports--in-
cluding vital iron and steel shipments--from the Federal Republic.
Berlin officials, moreover, have suggested that West German
exports to the USSR and other bloc states could also be sent via
West Berlin. Bonn hinted publicly that the deteriorating Berlin
situation may have a deleterious effect on Soviet-West German
trade negotiations which are scheduled to begin late this month.

On 30 September, while maintaining that intra-German
trade should continue as "the last tie in relations" between
the two states, East German Foreign Trade Minister Heinrich
Rau charged that Bonn's action was part of the Federal Repub-
lic's aggressive policy toward East Germany, and warned that
West Germany would be held responsible for the consequences.
Rau denied any connection between the questions of access to
Berlin and trade, and rejected allegations that the four-power
agreement governing Berlin had been violated, since "Berlin is
no longer under four-power control."

Emphasis was added to Rau's statement that night when it
was announced that henceforth visitors to the West Berlin exclave
of Steinstuecken--completely surrounded by East German terri-
tory--would be required to apply for East German residence per-
mits. This move constitutes the first East German harassment
of West Berlin residents since the beginning of the month-long
campaign against West German access to Berlin.

[PAGE 11]
British Labor Party's Defense Policy Faces Stiff Fight at
Party Conference

Hugh Gaitskell, leader of Britain's Labor party, still
faces an uphill fight to defeat an uncompromising nuclear dis-
armament resolution sponsored by the left-wing transport
workers' Frank Cousins at the party's annual conference from
3 to 7 October, despite recent indication that some small
trade unions and several local party branches now plan to
switch their support to Gaitskell. The left-wing position still
appears to command a majority of votes from the trade unions
and the constituency delegations. Cousins' statement on 2 Octo-
ber that his resolution means unilateral British disarmament--
a description he has until now refused to concede--may gain
for him additional support from extreme left-wingers.

Since the Trades Union Congress meeting early last month
when delegates endorsed both the official defense statement and
the Cousins resolution--the latter by a much larger margin--
several moderate Labor members of Parliament, previously
inclined to maintain a public silence on the issue, have spoken
up in favor of the official policy, which rejects an independent
British nuclear deterrent but supports an American deterrent
under NATO control. However, some of the party leaders have
done little to strengthen Gaitskell's position. George Brown,
Labor's parliamentary spokesman on defense matters and the
chief drafter of the official policy, has spent most of his efforts
in an unsuccessful attempt to reach a pre-conference accommod-
ation with Cousins. Harold Wilson, Gaitskell's runner-up as
party leader, continues to maintain his equivocal stand on the
issue.

Even if Gaitskell is able to eke out a narrow victory at the
conference, his hold on the party leadership will continue to be
precarious. The degeneration of the Labor party since the gen-
eral elections last fall has persuaded many moderate Laborites
that inept leadership has been a major factor in the party's de-
cline. The strength of this sentiment will be tested next month
when Parliament reconvenes and Labor members of Parliament
cast their annual votes for the party leaders.

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
