14 June 1961

MEMORANDUM TO:  All Branch Chiefs

FROM        :  Chief, Intelligence Information Staff

SUBJECT     :  Central Intelligence Bulletin Maps

The selection and production of maps for the CIB is usually done against short deadlines. Because of this the tendency has been to "make do" with maps slightly modified from versions previously used in either the CIWR or earlier issues of the CIB. This use of base-maps not ideally suited to the purposes of particular CIB items is sometimes unavoidable, since Graphics receives at best only one-half day's notice for the production of a new CIB map. To improve future maps in the CIB, however, the following guidelines and responsibilities, only a few of which are new, should henceforth be followed.

General Guidelines

1. A map for the CIB should be a simple "graphic" rather than "cartographic" presentation. Place names, roads, railroads and rivers specifically mentioned in either the brief or backup should be included on the map. As a general rule, no other geographic features should be included.

2. All CIB maps should have a title, a legend, a distance scale, and security classification. All special symbols used to show border incidents, active fighting, airfields, etc. should be identified and described in the legend.

3. On a CIB map, the country or area under discussion should stand out clearly from its surroundings. In the surrounding areas, no geographic features other than country names and international boundaries need normally be included.

4. Graphics is responsible for assuring that CIB maps meet these general criteria, which can be summed up in the two words simplicity and clarity.

Analysts' Responsibilities

1. The analyst should as early in the day as is practicable inform Graphics of any map required for the CIB item to appear in the following morning's Bulletin. This is the stage at which the analyst should assure that all place names and other geographic features mentioned in either brief or backup will be included in the map.

2. The analyst should refrain from asking Graphics to include information not directly pertinent to the CIB item.
