Thai and South Vietnamese Intrigue in Laos

The apparent plans of Thailand and South Vietnam to give financial support to non-Communist candidates in the 24 April parliamentary elections in Laos may complicate the Laotian Government's difficult task of developing a unified slate. Such support might also contribute to a new flare-up of bitterness between the reformist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI) and former Premier Phoui's Rally of the Lao People (RLP), which are now jockeying for preferred treatment in the selection of a government-approved slate. Allegations of Thai interference on the side of the CDNI and South Vietnamese support of the RLP aggravated the bitter dispute between the two groups which led to the fall of Phoui's government last December.

Thai Premier Marshal Sarit is reported to be giving covert financial support and tactical advice to the CDNI through his nephew General Phoumi, the Laotian defense minister and perhaps the most influential of the CDNI's leaders. Sarit hopes that Laos will eventually establish a military dictatorship, like the one in Thailand, and he probably feels that by helping CDNI-supported candidates he can retain and perhaps increase his influence over Phoumi and other military members of the CDNI.

Meanwhile, the RLP is reliably reported to have approached the South Vietnamese Embassy in Vientiane for financial support for 59 candidates. Many of these candidates will presumably be dropped from the government-approved slate, but Phoui may hope to run them as "independents" if funds for their campaign are forthcoming. This would run counter to the government's scheme for avoiding vote-splitting among anti-Communist candidates and would probably invite CDNI recriminations.

The South Vietnamese Embassy is reported reluctant to give all its support to one party, but may well be told to do so by Saigon. President Diem has tended in the past to place more confidence in the RLP than in the CDNI, whose leaders he considers inexperienced and somewhat brash.
