[PAGE 01]
30 May 1958

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 May 1958
(Information as of 0001 hours)

DAILY BRIEF

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Lebanon: Political maneuvering continues, with extremist opposition leaders still insisting on the government's virtual capitulation. Sporadic fighting among political factions erupted again in the Moslem quarter of Beirut on 29 May, but the security situation otherwise appears substantially unchanged, with General Shihab not making full use of the army against the rebels. Government authorities report seizures of additional quantities of arms, including mortars and antitank grenades, supplied to the rebels from Syria. General Shihab, meanwhile, has been approached by an emissary believed to be in Egyptian pay with a proposal which would eliminate pro-Western government in Lebanon in several stages over the next few months[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

Tunisia: Tunisian and French troops on 29 May waged a five-hour battle at Remada, the second clash within a week at this remote southern desert outpost. President Bourguiba has instructed his UN delegation to demand an immediate Security Council meeting to hear Tunisia's complaint against France. Meanwhile, Bourguiba appears to have abandoned hope that the United States will either supply the arms he has requested or make a firm declaration of support for his government. Tunisian government and Neo-Destour party officials at all levels demand that Bourguiba make determined preparations to counter any French attack. In his speech on 27 May before 100,000 demonstrators clamoring for arms, Bourguiba pointedly refrained from calling for support from the
[PAGE 04]
United States or the free world and expressed confidence that Tunisia would "win, if necessary, alone."

Algeria: The immediate private reaction among French military leaders in Algeria to the 29 May developments in Paris which apparently cleared De Gaulle's way to power is almost certainly one of immense relief that their virtual insurrection has, in effect, been "legitimized" and that further force will not be required. Throughout North Africa, French army leaders now will probably attempt to tighten discipline and avoid, at least in the immediate future, involvement in further incidents likely to have international repercussions. The Moslem nationalist rebels, while apparently somewhat hopeful that a De Gaulle government will be willing to reach an accommodation with them, can be expected to continue their guerrilla war until their "right to independence" is recognized.

*France: General de Gaulle's assumption of office appears to await only the formality of investiture, with the Socialists apparently ready to give him some two thirds of their votes in the National Assembly. Such a Socialist split, however, may end Mollet's control of the party and leave the minority increasingly susceptible to Communist popular-front overtures. Other groups such as the Democratic Resistance Union are also swinging to acceptance of De Gaulle in the face of the explicit threats of the Algerian junta to invade France if necessary. The Communists continue to press for demonstrations, and a general strike is a possibility, but the likelihood of widespread violence is discounted by a Ministry of Interior official. Police and National Security forces appear ready and more than willing to move quickly against any leftist-sponsored violence.

30 May 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii
