The embassy speculates that such surrenders may be ordered by the Indonesian Communist Party to strengthen its demands for stronger government action against the Darul Islam.

Comment: This course would be consistent with the current Communist policy of cooperating with the leftist Indonesian government. The Communists stand to lose no military potential, since the surrendered personnel could be absorbed by a Communist-controlled veterans organization which is openly carrying on paramilitary training. The defense minister is on record as favoring the issue of arms to this group to help it fight the Darul Islam.

SOUTH ASIA
7. Major Indian cabinet changes reported impending:

Prime Minister Nehru is pressing Food and Agriculture Minister Rafi Ahmed Kidwai to assume the defense portfolio.

Nehru also plans to replace Finance Minister Deshmukh with Chief Minister Pant of Uttar Pradesh. Nehru is said to regard Deshmukh as being too pro-Western and "in the pockets of the British and Americans."

Comment: The dismissal of Deshmukh would remove a moderating and generally pro-Western force from the cabinet, and give freer play to the nationalistic and anti-Western Kidwai, who already exercises strong influence on Nehru.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
8. Arab-Israeli tension mounts:

The Israeli government, under the moderate leadership of Prime Minister Moshe Sharett, is unlikely to initiate immediate major retaliatory action against either Syria or Jordan for alleged recent acts of aggression. This seems clear despite strong pressure from extremists, certain elements within the army and the public generally for such action.

Neither Jordan nor Syria wants to reopen hostilities with Israel. Jordan, according to Ambassador Mallory in Amman, fully recognizes its military inferiority. The new caretaker government of Syria does not want to break its armistice agreement with Israel, according to Ambassador Moose in Damascus.

Comment: While restraining influences on both sides are likely to prevent a major outbreak of hostilities, they cannot prevent mounting diplomatic and propaganda warfare. Israel is already using the current tension as an argument against American military aid to any Arab state. Jordan will persist in its refusal to hold high-level armistice talks with Israel, and the Syrian government will strengthen itself by a strong anti-Israeli position.

9. Rift widening between Iraq and Egypt over Turkish-Pakistani pact:

Prime Minister Jamali warned Egypt, apparently on 17 March, that he would open a "cold war" if Egyptian radio attacks on Iraq's alleged negotiations with Pakistan and other non-Arab states were not stopped within three days. Jamali said he would accuse the radio station of being pro-Israel and pro-Communist.

Comment: Relations between Egypt and Iraq, traditional rivals for leadership of the Arab states, have cooled noticeably in recent weeks. Iraq has been promoting an Arab federation plan and showing increasing independence of the Egyptian-dominated Arab League.

Egyptian attacks on Iraq are likely to encourage similar criticism from other Arab countries, particularly Saudi Arabia. This, along with mounting internal opposition in Iraq to participation in a foreign military alliance, makes it increasingly difficult for Jamali to align himself with the West.
