[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

18 February 1960

Copy No. 67

Army, DIA and State Dept.
review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Eastern Europe: Khrushchev's plans to cut the Soviet military force levels apparently are not to be followed immediately by unilateral reductions in the forces of the East European satellites. The Poles have made, and the Czechs probably will make any reductions in their own national forces dependent on West German reductions. The Balkan satellites may offer conditional reductions of their forces to draw attention to their proposals for limitation of armaments in the Balkan-Adriatic zone.

East Germany: In the past three weeks the USSR has initiated several moves in an attempt to bring pressure on the Western positions with regard to recognition of East Germany and access to West Berlin, as the time for summit negotiations approaches. The Allied Military Liaison Missions accredited to the Soviet forces in East Germany have been issued new passes worded to imply acceptance of some measure of East German authority over the missions and have been given a new map of restricted areas which closes the Soviet checkpoint at Helmstedt to mission personnel and substitutes crossing points into West Germany at two East German - controlled checkpoints.

i
[PAGE 05]
Morocco: General Kettani, at the instigation of the Moroccan crown prince, has renewed inquiries--the first since November--regarding American arms which might be supplied on the basis of the survey of Morocco's military needs by US experts last year. Indications are that in view of the present state of French-Moroccan relations, Morocco for the present ignores France's offer to equip the five units of elite troops organized last fall. Morocco is anxious to obtain modern aircraft and is reportedly planning to use the Ben Slimane (previously known as Boulhaut) base--scheduled to be evacuated on 1 March by American forces--as a new Moroccan air training center.

III. THE WEST

Britain-Kenya: African and settler representatives of the moderate faction at the London conference on Kenya's constitutional reforms have accepted in principle the far-reaching British proposals for an African majority in a 65-member legislative council elected on a broad franchise. The British governor would retain substantial powers. Although some disagreement persists over safeguards for the settler minority, strong dissent is thus far limited to a relatively small group of right-wing settlers. The British are sufficiently encouraged by the extent of agreement to permit the first African mass meetings in Kenya since 1953.

Paraguay: The Paraguayan Government expects new revolutionary attacks this week launched from bases in Argentina. A military alert and roadblocks in Asuncion were reinstituted on 14 February for the first time since the attacks of December 1959.

18 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
President Stroessner reportedly feels confident he can prevent any movement of revolutionaries into the interior, and the US army attache comments that Stroessner has the solid backing of the armed forces.

Cuba: The Cuban foreign minister has reportedly been instructed to examine the agreement under which the US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba, with a view to drafting a note to the US for revision of that agreement. Castro officials have in the past complained that the unilateral power of the US to terminate the agreement is objectionable to Cuba and probably have waited to raise the issue until they considered the timing most useful for purposes of bargaining and propaganda.

Watch Committee Conclusion: The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future: None.

18 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Puts Pressure on Allies to Recognize East Germany

In moves apparently intended to enhance East Germany's prestige and to test Allied determination to resist recognition of the German Democratic Republic (GDR), Soviet authorities have brought increasing pressure to bear on the Allied Military Liaison Missions (MLM) accredited to the Soviet forces in Germany. On 27 January, the US Mission was handed a new map showing areas permanently denied to MLM personnel. The restricted areas include the Russian-controlled Helmstedt-Marienborn checkpoint on the main access route to Berlin; mission personnel instead now are to use two crossing points on the East-West German border, which are manned by the East Germans. Four days later, Soviet authorities announced that they were issuing to MLM personnel new passes worded to imply de facto recognition of the GDR by the Western powers. On 15 February, Soviet authorities temporarily closed a large area in southwest Germany to visits of MLM personnel. US Army authorities note that the exception of one highway through the restricted area may have been intended as bait to induce mission personnel to use their new passes in order to enter the restricted area.

These moves coincided with a Soviet effort to involve the Allies in an admission of some East German authority over air access to West Berlin. On 3 February, Soviet officials in Berlin issued a flight safety guarantee, rejected by the West, for a special Scandinavian Airlines System flight along the air corridor to West Berlin's Tempelhof airport; the guarantee stated that permission for the flight had been given by "governmental authorities of the German Democratic Republic."

18 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Morocco Reopens Question of Procurement of US Arms

Prompted by Moroccan Crown Prince Moulay Hassan, who is chief of staff of the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces Maj. Gen. Ben Hamou Kettani has made renewed inquiries--the first since November--regarding the procurement of American arms. A survey of Morocco's military needs was conducted last fall by US experts in response to Moroccan arms requests. A token shipment of American equipment arrived in Morocco in time to be displayed during the national holidays in mid-November.

The crown prince wants American materiel to equip five units of elite troops--totaling about 1,750 men--organized last fall. Paris has offered to equip these units, but in the light of the present state of French-Moroccan relations, indications are that Morocco for the time being at least will ignore this offer.

Morocco is likely to request modern American planes in view of the early availability of the American air base at Ben Slimane (formerly Boulhaut), which is scheduled for evacuation on 1 March. Morocco has three jet fighter pilots and five students undergoing flight training in France. Any plans Rabat may have for the immediate utilization of the Ben Slimane base, however, may be complicated by negotiations with France. Under the 1950-51 French-American base agreements--not recognized by the Moroccan Government--the land and permanent base installations are the property of the French Government.

18 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Kenya Constitutional Conference Reaches Major Agreement

Representatives of African groups and moderate Europeans at the constitutional conference in London have accepted in principle the far-reaching British proposals for an African-dominated legislative council chosen by a greatly broadened electorate. Strong dissent is thus far limited to a relatively small group of right-wing settlers, and the extent of the agreement is acclaimed by the British press as a triumph for Colonial Secretary Macleod.

Of the 65 members, 33 Africans, 10 Europeans, 8 Asians, and 2 Arabs will be directly elected by a single multiracial electorate. The remaining 12 members--4 African, 4 European, and 4 others--will be chosen by the legislative council itself. Although the Africans failed to eliminate racial apportionment of seats, their leading spokesmen have indicated acceptance of the gains achieved at London. The franchise is extended to all who possess any one of the following qualifications: literacy, age over 40, holder of an office, or an annual income of $210. Some disagreement persists over constitutional safeguards for the settler minority. The conference is expected to end shortly. A detailed constitution--under which the British governor will retain some controls even over internal affairs--will then be drafted.

Encouraged by the African willingness to compromise, the British on 28 February will permit the first African mass meetings held in Kenya since 1953. Violence by the right-wing settlers remains a possibility, although they are not believed to have the support of most white Kenyans.

18 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Paraguay Expects New Rebel Attacks

President Stroessner, increasingly spotlighted as the last dictator in South America, is strengthening security measures in anticipation of new rebel attacks this week. On 14 February the regime reinstituted a military alert and again set up roadblocks in Asuncion--measures taken at the time of the December 1959 revolutionary attacks by the small 14th of May Movement. Also on 14 February the Humaita, one of Paraguay's two gunboats, steamed southward from Asuncion; it rarely leaves port unless trouble is expected.

The exile groups are still not completely united, and opposition party leaders in Asuncion still urge noninvolvement in the attacks. The Argentine police have recently raided some rebel arms caches, although some Argentine officials disapprove of their government's agreement with Paraguay to restrain rebel operations from Argentine territory.

Stroessner reportedly feels confident that he can prevent a rebel movement into the interior of Paraguay. The US army attache in Asuncion commented on 14 February that the armed forces are solidly behind Stroessner.

18 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
