[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Libya: The Libyan Government has formally requested a new round of "high level" negotiations with the United States on the Wheelus base agreement and on economic aid. This move, heralded for some time by Libyan pressure for increased, direct payments of "rent" for the base facilities, comes just after Libyan parliamentary elections in which most incumbents were defeated. The government depends in reality on the King's support rather than on that of parliament but evidently intends to point to the election results as an indication of rising nationalist sentiment; it will also feel in a stronger negotiation position because of favorable developments in the Libyan oil picture. The present base agreement extends to 1970; American aid in fiscal year 1959-60 amounts to $21,500,000, while the UK has contributed more than $9,000,000.

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

France: all diagnostic instrumentation for the first French nuclear weapons test is now ready and that the date of the test will depend on favorable weather. the initial shot would take place within the month of February. After analysis of the first shot is completed --which will take some time-- expects to set off a "fairly rapid" succession of atmospheric shots. underground tests--not necessarily to be held in the Sahara--are likely to follow later.

France-Algeria: The replacement of General Massu and the tone of the 22 January communique reaffirming De Gaulle's policy of self-determination for Algeria suggest that De Gaulle is laying the groundwork for a bold move to bring about a negotiated settlement regardless of rightist and army opposition. He gave Guy Mollet the impression on 19 January that he wants to set a date now for a referendum in Algeria. The same day, De Gaulle contended to a rightist deputy from Algeria that the "false tension" there was "entirely the creation of the military." He has announced that he will visit Algiers on 5 February. Extremist Europeans in Algeria, large numbers of whom are armed and organized, are likely to demonstrate at any time in protest against De Gaulle's position.

Cyprus: The American Consul General in Nicosia reports that Greek Cypriot negotiators in London would rather extend the date for Cyprus' independence indefinitely than agree to present British territorial demands regarding future UK military bases on the island. The dispute continues to center on the size of the bases to be retained under British sovereignty, with British military leaders insisting that far more territory be included than is proposed in the latest compromise offer suggested by Greek Cypriot officials.

23 Jan 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 05]
Dominican Republic: Approximately 1,000 Dominicans--many of them members of leading families--have been arrested during the past few days to forestall any move against the Trujillo regime. The US Embassy believes that the revolutionary organization is now disrupted, but that there is a strong possibility of an individual attempt against Trujillo's life as a result of the mass arrests.

Venezuela: The Venezuelan Government has arrested several officers and civilians involved in a terrorist campaign and coup attempt set for 23 January, the second anniversary of the overthrow of the dictator, Perez Jimenez. The action was probably also intended as a warning to other officers who may be implicated. President Betancourt's regime, though facing internal friction, is believed capable of controlling any violence which may erupt from demonstrations on 23 January.

23 Jan 60     DAILY BRIEF     iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

De Gaulle Moves to Quash Opposition on Algerian Policy

The relief of General Massu from his key army command in Algeria, together with the firm tone of the 22 January Paris communique reaffirming De Gaulle's offer of self-determination for Algeria, suggests that the French President is laying the groundwork for a bid for a negotiated solution regardless of rightist and army opposition.

The communique's statement that before the end of 1960 commissions of Algerian deputies and general and municipal councils would be summoned to Paris to study all major Algerian problems suggests that De Gaulle hopes to persuade the Algerian rebels that they could best gain their long-term objectives by participating in such deliberations.

His intention to visit Algeria on 5 February and his swift replacement of General Massu by a nonpolitical officer, Lieutenant General Jean Crepin, suggests that De Gaulle is confident his authority as chief of state will be respected by the army. He will nevertheless probably tour military installations in Algeria to reassure key groups of officers concerning his policy, as he did prior to his 16 September proposal for self-determination.

23 Jan 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4

[PAGE 08]
In Algiers, a rightist leader has stated that a mass demonstration by rightist Europeans is scheduled for 25 January. In view of settler resentment at De Gaulle's recent actions, demonstrations or disorders could take place at any time. Extremist settlers are said to recognize that they can no longer control De Gaulle's actions concerning Algeria, but reportedly hope to inflame European sentiment as a prelude to revolt.

23 Jan 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 5

[PAGE 09]
Trujillo Acts to Crush Revolutionary Organization

Approximately 1,000 Dominicans--many of them members of leading families--suspected of revolutionary activity against the Trujillo regime have been arrested during the past few days. The US Embassy believes that some 2,000 people may have been arrested or executed since the abortive invasion by insurgents from Cuba last June. It states that there is extreme tension among all levels of Dominican society.

During the past several weeks Trujillo has enacted several measures designed to gain popular support and thereby frustrate dissident plans. Rents were reduced for the small farmers and city dwellers who have made up his broad political support, an earlier decision denying workers Christmas bonuses was reversed, scheduled salary decreases for government employees were canceled, and it was announced that the International Monetary Fund had given the regime a standby credit of $11,250,000 that could be used to reinforce the economy. In addition, he arranged to have his son, General Rafael L. ("Ramfis") Trujillo--who as chief of the Combined General Staff was generally detested by the armed forces--sent to Europe, apparently for a protracted stay.

The US Embassy believes that the revolutionary organization is disrupted, but that there is a "strong possibility" the mass arrests will inspire an individual attempt against Trujillo's life. The arrests may also may increase resentment against Trujillo and eventually lead to renewed plotting on an even larger scale. Dissidence is already reported in the armed forces, and this may increase as a result of the arrests.

23 Jan 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 6

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
