Situation in Laos

The Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces retain the initiative in Xieng Khouang Province; the government outpost at Ban Ban, to the northeast of Xieng Khouang town, appears to have fallen after having been under enemy pressure for some days. With the fall of Ban Ban, the enemy would appear to have effective control of the road leading from Nong Het, on the North Vietnamese frontier, westward to the Plaine des Jarres. Government troops remaining in this area, including some 300 paratroopers dropped on 1 January, appear to be dispersed in the jungle. The bulk of the troops in Xieng Khouang Province at the time of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao offensive which began in late December reportedly have withdrawn to an area about 45 miles southeast of Xieng Khouang town. Estimated to number between 1,200 and 1,500, these elements are said to be equipped with small arms and to have left heavier equipment behind. Many of these troops are Meo tribesmen, who in the past fought the Pathet Lao with considerably greater ardor than did Lao troops. Given proper leadership and equipment, they might at least pose a strong guerrilla threat to the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces.

The ten Soviet IL-14s based at Hanoi flew logistic support missions into Laos on 6 January and on the 7th were again scheduled for flights into the Vang Vieng area. Three North Vietnamese aircraft were also scheduled for flights into Laos on 7 January.

Continued air support flights over the Vang Vieng area indicate a Communist intention to retain this strategic position on the road between Vientiane and Luang Prabang. Vang Vieng could serve either as a blocking position to prevent an overland effort by troops from Vientiane to retake the Plaine des Jarres or as a staging area for a future attack on Vientiane.

Four hitherto unobserved Soviet MI-1 helicopters were noted flying between Haiphong and Hanoi on the 6th; these aircraft probably recently arrived by ship at Haiphong or may have been carried

7 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
