[PAGE 01]
18 October 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Chinese people being told Korean truce is temporary (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Developments in the Israeli-Jordanian dispute (page 5).
6. Israel pushes Jordan River diversion project (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

18 Oct 53

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Chinese people being told Korean truce is temporary:

Chinese Communist officials there are stating in public that the Korean truce is only temporary, as it will "inevitably be broken by Americans."

The American consul general in Hong Kong notes that according to the North Korean pilot who defected to the West recently, military units in North Korea are being told that the truce is merely a breathing spell. The consul general believes that such statements may indicate a Communist intention to break the truce, but that they are more probably intended to keep the troops alert and to get the populace to perform tasks set by the State.

Comment: Communist internal propaganda throughout the period of the truce talks followed a similar line.

- 3 -

18 Oct 53

[PAGE 04]
[PAGE 05]
5. Developments in the Israeli-Jordanian dispute:

The Israeli government apparently has been both surprised and disturbed by the sudden violence of Jordanian reaction and the international condemnation of the 14 October attack by its forces on a Jordanian village. Under

In an effort to avoid direct responsibility for last week's incident, the Israeli delegate to the UN Mixed Armistice Commission in Jerusalem offered on 15 October to vote for the resolution charging Israel with the attack if there was no mention of "Israeli regular army" involvement. Initial public reactions of the Israeli government suggest that it will seek to divert the current international focus from the specific incident to Arab-Israeli disputes in general.

There is still no evidence that the incident will lead to a breakdown of the Arab-Israeli armistice.

6. Israel pushes Jordan River diversion project:

Israeli work on the diversion of the upper Jordan River in the demilitarized zone between Israel and Syria is continuing on a three-shift basis in an atmosphere of "feverish activity," according to an American official who visited the site on 15 October.

- 5 -

18 Oct 53

[PAGE 06]
Military police are reportedly constructing defense installations at the scene.

Comment: On 23 September General Bennike, chief of staff of the UN Truce Supervision Organization, requested Israel to suspend work on diversion of the river.

- 6 -

18 Oct 53
