[PAGE 01]
25 May 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. RIOTS IN TAIPEI

2. LIBYAN PRIME MINISTER RESIGNS
(page 4).

3. MASJUMI LEADER ATTACKS INDONESIAN PRESIDENT
AND CABINET

4. YUGOSLAV DEFENSE MINISTER TO VISIT MOSCOW
[PAGE 04]
1. RIOTS IN TAIPEI

The mob violence in Taipei on 24 May which resulted in the wrecking of the US embassy and the US Information Agency building reveals strong and widespread anti-American sentiment on Taiwan. The rioting lasted for 12 hours and eased only after heavily armed Chinese troops occupied the city.

The riots were inspired by inflammatory articles in the local newspapers which bitterly assailed the US military court acquittal of a MAAG sergeant who shot and killed a Chinese "peeping Tom." The Nationalist government had protested the court decision shortly before the disorders began.

National Youth Corps students appear to have participated in the rioting in an organized manner. Ambassador Rankin, in a cable sent immediately after he returned to Taipei from a trip to Hong Kong, reported "various, if fragmentary, indications that the riots were organized in advance."

Negotiations for a status-of-forces agreement between the United States and the Nationalist government, which have been stalled for some months, now may become even more difficult.

Chinese Communist broadcasts have recently taken the line that the United States is making a "colony" of Taiwan. Pro-Communist newspapers in Hong Kong have already denounced the acquittal verdict and Peiping can be expected to exploit the riots with propaganda calling for "Chinese unity" against American "imperialism."
[PAGE 05]
2. LIBYAN PRIME MINISTER RESIGNS

The British financial adviser to King Idriss of Libya has informed the American ambassador that the resignation of Prime Minister Mustafa Ben Halim was accepted on 24 May. Former deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs Abdul Majid Kubaar has been asked to form a new cabinet.

Ben Halim will be officially named as an adviser to the new prime minister, as will Mahmud Muntasser, former prime minister and present ambassador to London. Ali Sahli and Muhyi al-Din Fikini, ministers of communications and finance, respectively, have been ousted. Defense Minister Abdul Qadir al-Allam will be in charge of communications, and the defense post will be filled "for a short while" by Saddiq Muntasser, former ambassador to Egypt.

The new cabinet reportedly will be sworn in on 26 May and is expected to retain the pro-Western orientation of its predecessor. The changes are said to be completely satisfactory to Ben Halim.

Comment

Ben Halim was strongly pro-Western during the latter part of his three-year tenure as prime minister. Prime Minister-designate Kubaar was personally chosen last March by Ben Halim as his deputy because of his "loyalty and reliability." The new defense minister, Saddiq Muntasser, is pro-Egyptian and a foe of Ben Halim, but the ousting of Sahli and Fikini, who had been opposed to the policies of Ben Halim, would seem to support the view that the new government will continue to pursue generally pro-Western policies.
[PAGE 06]
3. MASJUMI LEADER ATTACKS INDONESIAN PRESIDENT
AND CABINET

Former premier Harahap, the Masjumi parliamentary leader, during debates on the Indonesian cabinet's program on 21 May, charged that President Sukarno had acted irresponsibly in declaring martial law, had violated the constitution by appointing the cabinet himself, and had demolished every form of democracy. He also accused the cabinet of violating the constitution when it created the "national advisory council" by an emergency cabinet decree.

The spokesman of the Nahdatul Ulama (NU) Party, however, stated that his party's position would depend on future actions of the cabinet, and that the NU did not reject the national council out of hand.

Comment

The lack of unity between the two major Moslem parties will keep parliament ineffective as an instrument of opposition to Sukarno and the cabinet. Parliament's influence over the government's program has already been circumscribed by Prime Minister Djuanda's announcement that parliament could debate the cabinet's program as much as it pleased, but would not be asked for a vote of confidence in the government.

Harahap's attack on Sukarno, probably the most violent public criticism of the president by an Indonesian spokesman to date, is likely further to complicate relations between Djakarta and the dissident provinces which are Masjumi strongholds.
[PAGE 07]
4. YUGOSLAV DEFENSE MINISTER TO VISIT MOSCOW

The trip of Yugoslav defense minister Gosnjak to Moscow scheduled for June is a "purely courtesy one", according to a Yugoslav Foreign Ministry official, Franc Kos. He told an American embassy official on 23 May that the trip had been arranged in principle at the time of Tito's trip to Moscow last June. Kos, citing recent Soviet expressions of hostility, stated that "relations between Belgrade and Moscow were hardly conducive to friendliness and certainly not to obtaining anything concrete in the way of military assistance."

Asked what Tito had in mind when he stated early this week that relations are improving, Kos replied that Tito undoubtedly had in mind not the USSR, but Poland, Rumania, and even Czechoslovakia, whose Premier Siroky would probably visit Belgrade in June.

Comment

Tito probably timed Gosnjak's trip to demonstrate Yugoslavia's independence following the publicly announced decision by the United States to resume military aid deliveries. He probably now feels it useful to demonstrate his willingness to call a truce in the ideological war with Moscow. This will be the first high-level Yugoslav-Soviet contact since October.
[PAGE 08]
