Syrian Army Officers Disgruntled With New Regime

Antiregime pamphlets were distributed in Damascus between 3 and 5 April, apparently by police personnel at the instigation of "certain army elements".

Syrian Army involvement in such action could stem from dissatisfaction of former army officers with their current restricted roles as civilian officials and of present officers over the manner in which the UAR military command is effecting personnel transfers. Nasir appears to be using individual transfers either within the military or into civilian positions to eliminate from the army any potential centers of future conspiracies.

The reported arrest at Nasir's order of Syrian Minister of Municipal and Village Affairs Abd al-Karim, ex-chief of operations of the Syrian Army, is probably due to his association with ex-Chief of Staff Bizri in efforts to modify new military assignments. The story being spread publicly, however, is that Abd al-Karim was arrested for abusing his new civilian position. Bizri himself is being detained in Cairo. Other leftist supporters of Bizri, as well as rightist associates of former dictator Shishakli, either have been transferred out of Syria or are scheduled to leave. Former Assistant Chief of Staff Nafuri, now Syrian minister of communications, may be "the next prominent ex-officer marked to go", since he also is believed to have been implicated in the Bizri affair. Former G-2 Sarraj seems as strong as ever, with most of the army's former internal security and intelligence functions being shifted to his Ministry of Interior for the Syrian region.

The formation of a "free officer" group has been reported and Lebanese Prime Minister Sulh stated on 7 April that he is receiving reports of dissidence within Syria from a broad range of sources, but gave no details. It seems doubtful that present or former army officers, despite their disgruntlement, are making any real effort to throw off Nasir's control, or that a "free officer group" could develop into a significant dissident force.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
