[PAGE 01]
3 August 1959
CONTINUED CONTROL  Copy No. C 63
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 AUGUST 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Geneva--USSR spokesmen hint link
between interim Berlin accord and
all-German talks could be modified
in exchange for agreement in principle to reduce Western forces in
Berlin.
Moscow grants concessions in impending new arms deal with UAR.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Military situation in northern Laos
remains grave; North Vietnam is
probably involved in planning and
direction of attacks.
Tunisia--Bourguiba's decision to
exchange ambassadors with Czechoslovakia may be move to appease
domestic critics.
UK military planning team concludes
discussions with Kuwait on defense of
sheikdom.
Sudanese political situation remains
unstable as regime begins final series
of trials of dissident officers.
Israeli action in demilitarized zone
may provoke new clash with Syrians.

III. THE WEST
Cyprus--Grivas privately calls on
former aides to oppose Makarios; two
former top Grivas lieutenants say they
will support Archbishop instead.
West Germany--Brentano hopes to
revive proposal for nonaggression
pact with Poland, Czechoslovakia.
Investigation commission's criticism
of British handling of recent Nyasaland disorders strengthens African
nationalists.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR—Geneva: Soviet spokesmen at Geneva have hinted
that in exchange for Western agreement in principle
to reduce Allied forces in West Berlin, the USSR would agree
to soften its insistence on a link between an interim Berlin arrangement and an all-German committee. A member of the
Soviet delegation reportedly informed bloc journalists on 29
July that if Western concessions on troop levels were forthcoming, the USSR would make certain "gestures" concerning
its proposal for all-German negotiations. He stated that
even a reduction of 1,000 men would satisfy the USSR. The
counselor of the Soviet delegation hinted at another Soviet
concession in a talk with an American official by conveying
the impression that Gromyko would abandon his earlier opposition to a four-power commission to handle access problems.

USSR—UAR: Moscow, continuing its efforts to maintain
close ties with the UAR, apparently has decided to grant significant concessions to Cairo in a new arms deal. This agreement has been under negotiation for the past year and probably
will be concluded shortly. Although the full scope of the agreement and the concessions approved by Moscow are not yet
apparent, the USSR has agreed to supply the UAR with additional jet fighters and "new bombers." In addition Moscow
has apparently agreed to provide certain civilian items, possibly including civil aircraft, on the same financial terms
applying to arms purchases. Terms apparently will be extremely favorable to Cairo, calling for discounts of at least
one-third the quoted price and providing for extended repayment, probably in the form of surplus UAR commodities.
(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The military situation in northern Laos remains
grave, with Communist partisans retaining the initiative.
Senior Lao officials continue to emphasize the participation
of North Vietnamese troops. Although their evidence is inconclusive, it is probable that North Vietnam is involved in
the planning and direction of the attacks and that North
Vietnamese-trained elements are engaged in the fighting.
Hanoi has warned that it cannot remain indifferent to the developments in Laos which, it alleges, threaten the security
of North Vietnam. (Page 2)

Tunisia-Czechoslovakia: President Bourguiba's decision
to exchange ambassadors with Czechoslovakia--after having
rebuffed Czech overtures six weeks ago--may be a move to
silence internal criticism that he has been dilatory in opening relations with the Soviet bloc. Bourguiba probably will
at a later date also exchange ambassadors with the Soviet
Union. Such steps probably foreshadow no change in Tunisia's
policy of Western-oriented "nonengagement." (Page 4)

UK-Kuwait: A British military planning team which arrived in Kuwait in late July has concluded discussions on the
defense of Kuwait, the Middle East's largest oil producer.
The Kuwaiti Ruler's unwillingness to permit British troops
or maintenance personnel to be stationed in Kuwait has forced
the British to modify plans to stockpile tanks and other heavy
equipment in the sheikdom. Kuwaiti authorities have agreed,
however, to purchase British tanks, and to send Kuwaiti Army
personnel to Britain for training. The Ruler has also agreed
that weapons and equipment purchased for the Kuwaiti Army
could be made available to British troops if Kuwait were
threatened. Kuwaiti authorities first sought closer military
cooperation with their British allies following the rise of
Communist activity in Iraq.
3 Aug 59  DAILY BRIEF  ii

[PAGE 06]
Sudan: The situation remains highly unstable as the
Abboud military government moves into the final series of
trials of officers implicated in the May coup attempt. The
power struggle continues in the army between opponents
and supporters of the accused.
Abboud has received letters demanding
that he release the arrested officers and arrest cabinet
strongman, Brigadier Hasan Beshir Nasir, or be assassinated by the "free ones." The same day Sudanese Army
headquarters tightened restrictions on movement of officers to Khartoum. (Page 5)

Israel-UAR: The chief of staff of the UN Truce Supervisory Organization (UNTSO) has warned that a serious new
incident may occur between the Syrians and Israelis as a
result of the movement of a platoon of heavily armed Israeli
"police" into the southern demilitarized zone south of Lake
Tiberias on 29 July. The Israelis claim that the force has
been deployed to protect construction of a road for use by
agricultural equipment. The UNTSO official and UAR officers believe, however, that the road is military in purpose,
and threatens to outflank Syrian front-line positions.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: General George Grivas has privately called
on his former top aides in Cyprus to be ready to abandon
Archbishop Makarios, but two top lieutenants in the EOKA
movement, who are cabinet ministers in the transitional government, have already indicated they will continue to support
Makarios. Support from such quarters will greatly assist
Makarios in pursuing his moderate policies for Cyprus in the
face of criticism from extremists such as Grivas.
(Page 6)
3 Aug 59  DAILY BRIEF  iii

[PAGE 07]
West Germany: Foreign Minister Brentano and some ministry officials hope to revive his proposal for a nonaggression
pact with Poland and Czechoslovakia at the first practicable opportunity, although the cabinet rejected it on 22 July. Brentano
feels the proposal could serve as a tactical move to offset Soviet
charges of German obstructiveness in East-West negotiations.
Although Adenauer has considered such a move for some time,
he apparently feels that it would be a unilateral concession with
no immediate advantage for Bonn. (Page 7)

Britain - Central Africa: Criticism by a special commission
of the handling of last winter's disorders in Nyasaland may indirectly increase African unrest there. London is unlikely to
initiate any significant corrective action which could be construed
as an admission of errors before the British general elections expected in October, and the Macmillan government will therefore
remain vulnerable to Labor charges that "police state" conditions
are allowed to continue. In Nyasaland itself, the criticism has
strengthened the appeal of the nationalist movement led by the
imprisoned Dr. Hastings Banda. (Page 8)
3 Aug 59  DAILY BRIEF  iv

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Moves to Maintain Close Ties With Cairo

Moscow agreed to grant major concessions to the UAR in a
new arms deal. Under the agreement, the Soviet Union will supply the UAR with additional jet fighters and "new bombers."
Cairo last year had asked the USSR to provide two squadrons
of MIG-19s and one squadron of TU-16 jet medium bombers,
which Moscow had refused previously. Moscow, however, has
apparently decided to increase its efforts to maintain close relations with Cairo and may have agreed to a compromise, involving the supply of other less advanced combat aircraft.

In addition, Moscow now has agreed to provide "civilian"
equipment to the UAR under the new agreement. In the past the
Soviet Union has repeatedly refused to permit the UAR to include
such items as civil aircraft and trucks in arms deals, insisting
that the UAR purchase these items, specifically modern civil
aircraft such as the IL-18 and the TU-104, under short-term
commercial credits and at the full quoted price.

The arms deal apparently will be concluded on the basis of
"the financial terms of the former agreements," suggesting that
Moscow will grant the UAR large discounts. Moscow had previously agreed to sell arms to the UAR under this agreement at
one-third their price and on extended payments. Since these terms
did not appear to be completely satisfactory to Cairo and, in view
of the reference to the former agreements, Moscow apparently
has agreed to make the terms of repayment even more favorable
to the UAR. Cairo probably will be required to make only token
payments for its arms purchases, presumably in the form of surplus commodities such as cotton.

The agreement has been under negotiation, mainly in Moscow,
since July 1958 and was approved in draft form in March. Difficulties, primarily concerning the financial terms, delayed the
final agreement. The UAR's arms-purchasing agent in Moscow
was instructed by Cairo on 29 July to agree to sign the contracts
that come under the agreement or to sign the agreement itself,
provided it stipulates a supplementary agreement to cover additional requests and the civilian equipment. In the same message,
Cairo revealed that it was contacting Moscow to "define the extent" of its concessions to the UAR.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1

[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos

The military situation in northern Laos remains grave.
Communist partisan forces apparently retain the initiative
in large areas of Sam Neua Province, following their initial
attacks in mid-July, and most recently have extended their
operations to the southeastern corner of Phong Saly Province.
The previously reported incidents of 27 July in central Laos
have not yet been followed by other indications of a countrywide uprising, although the mining of roads in both central
Laos and to the south of Sam Neua Province has been reported.

The Laotian Government has sent small numbers of reinforcements to Sam Neua Province, but their effectiveness has
yet to be demonstrated. The government's capability to reinforce is hampered by the need to retain troops on security
missions in other potentially troublesome areas, by its limited airlift capability, and by the rugged nature of the northern
terrain--a heavily forested, mountainous area with few trails.
The Lao Air Force commander has stated that, as of 29 July,
four of his six C-47s were undergoing repair.

In recent official briefings, senior Lao authorities have
emphasized the involvement of North Vietnamese troops. They
believe this is a major infiltration effort, rather than an invasion, to set up bases of dissidence with clandestine North
Vietnamese support in order to regain control of the two former Pathet Lao provinces of Sam Neua and Phong Saly. While
their evidence thus far--several weapons and grenades, the
statements of a captured tribesman, and of two Lao Army soldiers who escaped after capture by the enemy--is inconclusive,
North Vietnamese complicity in terms of supply and leadership
is highly probable, and it is also probable that North Vietnamtrained units are engaged in the fighting. Hanoi has warned
that it will not remain indifferent to developments in Laos. The

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2

[PAGE 10]
locale of much of the fighting readily permits covert supply from
across the border.

The Communists probably estimate that any demonstrated
inability of the Laotian Government to cope with the partisan attacks will bring effective pressure on the Laotian Government and the West for the return of the International Control Commission (ICC). Peiping and Hanoi probably regard the ICC as the best means at present for restoring an atmosphere favorable for the expansion of Communist assets in Laos, assuring Laotian neutrality, and frustrating US and French efforts to train the Laotian Army.
With cumulative evidence of the present Phoui government's proUS orientation, coupled with its moderate success in undercutting Communist strength in some sections of the country, the propaganda from Peiping and Hanoi has reflected increasing concern
over the deteriorating Communist position in Laos. The relatively
poor showing of the Laotian Army in June against the renegade
Pathet Lao battalion may have encouraged Peiping and Hanoi to
act while local partisan capabilities were still sufficient to keep
the Laotian Government off balance.

During his visit to the Soviet Union last month, North Vietnam's President Ho Chi Minh undoubtedly discussed with Soviet
leaders the problem of Communist strategy in Laos. At his next
meeting with British Foreign Secretary Lloyd on 3 August, Gromyko probably will renew Soviet pressure for reconvening the
truce commission.

Meanwhile, an Indian official in New Delhi has implied his
government's concern, as chairman of the ICC, over how to deal
with Communist bloc objections to the recent introduction of
American military training personnel into Laos. Commonwealth
Secretary Desai stated it was unfortunate that the Laotian Government had itself requested American instructors; if the French,
who are permitted under the Geneva truce terms to maintain a
training mission, had made the request, there would have been no
legal basis for objection. Desai also noted that the current activity in Laos was another clear indication of the reason why India
feels meetings of the ICC "when needed" could be helpful in confirming allegations of foreign intervention.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3

[PAGE 11]
Tunisia Announces Decision to Exchange Ambassadors
With Czechoslovakia

President Bourguiba's decision to exchange ambassadors
with Czechoslovakia "came as a surprise," according to a
Tunisian Foreign Secretariat official. In mid-June, Bourguiba
was reported to have rebuffed the third Czech request for an
exchange of diplomatic representatives. His move now may be
an effort to silence criticism that he has been dilatory about
opening relations with the Soviet bloc, although he made a decision in principle some time ago to do so.

A Czech ambassador is expected to arrive in Tunis this
month and become the first Soviet bloc diplomat accredited to
Tunisia. Until his arrival, the chief of the Czech trade mission--which has succeeded in increasing Czech-Tunisian
trade--will act as chargé. Rather than open an embassy in
Prague, Tunisia may be represented by its ambassador in
Rome.

The American chargé in Tunis comments that the choice
of Czechoslovakia, rather than the USSR or Communist China,
is typical of Bourguiba's gradualism, but that an exchange of
diplomatic representatives with the USSR is probably "only a
matter of time." The exchange of representatives represents
no change in Tunisia's foreign policy of Western-oriented
"nonengagement" with either power bloc.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4

[PAGE 12]
Continuing Instability in the Sudan

The internal situation remains unstable as the Abboud military government moves into the final stage of the conspiracy
trials of officers implicated in the May coup attempt. The government has concluded its case against General Hamid, last of
three high-ranking officers to be tried, and has announced that
trials of junior officers will begin on 4 August. The sentences
of convicted officers will probably not be announced by President
Abboud until all the trials have been completed later this month.

Meanwhile, the power struggle in the army is continuing
between opponents and supporters of the accused. The forceful Minister for Cabinet Affairs, Brigadier Hasan Beshir Nasir,
has been striving to reshuffle officer appointments to ensure
loyalty in key positions, particularly in the armored and artillery forces. Army headquarters tightened existing restrictions on travel of army
officers to Khartoum and required that all officers provide 48
hours' advance notice and obtain permission before traveling to
the capital. Also, the UAR ambassador in Khartoum informed Cairo that
President Abboud had received letters demanding that he release
the arrested officers and issue orders for the arrest of Hasan
Beshir Nasir, or be assassinated at the hands of the "free ones"
--presumably a dissident officer group.
Abboud's wife was attempting to persuade him to avoid danger by
leaving the government.

Former Premier Azhari has indicated that civilian political
groups, with some military support, are attempting to find a
basis for establishing a nonparty civilian cabinet under a supreme council of retired officers. Some political figures, however, appear striving to gain advantage from the unstable situation by maneuvering to obtain Egyptian support. The UAR
ambassador in Khartoum informed Cairo that Brigadier Hasan Beshir Nasir wished to send a secret
envoy for talks with President Nasir. Ansar sect leader Sidiq
al-Mahdi expressed concern to Ambassador Moose on 27 July
over the visit to Cairo and Moscow by Ethiopian Emperor Haile
Selassie, because the Sudan had always considered Ethiopia
as its "second line of defense" against Egyptian encroachment.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5

[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

Makarios Gets Support From Former Top EOKA Leaders

Former EOKA leader George Grivas has followed his recent
public announcement dissociating himself from responsibility for
the Cyprus accords with a private call to ministers of the transitional government of Cyprus to be ready to abandon Archbishop
Makarios. Several ministers of the transitional government were
formerly active in EOKA, including Minister of Communications
Georghiades and Minister of Labor Georkadjis, who were Grivas'
top lieutenants. Both informed the American consul general in
Nicosia on 30 July that they regretted Grivas' recent announcement and were attempting to convince him not to continue his
campaign; they stated that no minister would resign. Georghiades
flew to Athens on 31 July, reportedly to tell Grivas that 90 percent of the leadership of the right-wing Greek Cypriot nationalist
front, which succeeded EOKA last spring, was supporting
Makarios, and to warn him that only the Turks and Communists
stand to gain from the developing rift between himself and the
Archbishop.

If Makarios can retain the support of the former EOKA leaders, he will be in a strong position to rebuff attempts by Grivas
to upset the Cyprus settlements. He is also in a position to cite--
as the Greek Government has already done--speeches by Grivas
at the time the settlement was negotiated, calling on the Cypriots
to support Makarios and to ignore those who would disrupt Greek
Cypriot unity.

Turkish Cypriots fear that the rift between Makarios and
Grivas will allow the extremists to intimidate the moderate leadership into more intransigent positions on questions regarding
the settlement still to be resolved. The extremists have a potential leader on Cyprus in the person of Bishop Kyprianos of
Kyrenia, who has never accepted the settlement and still demands union of the island with Greece. A few fanatics, looking
to Kyprianos and Grivas for leadership, could cause a dangerous
revival of intercommunal tension by isolated acts of terrorism.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6

[PAGE 14]
Bonn Foreign Minister to Press for Pacts with Poland
And Czechoslovakia

West German Foreign Minister Brentano has not abandoned his proposal for nonaggression pacts with Poland and
Czechoslovakia despite its rejection by Chancellor Adenauer
and the cabinet on 22 July. Brentano and the Foreign Ministry are seeking to disarm public criticism of West Germany's
inflexibility at Geneva, and are evidently behind the press
agitation for a more positive West German policy on Eastern
Europe.

The idea of offering nonaggression pacts in these countries has been under discussion by Bonn officials for over two
years. Early last February, serious high-level consideration
was given to a plan for concluding bilateral nonaggression
pacts with the USSR, Poland, and possibly Czechoslovakia in
order to stimulate public support for a strong Western stand
on Berlin and to counter Soviet charges that West Germany
seeks to employ force to recover its lost territories.

Adenauer, however, supported by a majority of government leaders and refugee-expellee groups, has opposed the
proposal as a one-sided concession to gain nebulous objectives
at the cost of arousing Allied suspicions of West German motives. In order to fend off criticism that he is obstructing
rapprochement with Germany's eastern neighbors, the chancellor has allowed press leaks to the effect that the proposal,
although undesirable at this time, remains a possible future
move by West Germany.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7

[PAGE 15]
London's Inaction May Lead to Further Unrest in Central Africa

The special Devlin Commission's criticisms of the British
Government's handling of last winter's disturbances in Nyasaland
are likely to bolster the African nationalist movement there, led
by the imprisoned Dr. Hastings Banda. The American consul general in Salisbury believes that the far-reaching charges of government overstatement and misrepresentation concerning the
African "massacre plot" will substantially enhance the general
feeling of unrest and uncertainty already plaguing the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The extent to which unrest
increases largely depends upon whether any corrective action
is taken toward Banda, who still appears unchallenged as leader
of the Nyasaland nationalists.

The highly charged political atmosphere in Britain inhibits
the Macmillan government from taking such action. The American Embassy in London believes that any major British initiative,
such as negotiation with the nationalist leadership, is effectively
precluded until after the general elections anticipated in October.
Although failure to act leaves the government vulnerable to Labor
party charges of maintaining the "police state" conditions which
the commission cited, the Conservatives evidently prefer not to
risk their slim popular lead by seeming to acknowledge the correctness of the Labor party's charges. Despite the normally
limited electoral appeal of colonial questions, the Labor party's
failure to win popularity with its economic or foreign policy programs makes it especially eager to exploit this issue.

British partisan differences over African policy have further
threatened the prospects for Nyasaland and the federation by the
clash two weeks ago over preparations for the review of the federation's constitution expected next year.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8

[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 17]
