Situation in Laos

General Phoumi stated that he neither expected nor intended to come to an early agreement with Souvanna and Prince Souphannouvong on a coalition government. Phoumi cited various legal and technical impediments to early formation of such a regime but added that in any event, it was impossible to settle the question until the neutrality of Laos had been assured by some form of agreement at Geneva. With regard to a much-mooted "summit meeting" with Souvanna and Souphannouvong, Phoumi stated that he would be willing to meet with them, provided a mutually satisfactory site could be agreed upon.

According to a report that is probably true, Phoumi was to stop off in Nong Khai, Thailand, on 19 May, during a flight to Savannakhet, to see Premier Sarit. Phoumi was characterized as feeling isolated and puzzled by the American position on Laos; it is probable that he hoped to obtain new insights into American intentions from Sarit on the basis of the latter's recent talks with Vice President Johnson. The report quotes Phoumi to the effect that if the United States is not prepared to act militarily in his behalf in the event the Pathet Lao should suddenly attack Vientiane or Luang Prabang, he should know about it, in which case he would prepare to move his government to Pakse in southern Laos.

Should Phoumi become persuaded that the United States would not come to his assistance in the event of the resumption of the Pathet Lao offensive, there is a possibility that he might suddenly come to terms with Souvanna and the Pathet Lao, his contrary protestations to Ambassador Brown notwithstanding.

Xieng Khouang town the airstrip there is lightly defended by two companies. The radio station appeared powerful and had a trans-horizontal aerial. Three pairs of permanent telephone lines were observed along the Plaine des Jarres - Xieng Khouang road with one pair terminating about four miles from the Plaine des Jarres. The ICC villas in Xieng Khouang are

20 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
