guarded by Pathet Lao troops under the supervision of Kong Le paratroops, who seem to be in control of the area. The paratroops were equipped with US arms, whereas the Pathet Lao were armed with Soviet carbines.

The South Vietnamese special forces engaged in patrol duty just inside the Laotian border in the Tchepone area were reportedly withdrawn on 19 May. Their return to South Vietnam was allegedly occasioned by a letter written by the local Laotian commander in which he asked them to withdraw, as "the war was over," and refused to accept any further responsibility for their acts or security. No mention was made in the report of elements of the Third Battalion of the South Vietnamese Army, which is also reported to be in Laos in the same general area.

Several prominent South Vietnamese opposition leaders now residing in Paris are reported assembling in Geneva, where they hope to make informal contact with various delegations to the conference on Laos and to advance their political aims in South Vietnam. Among them are leaders, alleged by South Vietnamese officials to have some covert French and North Vietnamese backing, who are working for the ouster of President Diem and are advocating a policy of neutrality for South Vietnam. Although they have no official access to the conference, they may also hope to present their views if the question of Vietnam is raised at the meetings.

Indications that the Communist guerrillas in South Vietnam were planning a "program for responding" to the conference

A key Chinese Communist objective at the Geneva Conference is to damage SEATO as much as possible, according to recent statements of Communist newspapermen to Western journalists. Since arriving in Geneva, the Chinese have maintained a steady barrage of attacks on the US alliance structure in Southeast Asia. These attacks are designed to create international apprehension--particularly among Asian neutrals--over US defense commitments in the area, and the Chinese lose

20 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
