Bolivian President Cracking Down on Political Opposition

The Paz administration has been giving major attention to the economy since its inauguration last August. Many of the original supporters of the sweeping 1952 revolution, which gave Paz his first term of office from 1952 to 1956, have been alienated by the economic stagnation of the last several years. Paz stated some weeks ago that the critical time would be the period from March through May--when his economic program would be initiated but not yet showing results. Central to his economic program is the rehabilitation of the tin mines of the nationalized Mine Corporation of Bolivia (COMIBOL)--on which the country's export earnings depend.

To rehabilitate the tin mines, a plan has been developed utilizing aid from West Germany, the United States, and the Inter-American Development Bank. West Germany is now reconsidering its participation as a result of an initial report by German technicians which indicated that the mine problem was more extensive than they had anticipated. Paz has indicated previously that he has made plans to use Soviet economic aid for other aspects of the economy. Bolivian plans were drafted in February to utilize the $150,000,000 credit which the USSR offered to Bolivia in late 1960.

President Paz faces a serious political problem in COMIBOL's tin mines. The government party, the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), is opposed by both Communists and members of the Authentic MNR, a right-wing splinter of Paz' MNR. According to a survey in February 1961 by the American Embassy in La Paz, Communists and Trotskyites control unions in mines accounting for 34 percent of the COMIBOL labor force and 44 percent of tin production. The Authentic MNR controls 31 percent of the COMIBOL labor force and 44 percent of tin production.

During February and March Paz arrested and exiled a significant number of Authentic MNR members and several leftist

17 Apr 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
