Afghanistan-Pakistan: Propaganda exchanges have reached the highest pitch in recent years. A continuation will put a severe strain on the already cool relations between the two countries and will make both sides even less amenable to any calm consideration of the major irritant, the Pushtoonistan issue. Karachi has dropped its usual propaganda restraint and has replied to Kabul's allegations of "oppressive colonialism" with charges that Afghanistan is making "atheistic" moves resulting from "Sovietization." (Page 2)

Ceylon: The position of the new government has been seriously jeopardized by the arrest on 14 October of a Buddhist priest--a high official of the government party--in connection with the assassination of former Prime Minister Bandaranaike. The close association of the priest with several cabinet ministers will intensify suspicion that top government officials were involved in a conspiracy. Those politicians implicated may be forced to resign from the government and others may defect from the ruling party, thus depriving Prime Minister Dahanayake of his bare majority in Parliament. (Page 3)

Belgian Congo: The two most recent outbreaks of violence among Africans in the Belgian Congo have reportedly resulted in at least 25 deaths. Although not directed primarily against Europeans, the outbreaks continue a trend toward violence which has been manifest in numerous incidents since the Leopoldville riots last January. (Page 4)

South Korea: Government and opposition leaders on 13 October agreed to end South Korea's long-standing legislative impasse. Opposition willingness to proceed with the election of National Assembly officers probably stemmed from a recognition that their obstructionist tactics were generating adverse public reaction, as well as from a desire to regain their major forum for criticizing the administration. Although the agreement may temporarily restore normal legislative activity, further disruptions are likely, until after the 1960 presidential elections. (Page 5)

16 Oct 59 DAILY BRIEF
