[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

20 December 1960

Copy No.

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Berlin: In an effort to prod Bonn into reinstating the interzonal trade agreement which otherwise will lapse on 31 December, the East German mass media threaten "serious disorders."

Soviet Ambassador Per-
vukhin told Ambassador Dowling on 16 December that Berlin access problems could always be settled by Soviet-US bilateral talks, suggesting that Moscow is not interested in a showdown at this point

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia: A high-level Indonesian delegation, including National Security Minister and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution, will arrive in Moscow late this month, apparently with the dual mission of negotiating more favorable terms for new navy and air force aid programs and accelerating the transaction. The mission may be led by Foreign Minister Subandrio. General Nasution represented the mission as a reaction to statements from The Hague on its dispatch of reinforcements to Netherlands New Guinea.

Nepal: King Mahendra's continuing roundup of political leaders since his takeover on 15 December has now taken out of circulation nearly all of Nepal's key politicians, including three former prime ministers. Mahendra reportedly intends to rule directly for some time, choosing his own council of ministers as he has during previous periods of palace rule. The army apparently remains completely loyal to the King, and the populace is quiescent.
(Page 5)

*Congo:
Morocco plans to delay the withdrawal of its UN contingent in the Congo "until a decision could be reached by African states" concerning possible joint action with regard to the Stanleyville dissident regime.
Rabat, like Cairo, has had second thoughts on withdrawal from the Congo; the UAR as yet has made no move to implement the intended withdrawal of its UN battalion, announced on 7 December. Ghanaian President Nkrumah has urged both the Lumumba's African allies not pull out of the UN force, but support the dissidents in Orientale Province. The USSR may be preparing to assist in supplying material aid to Gizenga's group. Soviet UN
[PAGE 06]
delegate Zorin to the Austrian ambassador on 16 December that "the US is making preparations now, and we are making preparations too."
There is also confirmation that the USSR has obtained permission to overfly the UAR for flights to Stanleyville. UN representative Rusk in Leopoldville has stated that three Soviet-type aircraft landed at Stanleyville between 10 and 14 December, but the UN "believes" them to have been UAR aircraft.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: In his efforts to dissuade the Castro regime from establishing diplomatic relations with East Germany, the West German ambassador told the acting Cuban foreign minister that West Germany has nothing against the Cuban Government and is neutral insofar as the "Cuban-US quarrel is concerned." The American charge notes that there is probably not a single foreign chief of mission in Havana, with the exception of certain Latin American ambassadors, who has condemned to him Castro officials the violation of human rights by the Castro regime or criticized its rapprochement with the Sino-Soviet bloc.
(Page 6)
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
High-Level Indonesian Delegation to USSR

An Indonesian delegation will arrive in Moscow late this month, apparently with the dual mission of negotiating more favorable terms for the new navy and air force aid programs and accelerating the transaction. The delegation will include National Security Minister and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution, Air Force Chief of Staff Marshal Suryadarma, and Foreign Minister Subandrio.

An agreement in principle was reached last August on the programs.

Proposed naval purchases are said to include a cruiser, two destroyers, four submarines, and approximately 50 small combatant, patrol, and auxiliary vessels. The air force has requested two squadrons of advanced MIG fighters, one squadron of medium jet bombers, and other air force materiel. Indonesia has already received some $225,000,000 worth of military aid from the Sino-Soviet bloc.

General Nasution represented the mission as a direct reaction to statements from The Hague on the dispatch of reinforcements to Netherlands New Guinea. He said any military build-up by the Dutch would be more than matched by Indonesia.

Nasution has informed the American ambassador in Djakarta that he was ordered by President Sukarno to make the trip to Moscow. Nasution had accepted an invitation to Moscow some months ago but had not set a date.
[PAGE 11]
Nepali King Consolidates Control Following Takeover

King Mahendra's continuing roundup of political leaders since his takeover on 15 December has now taken out of circulation all of Nepal's leading politicians, including those who might oppose the King's policies as well as those with previous experience in forming and administering a government. The only key figure to escape imprisonment is former Deputy Prime Minister Subarna, who was in Calcutta at the time of the King's move. The arrest of these politicians, together with the King's suspension of those constitutional provisions dealing with representative government, adds to the already strong indications that Mahendra plans to rule directly for some period of time. There are, in addition, reports that the King will select a council of ministers composed of officials and civil servants to assist him as in previous periods of palace rule.

The populace appears to be taking the King's action in its stride, with no immediate signs of opposition. The army is reported loyal. The principal immediate result of the King's takeover will be an extended period of governmental inaction during which lower echelon officials will defer decision making until the King's intentions are known.

Indian leaders
feel that the Koirala government, which New Delhi extensively supported, had offered the best hope of preventing Communist inroads in Nepal. They probably hope to bring influence to bear on Mahendra to restore representative government in the near future, but at the moment they appear to have adopted a wait-and-see attitude.
[PAGE 12]
US Allies Fail to Support US Policy on Cuba

In his efforts to dissuade the Castro regime from establishing diplomatic relations with East Germany, the West German ambassador told the acting Cuban foreign minister that West Germany has nothing against the Cuban Government and is neutral insofar as the "Cuban-US quarrel is concerned." The American charge notes that probably not a single foreign chief of mission in Havana, with the exception of certain Latin American ambassadors, has condemned to high Cuban officials the violations of human rights by the Castro regime or criticized its rapprochement with the Sino-Soviet bloc.

The Canadian ambassador says he reports the US point of view to Ottawa, but the American charge doubts that he has the influence to put his ideas across to the Canadian Government. The British ambassador and his government also appear to share the US attitude, but appear reluctant to make their views known to the press and public. The French are "fascinated" with Castro, but primarily because of his advocacy of Algerian independence. The Japanese ambassador is generally pro-US, but is mainly interested in trade. East Germany is the only Sino-Soviet bloc country with which Cuba has not yet established formal diplomatic relations. Che Guevara, as he left East Germany on 17 December after having concluded a five-year trade agreement, declared that East Germany and Cuba will establish diplomatic relations "at the proper time...and with due regard for their mutual interests."
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants for Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
