[PAGE 01]
20 December 1960
Copy No. C 64-7

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
20 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Germany--Interzonal trade talks nearing climax.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Pathet Lao skirmishing around Luang Prabang and in Xieng Khouang Province.
Indonesia--High-level delegation leaving for naval and air force assistance talks in Moscow.
Nepal--King has now detained almost all key politicians; intends to rule directly for some time.
Congo--Morocco delays withdrawal of UN contingent; USSR threatens aid to Stanleyville dissidents.

III. THE WEST
Cuba--West German ambassador tells Cubans his government neutral in "Cuban-US quarrel."
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Berlin: In an effort to prod Bonn into reinstating the interzonal trade agreement which otherwise will lapse on 31 December, the East German mass media threaten "serious disorders." however, East German officials indicate they will make important concessions if the West Germans reinstate the agreement. Soviet Ambassador Pervukhin told Ambassador Dowling on 16 December that Berlin access problems could always be settled by Soviet-US bilateral talks, suggesting that Moscow is not interested in a showdown at this point.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Laos: The Luang Prabang garrison commander states the Pathet Lao have conducted light skirmishes with his forces during the past two weeks; the Pathets could mount a major attack if they are able to regroup and bring up reinforcements. Pathet Lao elements, reportedly aided by North Vietnamese elements, are apparently exerting strong pressure on a government outpost in eastern Xieng Khouang Province. Shuttle flights by Soviet IL-14s between Canton and Hanoi indicate that the cargo brought in by the AN-12s which arrived at Canton on 18 December is being ferried to Hanoi. Chinese Communist transports meanwhile continue their airlift operations between Nanning and Hanoi. North Vietnam's call for another Geneva conference was supported by the Chinese Communist Government in an official statement on 19 December and by Cambodia's Prince Sihanouk, who told a Peiping rally that Laos should be considered by a "new" international conference. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia: A high-level Indonesian delegation, including National Security Minister and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution, will arrive in Moscow late this month, apparently with the dual mission of negotiating more favorable terms for new navy and air force aid programs and accelerating the transaction. The mission may be led by Foreign Minister Subandrio. General Nasution represented the mission as a reaction to statements from The Hague on its dispatch of reinforcements to Netherlands New Guinea. The prospective purchases reportedly total $277,000,000 for the navy and $100,000,000 for the air force. (Page 4)

Nepal: King Mahendra's continuing roundup of political leaders since his takeover on 15 December has now taken out of circulation nearly all of Nepal's key politicians, including three former prime ministers. Mahendra reportedly intends to rule directly for some time, choosing his own council of ministers as he has during previous periods of palace rule. The army apparently remains completely loyal to the King, and the populace is quiescent. (Page 5)

*Congo:
Morocco plans to delay the withdrawal of its UN contingent in the Congo "until a decision could be reached by African states" concerning possible joint action with regard to the Stanleyville dissident regime. Rabat, like Cairo, has had second thoughts on withdrawal from the Congo; the UAR as yet has made no move to implement the intended withdrawal of its UN battalion, announced on 7 December. Ghanaian President Nkrumah has urged that Lumumba's African allies not pull out of the UN force, but support the dissidents in Orientale Province. The USSR may be preparing to assist in supplying material aid to Gizenga's group.
[PAGE 06]
delegate Zorin told an ambassador on 16 December that "the US is making preparations now, and we are making preparations also."

There is as yet no confirmation that the USSR has obtained permission to overfly for flights to Stanleyville. UN representative in Leopoldville has stated that three Soviet-type aircraft landed at Stanleyville between 10 and 14 December, but the UN "believes" them to have been UAR aircraft.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: In his effort to dissuade the Castro regime from establishing diplomatic relations with East Germany, the West German ambassador said the acting Cuban foreign minister that West Germany has nothing against the Cuban Government and is neutral insofar as the "Cuban-US quarrel is concerned." The American charge notes that there is probably not a single foreign chief of mission in Havana, with the exception of certain Latin American ambassadors, who has condemned to high Cuban officials the violation of human rights by the Castro regime or criticized its rapprochement with the Sino-Soviet bloc. (Page 6)
[PAGE 07]
Situation in Laos

the Pathet Lao for the past two weeks had been engaged in light probing actions against the royal capital but that his forces had succeeded in preventing any major Pathet attack.
does not believe the Pathet Lao would be able to mount any offensive against the town without extensive regrouping and reinforcement. He expects Captain Kong Le may move to the Luang Prabang area to join with the Pathet Lao in an attack on the capital.
it would take at least a week for Kong Le's forces to arrive in the area.

More detailed information, just made available, on Kong Le's withdrawal from Vientiane indicates that from 500 to 700 troops left with him. These probably include approximately three companies of paratroopers and some irregular elements drawn mainly from the leftist youth movement which developed after his 9 August coup. Eight armored cars and one M-24 tank withdrawing on the road toward Luang Prabang.

It is estimated that Kong Le may retain from two to four 105-mm. howitzers and two 120-mm. mortars out of the equipment brought in by Soviet IL-14s before General Phoumi launched his attack on Vientiane. Kong Le probably is now about 25 miles north of Vientiane.

In Xieng Khouang Province, Pathet Lao forces are reportedly exerting strong pressure on Nong Het, a government outpost near the North Vietnamese border.
a North Vietnamese battalion has been supporting the Pathet Lao with mortar fire. General Phoumi earlier had been reported as convinced that the next big Pathet Lao effort would be directed toward Xieng Khouang. Phoumi planned to send reinforcements to the area.

The three Soviet AN-12 heavy transports which arrived at Canton from the USSR on 18 December will not continue on to
[PAGE 08]
Hanoi as they were originally scheduled to do but are to fly to Peiping on 20 December. Flights by Soviet IL-14s between Hanoi and Canton on 18 and 19, and three flights scheduled for 20 December indicate that the cargo ferried in by the AN-12s is being transshipped to Hanoi. Soviet and Chinese Communist transports continued to shuttle between Nanning and Hanoi through 19 December. Five of the Soviet IL-14s flew from Hanoi to the Vientiane area on 19 December, and five are scheduled to fly two round trips each from Hanoi to Vientiane on 20 December. Also scheduled for 20 December is the flight of three North Vietnamese transports from Hanoi to Sam Neua. On 19 December, three North Vietnamese transports were taking off from Sam Neua. This is the first confirmation that North Vietnamese aircraft have landed at Sam Neua, although previous flights to the area

a North Vietnamese helicopter en route to Laos may have crashed. contact with the helicopter was lost on 17 December and it was still unreported as of 18 December.

Chou En-lai on 19 December forwarded to Hanoi a "second Chinese Government statement on the situation in Laos" which noted that Peiping holds that the Laotian question should be settled by the Laotian people themselves without foreign interference. It condemned US imperialism for the grave situation in Laos. The statement gave full support to the 17 December North Vietnamese proposal for reconvening another Geneva conference and reactivating the ICC in Laos.

Prince Sihanouk told a Peiping rally on 19 December that "a new conference like the 1954 Geneva meeting on Indochina" should be convened to consider Laos. Hanoi will view Sihanouk's comment as evidence of neutral support for the North Vietnamese call for another Geneva conference and reactivation of the ICC. The ICC for Vietnam also has been the recipient of another North Vietnamese protest calling for "urgent measures to stop the dangerous activities of the US 7th Fleet in South Vietnam!" US fleet movements were linked to events in Laos by North Vietnam's chief of staff, General Vo Nguyen Giap, who sent the protest to the ICC in Vietnam on 17 December.
[PAGE 09]
Prince Souphannouvong had reaffirmed his agreement for a coalition government with participation of "all political elements." Souphannouvong was apparently prepared to discuss a cease-fire with Phoumi. Soviet propaganda continues on the line that a serious situation exists in Southeast Asia as a result of joint US and Thai intervention in Laos. Moscow broadcasts highlight Pathet Lao reports of US participation in the battle for Vientiane. On 17 December, Soviet press dispatches reporting the presence of Souvanna Phouma in Phnom Penh characterized him as the legal representative of the Lao people.
[PAGE 10]
High-Level Indonesian Delegation to USSR

An Indonesian delegation will arrive in Moscow late this month, apparently with the dual mission of negotiating more favorable terms for the new navy and air force aid programs and accelerating the transaction. The delegation will include National Security Minister and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution, Air Force Chief of Staff Marshal Suryadarma, and Foreign Minister Subandrio.

An agreement in principle was reached last August on the programs.
Although offered a one-third discount by the USSR, Indonesia is reported recently to have sent a note to Moscow requesting even easier terms. Proposed naval purchases are said to include a cruiser, two destroyers, four submarines, and approximately 50 small combatant, patrol, and auxiliary vessels. The air force has requested two squadrons of advanced MIG fighters, one squadron of medium jet bombers, and other air force materiel. Indonesia has already received some $225,000,000 worth of military aid from the Sino-Soviet bloc.

General Nasution represented the mission as a direct reaction to statements from The Hague on the dispatch of reinforcements to Netherlands New Guinea. He said any military build-up by the Dutch would be more than matched by Indonesia.

Nasution has informed the American ambassador in Djakarta that he was ordered by President Sukarno to make the trip to Moscow. Nasution had accepted an invitation to Moscow some months ago but had not set a date.
[PAGE 11]
Nepali King Consolidates Control Following Takeover

King Mahendra's continuing roundup of political leaders since his takeover on 15 December has now taken out of circulation all of Nepal's leading politicians, including those who might oppose the King's policies as well as those with previous experience in forming and administering a government. The only key figure to escape imprisonment is former Deputy Prime Minister Subarna, who was in Calcutta at the time of the King's move. The arrest of these politicians, together with the King's suspension of those constitutional provisions dealing with representative government, adds to the already strong indications that Mahendra plans to rule directly for some period of time. There are, in addition, reports that the King will select a council of ministers composed of officials and civil servants to assist him as in previous periods of palace rule.

The populace appears to be taking the King's action in its stride, with no immediate signs of opposition. The army is reported loyal. The principal immediate result of the King's takeover will be an extended period of governmental inaction during which lower echelon officials will defer decision making until the King's intentions are known.

Indian leaders maintain that the King's actions have been ill-timed and retrogressive; they feel that the Koirala government, which New Delhi extensively supported, had offered the best hope of preventing Communist inroads in Nepal. They probably hope to bring influence to bear on Mahendra to restore representative government in the near future, but at the moment they appear to have adopted a wait-and-see attitude.
[PAGE 12]
US Allies Fail to Support US Policy on Cuba

In his efforts to dissuade the Castro regime from establishing diplomatic relations with East Germany, the West German ambassador told the acting Cuban foreign minister that West Germany has nothing against the Cuban Government and is neutral insofar as "the Cuban-US quarrel is concerned." The American charge notes that probably not a single foreign chief of mission in Havana, with the exception of certain Latin American ambassadors, has condemned to high Cuban officials the violations of human rights by the Castro regime or criticized its rapprochement with the Sino-Soviet bloc.

The Canadian ambassador says he reports the US point of view to Ottawa, but the American charge doubts that he has the influence to put his ideas across to the Canadian Government. The British ambassador and his government also appear to agree to the US attitude, but appear reluctant to make their views known to the press and public. The French are "disgusted" with Castro, but primarily because of his advocacy of Algerian independence. The Japanese ambassador is generally pro-US, but is mainly interested in trade. West Germany is the only Sino-Soviet bloc country with which Cuba has not yet established formal diplomatic relations. Che Guevara, as he left East Germany on 17 December after having concluded a five-year trade agreement, declared that East Germany and Cuba will establish diplomatic relations "at the proper time . . . and with due regard for their mutual interests."
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
