Extremists Reported Pressing for Control of Mali Regime

Tension between anti-French extremists and less radical elements in the neutralist government of the Mali Republic recently has become so great that the position of President Modibo Keita, a relative moderate, may be threatened.

Modibo, who indicated recently to the American charge in Bamako that a cabinet reshuffle would occur soon, is said to be trying to reconcile the two factions, which are quarreling especially over Mali's future relations with France and the French Community and the amount of aid Mali should accept from Sino-Soviet bloc countries. If the situation reaches a showdown, however, Modibo may yield to the radicals, led by Interior Minister Madeira Keita and strongly entrenched in Mali's only political party. In this event, Mali would probably move fairly rapidly toward a close alignment with Guinea--admired greatly by the extremists--and, like that country, welcome large-scale bloc assistance.

A conviction common to nearly all Mali officials that France was responsible for the breakup in August of Mali's former federation with neighboring Senegal has so far impeded the establishment of stable relations with Paris. Numerous statements and actions by Mali's leaders--particularly since their formal acknowledgment in late September of the federation's dissolution--have pointed to Mali's complete dissociation from the Community. Nevertheless, Modibo and his supporters have seemed to share Paris' hope that something of the former relationship might be salvaged, at least on the economic plane.

At the same time, however, the preference of most Mali leaders for a Marxist and collectivist approach to their country's economic and political problems makes them especially receptive to blandishments from the bloc. The Malians have announced their intention to establish diplomatic relations with a number of bloc countries--including the USSR and Communist China--and various economic and technical assistance arrangements are apparently under study. These include reported Czech offers to build an oil refinery and an international airport. A six-man Soviet economic delegation now is in Bamako--as is a US aid mission.

22 Oct 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
