Cyprus

Following a brief meeting on 8 October the North Atlantic Council postponed discussion of the Cyprus issue indefinitely to permit further informal conversations.

At a meeting on 6 October, agreement seemed near on acceptance of NATO Secretary General Spaak's paper which called for a conference of interested parties in the Cyprus dispute. Britain announced acceptance and the Greek representative accepted with the provision that the ultimate status of Cyprus--following the interim British seven-year plan--could also be discussed by the conferees. The Turkish representative criticized the Spaak paper but agreed to seek further instructions from Ankara.

On 7 October, officials informed the American charge in Turkey of Ankara's "last word" on the Turkish position. The Turks rejected the Spaak paper, refused to permit discussion of a final solution for Cyprus because of "the present climate of hostility," and declined to accept the suggested participation of Spaak, Italy, France, or the United States at the proposed conference. In addition, the Turks again questioned Spaak's impartiality and denounced NATO "pressure tactics."

On the same day, Turkish officials confirmed a press report that the Turkish consul general in Liverpool had been appointed consul general in Nicosia to replace Burhan Isin, who had recently been appointed the first Turkish representative to Governor Foot. Appointment of Isin to the additional post was a move by Premier Menderes designed to calm Greek fears that partition was being fostered by the British plan. This latest Turkish move will probably bring an angry reaction from Athens.

The present Turkish attitude toward a conference and the change in the status of Isin indicate that Foreign Minister Zorlu, advocate of a "tough" policy on the Cyprus issue, has apparently convinced Premier Menderes that the latter's conciliatory move in appointing Isin rather than another diplomat as Turkish representative, was in error. Zorlu's intransigent stand on matters of Turkish foreign policy could make further negotiations toward a Cyprus solution extremely difficult.

9 Oct 58
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
