The Situation in Laos

Premier Souvanna Phouma and his ministers, at a Cabinet meeting on 12 October, decided to move the government from Vientiane to the royal capital at Luang Prabang. Minister of Finance Inpeng was instructed to make the necessary arrangements for the move, expected to be completed within ten days. He was also instructed to arrange for the transfer of funds in the National Bank to Luang Prabang. Various Lao leaders in Vientiane have been considering such a move for some time as a means of getting out from under the immediate influence of Captain Kong Le, of drawing the King into more active participation in government deliberations, and of providing General Phoumi with a face-saving alternative to Vientiane should he decide to drop his opposition to the government.

At the same meeting, the cabinet reportedly also determined that it would seek a loan from the USSR if the United States failed to give aid for the armed forces and the police. Soviet Ambassador-designate Abramov arrived in Vientiane on 13 October as scheduled. According to the press, his arrival was the occasion for an airdrop demonstration by Kong Le's 2nd Paratroop Battalion.

The Thai acting foreign minister's announcement in Bangkok that the Thai Embassy has been instructed to evacuate all Thai nationals from Laos as soon as possible is likely to lead to additional tension with the Souvanna government. Premised on the assertions that the situation was worsening and that civil war was inevitable, Bangkok's action will probably be construed by Souvanna as another effort to discredit his regime. Implementation of the evacuation order will probably be limited largely to Thai nationals in Vientiane; neither government is believed to have accurate information on the location of Thais in other parts of Laos.

reports the existence of scattered opposition by district chiefs to the Pathet Lao there. Resistance to the Pathet Lao is probably still largely unorganized, however, and the Pathet Lao appear to exercise firm control over Sam Neua town and Muong Peun to the Southwest. Meanwhile, the Laotian Army has reportedly launched a counter-offensive to regain territory lost to the Pathet Lao in southeastern Phong Saly Province.
