[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

26 November 1960

Copy No. Ed-7

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Page Denied

Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

26 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia-Netherlands: A 23-man armed Indonesian force--some of whom were captured by the Dutch shortly after landing in southwest New Guinea about 15 November--may be the first contingent in an accelerated Indonesian paramilitary campaign to create dissension in the area. Djakarta apparently believes that such tactics would increase international pressure on the Dutch for cession of Netherlands New Guinea to Indonesia. Dutch fears of a large-scale Indonesian invasion of New Guinea in the near future appear unfounded.

Jordan-Lebanon-UAR: Relations between Jordan and Lebanon have become strained because of Jordanian sabotage activities in Syria. The recent expulsion of the Jordanian military attache in Beirut may have resulted from UAR pressure on Lebanon.

1

[PAGE 04]
*Laos: The extent of the military threat to Luang Prabang is still not clear. Aerial surveillance revealed what appeared to be a large truck convoy moving northward toward Muong Kassy, on the Vientiane - Luang Prabang road. A smaller convoy of approximately ten trucks was observed apparently returning to Vientiane. At Muong Kassy some parked trucks and 200 to 250 men were observed.

An American official in Luang Prabang estimates that troops there could successfully defend against a coordinated attack by a force of up to three battalions. Forty percent of the troops in Luang Prabang are headquarters and service personnel who might be effective in defense of the city but would be of limited value in a counterattack. The key factor in the defense of the city, however, would be the will of the individual soldier to fight.

There is as yet no reaction from the principals who would be involved in Premier Souvanna Phouma's proposal for a Luang Prabang meeting of political leaders to discuss the formation of a national union government.

26 Nov 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Page Denied

[PAGE 06]
Indonesia May Accelerate Paramilitary Campaign
In New Guinea

A 23-man armed Indonesian force--some of whom were captured by the Dutch shortly after landing in southwest New Guinea about 15 November--may be the first contingent in an accelerated Indonesian paramilitary campaign to create dissension in the area. Djakarta believes such tactics would increase international pressures on the Dutch for cession of the area to Indonesia. Captured members of the force claim other infiltration teams will follow.

The Dutch administration in New Guinea has reported at least a dozen infiltration attempts since 1952.

Indonesia's army chief of staff told Parliament last February that an intensified struggle to "reclaim" New Guinea must be waged on all fronts--economic, political, and military--and that it must be carried on both inside and outside the territory.

Reports that a large-scale rebellion is taking place in the area apparently are inspired by Djakarta, and Dutch fears of an Indonesian invasion of battalion size or larger in the near future appear unfounded.

The Dutch now have about 3,000 troops in New Guinea and are sending approximately 1,000 more army and air force

[PAGE 07]
personnel. In addition, the territorial mobile force, which functions under the civil administration, comprises some 200 Europeans and 1,400 native Papuans.

[PAGE 08]
Lebanon Expels Jordanian Military Attache

Jordanian sabotage activities in Syria, relations between Jordan and Lebanon have strained. A Lebanese arrested in Damascus, who subsequently was extradited to Lebanon, reportedly confessed that he had been sent by the Jordanian military attache in Beirut to plant explosives in Syria. UAR pressure on the Lebanese Government resulted in an announcement on 23 November by Lebanese Foreign Minister Taqla that the Jordanian attache, Major Ghazi al-Khatib, had returned to Jordan at the request of the Lebanese Government and would not be allowed to return to Beirut. The Lebanese also are imposing more stringent controls on the activities of Syrian political exiles in Lebanon.

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
