[PAGE 01]
26 November 1960
Copy No. Ed-7

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
26 NOVEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo--UAR efforts to form pro-Lumumba "popular front" intensified. (1)

Indonesia may plan further small-scale paramilitary activity in southwest New Guinea. (2)

Jordanian-Lebanese relations worsen. (3)

Situation in Laos. (4)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
26 November 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo:
a course of action designed to enlist the support of other African and Asian countries in stimulating a pro-Lumumba nationalist front in the Congo.
such a coalition would be able to call on foreign allies for material and military assistance, "and it is inevitable that the Soviet Union must bear most of it." He indicated concern, however, that "if Mobutu and the imperialists emerge victorious," Mobutu will expel the embassies of Guinea and the UAR and possibly those of India and Yugoslavia.
(Page 1)

Indonesia-Netherlands: A 23-man armed Indonesian force--some of whom were captured by the Dutch shortly after landing in southwest New Guinea about 15 November--may be the first contingent in an accelerated Indonesian paramilitary campaign to create dissension in the area. Djakarta apparently believes that such tactics would increase international pressure on the Dutch for cession of Netherlands New Guinea to Indonesia; Dutch fears of a large-scale Indonesian invasion of New Guinea in the near future appear unfounded. (Page 2)

Jordan--Lebanon-UAR: Relations between Jordan and Lebanon have become strained because of Jordanian sabotage activities in Syria which have been directed from Lebanon. The recent expulsion of the Jordanian military attache in Beirut may have resulted from UAR pressure on Lebanon. This move, together with possible further

[PAGE 05]
Lebanese curtailment of Jordanian intelligence operations, will inhibit but probably not eliminate Jordan's contacts with subversive elements in Syria through Lebanon. (Page 4)

*Laos: The extent of the military threat to Luang Prabang is still not clear. Aerial surveillance on 24 November revealed what appeared to be a large truck convoy moving northward toward Muong Kassy, on the Vientiane - Luang Prabang road. A smaller convoy of approximately ten trucks was observed apparently returning to Vientiane. At Muong Kassy some parked trucks and 200 to 250 men were observed.
a convoy of 25 vehicles would return from Muong Kassy to Vientiane on 24 November.

An American official in Luang Prabang estimates that troops there could successfully defend against a coordinated attack by a force of up to three battalions. Forty percent of the troops in Luang Prabang are headquarters and service personnel who might be effective in defense of the city but would be of limited value in a counterattack. The key factor in the defense of the city, however, would be the will of the individual soldier to fight.
troop strength in the city was considered insufficient and requested Savannakhet to send reinforcements.

There is as yet no reaction from the principals who would be involved in Premier Souvanna Phouma's proposal for a Luang Prabang meeting of political leaders to discuss the formation of a national union government.

26 Nov 60 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
The Situation in the Congo

a course of action designed to enlist the support of other African and Asian countries in stimulating a pro-Lumumba nationalist front in the Congo.

the representatives of Guinea, India, and Yugoslavia agreed with him concerning the seriousness of the situation and the necessity for grouping nationalist elements into a united front. He stated that Baluba leader Jason Sendwe may announce the formation of a new pro-Lumumba coalition when the UN Conciliation Commission arrives in Leopoldville.

such a pro-Lumumba coalition would be able to call on foreign allies for material and military assistance "and it is inevitable that the Soviet Union must bear most of it." He speculated that recognition of a new Congolese government by pro-Lumumba African states could be followed by "the intervention in strength of the Soviet Union and the Communist camp."

"This does not mean that we would enter the battle on the side of the Eastern bloc, but that the Eastern bloc is the one which would intervene to assist the independent nations in their policy toward the Congo."

notwithstanding their grandiose plans, Lumumba's African allies were concerned over the course of events in the UN, in Leopoldville, and in Orientale Province. After reporting that the position of pro-Lumumba forces in Stanleyville had "improved greatly," he noted that Lumumba and his followers now are interested in "transferring their activity" to areas of the Congo interior other than Orientale Province. He warned that "if Mobutu and the imperialists emerge victorious," Mobutu will expel the embassies of Guinea and the UAR and possibly those of India and Yugoslavia.

[PAGE 07]
Indonesia May Accelerate Paramilitary Campaign
In New Guinea

A 23-man armed Indonesian force--some of whom were captured by the Dutch shortly after landing in southwest New Guinea about 15 November--may be the first contingent in an accelerated Indonesian paramilitary campaign to create dissension in the area. Djakarta believes such tactics would increase international pressures on the Dutch for cession of the area to Indonesia. Captured members of the force claim other infiltration teams will follow.

the New Guinea landing mention supply problems and an operation scheduled for 27 November.

The Dutch administration in New Guinea has reported at least a dozen infiltration attempts since 1952. However, Indonesia apparently did not evolve a long-term plan for the infiltration and eventual accession of New Guinea until some time after its last defeat on the issue at the United Nations in November 1957. An apparently authentic Indonesian document dated December 1959 gives details of a three- to five-year plan which calls for infiltration of "territorial cadres" into New Guinea, eventual guerrilla operations, and finally a resort to diplomacy--presumably an appeal to the UN--and possibly to a sea and air offensive. Indonesia's army chief of staff told Parliament last February that an intensified struggle to "reclaim" New Guinea must be waged on all fronts--economic, political, and military--and that it must be carried on both inside and outside the territory.

Reports that a large-scale rebellion is taking place in the area apparently are inspired by Djakarta, and Dutch fears of an Indonesian invasion of battalion size or larger in the near future appear unfounded.

The Dutch now have about 3,000 troops in New Guinea and are sending approximately 1,000 more army and air force

[PAGE 08]
personnel. In addition, the territorial mobile force, which functions under the civil administration, comprises some 200 Europeans and 1,400 native Papuans.

[PAGE 09]
Lebanon Expels Jordanian Military Attache

Jordanian sabotage activities in Syria, which have been arranged and directed in Lebanon, have strained relations between Jordan and Lebanon. A Lebanese arrested in Damascus, who subsequently was extradited to Lebanon, reportedly confessed that he had been sent by the Jordanian military attache in Beirut to plant explosives in Syria. UAR pressure on the Lebanese Government resulted in an announcement on 23 November by Lebanese Foreign Minister Taqla that the Jordanian attache, Major Ghazi al-Khatib, had returned to Jordan at the request of the Lebanese Government and would not be allowed to return to Beirut. The Lebanese also are imposing more stringent controls on the activities of Syrian political exiles in Lebanon.

King Husayn was considering withdrawing most of the Jordanian Embassy staff in Beirut following the summoning of Khatib by Lebanese authorities for questioning. Husayn apparently feels that the present Lebanese Government, led by pro-Nasir Prime Minister Saib Salam, is so susceptible to UAR pressure that Jordan cannot hope for much "cooperation" from it.

Khatib's expulsion together with possible further Lebanese curtailment of Jordanian intelligence operations will inhibit but probably not eliminate Jordan's contacts through Lebanon with subversive elements in Syria.

Khatib has directed sabotage operations in Syria, including three explosions in Damascus on 25 October, and has attempted to arrange the assassination of Abd al-Hamid Sarraj, president of the Syrian Executive Council. The Jordanians believe Sarraj was responsible for the assassination of Jordanian Prime Minister Majalli on 29 August.

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
