Geneva Technical Talks Nearing Completion

The Soviet and Western delegations to the Geneva conference on detecting nuclear tests have reached agreement on the two major issues--the number of the control posts needed and the necessity to supplement this system with mobile inspection teams. A formal agreement will probably be signed by Thursday in Geneva, and the recommendations forwarded to the respective governments.

Although the Soviet delegation originally suggested 100 to 110 control posts, it now has agreed to the Western recommendation of 160 to 170 posts throughout the world in addition to a few ships. These posts would include 6 in Europe, 37 in Asia, 24 in North America, 7 in Australia, 16 each in South America and Africa, 4 in Antarctica, and 60 on islands; there has been no breakdown by individual countries.

The Soviet delegation, after much negotiation, further agreed to go along with the US recommendation that mobile inspection teams be used at the discretion of the international control authority to determine whether an unidentified disturbance detected by control posts was a nuclear explosion. This compromise, however, does not include the wording of the original Western proposal which described how extensively the teams would have to be used. Presumably the USSR will continue to try to minimize the need for mobile inspection. The Soviet delegation withdrew its demand that the conference settle certain political questions that the West insisted must be settled by the governments--such as the nationality of persons manning individual posts.

Moscow will probably move quickly to accept the Geneva conference recommendations, anticipating that this will give it a tactical advantage in its campaign to halt nuclear tests. The USSR probably believes that it can gain strong public support for its claim that the success of the Geneva conference binds the Western powers to stop tests despite Washington's prior disclaimers of such a commitment.

20 Aug 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
