[PAGE 01]
17 July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Ambassador Kennan comments on Soviet policy in Rumania (page 3).
2. Increase noted in Soviet European flights (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Burmese Communist chief reported retreating toward India (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Prince Naif of Jordan asks for Saudi Arabian support (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
5. Tito desires strategic talks with the United States (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. Belgium reportedly completes shipment on Soviet orders placed at Moscow Conference (page 7).
7. French President makes unusual plea for American aid (page 8).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Ambassador Kennan comments on Soviet policy in Rumania:
Ambassador Kennan, in commenting on the Bucharest assignment of A. I. Lavrentiev, says that Moscow is placing the Rumanian situation in the hands of its ace trouble shooter for the Satellite area. In the Ambassador's opinion, Rumania's strategic position is the key factor. The Kremlin would like to make the Dobrudja area a direct defensive responsibility of the Soviet Army, but leave the Western area a Rumanian responsibility in order to avoid Soviet military contact with the Yugoslavs.

Ambassador Kennan feels that the appointment of Bughici as Rumanian Foreign Minister signifies a virtual Soviet take-over of the Bucharest Foreign Ministry and that Rumania is quietly being changed into a Soviet constituent republic, although for the present without formal incorporation. He notes that Lavrentiev was previously assigned to Rumania in 1940 to arrange for the separation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina and their subsequent annexation by the USSR.

The Ambassador concludes by noting that while three Deputy Foreign Ministers have recently left Moscow, only one replacement has been announced. In his opinion this may presage a shake-up in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in which Vishinsky's position will bear watching.

2. Increase noted in Soviet European flights:
Soviet aircraft, largely bombers and transports, operating in the Western USSR and Eastern Europe, made a minimum of about 11,000 navigational and local flights during the period 5 June to 2 July.
[PAGE 04]
This represents an increase of about 3,400 flights, or almost 45 percent, over a comparable period last year. It is the highest level of activity ever recorded, the previous peak having occurred in April, when 10,928 flights were noted.

Comment: This increase is largely attributable to the appearance of additional new bombers in operational units and intensified training since flying weather has improved. Since last year, Soviet Air Force training has increasingly emphasized night flying and all-weather bombing.

FAR EAST

3. Burmese Communist chief reported retreating toward India:
The leader of the Burma Communist Party, Thakin Than Tun, with 300 followers is reliably reported to have crossed the Irrawaddy River about 100 miles southwest of Mandalay in late June. The report states that the Communists have proceeded toward the mountains of Western Burma and that if they are blocked in an attempt to escape by turning to the north, they will try to reach Manipur Province in India. If not interned, they will later infiltrate back into Burma. (See map on following page.)

Comment:
the Burmese Army during the past months has successfully dispersed large concentrations of Communists in their base area of north-central Burma. The reported route of Than Tun's flight suggests an intent to circle around Burmese forces and establish a new Communist base in upper Burma near the China border.

Other reports, however, state that Than Tun fled eastward into the Shan foothills after government forces overran his headquarters in the Pyinmana area in May. Recent Communist raids on towns and communications, in central Burma and elsewhere in the country, are evidence that the party still maintains organized forces.
[PAGE 05]
THE UNION OF BURMA
Reported movement of Communist force from area of recent concentration
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Prince Naif of Jordan asks for Saudi Arabian support:
Prince Naif of Jordan, King Talal's brother, wished to meet a representative of Saudi Arabia to reach an agreement whereby he would "ally himself to the Saudi Arabian Government" in return for protection from the "conspiracies" of the Iraqi Regent and Prime Minister.

Naif reportedly would agree to support the status quo in Jordan which Saudi Arabia is seeking to preserve. In reply to these proposals, Saudi Arabia suggested that Naif approach the Jordanian Government and reach an agreement with it.

Comment: Prince Naif has been an aspirant to the Jordanian throne since the death of his father King Abdullah last July. Following a break with his brother this spring, Naif went to Baghdad and then to Beirut. He remains a figure around whom malcontents in Jordan can rally as long as the Jordan political crisis continues.

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Tito desires strategic talks with the United States:
Marshal Tito has told Assistant Secretary of Defense Nash and Ambassador Allen that American-Yugoslav conversations on strategic and operational questions were "highly desirable." Tito agreed that Britain and France should be included. He added that his government also wished to consider the participation of Greece and Turkey, but he stressed that he did not wish to deal with an "organization."
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Yugoslavia has clearly indicated that it wishes to avoid direct contact with NATO. This is the first official Yugoslav statement of willingness to engage in talks which presumably will lead to limited joint military planning.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Belgium reportedly completes shipment on Soviet orders placed at Moscow Conference:
Belgian products worth $3,000,000, mostly textiles and chemicals, ordered at the Moscow Economic Conference had been shipped to the USSR.

The Belgian diplomat, who had just returned from leave in Brussels, allegedly said that public opinion is increasingly favorable to the "resumption of East-West commercial relations," and indicated that a committee has been formed for developing Soviet-Belgian trade.

Comment: This is the first report of any Western European country fulfilling an agreement made with the Soviet Union at the Moscow Economic Conference. The Soviet-Belgian agreement was previously reported to be for the exchange of $2,000,000 worth of textiles for Soviet automobiles.

Belgium has never broken off commercial relations with the Soviet Orbit. The trend of public opinion probably refers to Belgian interest in increasing exports of non-strategic commodities.
[PAGE 08]
7. French President makes unusual plea for American aid:
President Auriol of France has strongly urged that the United States reconsider its decision not to finance French military production to the extent requested by Defense Minister Pleven in May. He twice expressed his personal disappointment to Ambassador Dunn during the Bastille Day reception.

The Ambassador notes that the President very rarely intervenes in matters of this nature and interprets his action as an indication of the government's "serious concern."

Comment: President Auriol's intervention highlights the French Government's reluctance to publicize its bad budgetary position.
