[PAGE 01]
9 October 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. COMMENT ON MOLOTOV'S SELF-CRITICISM (page 3).

2. (page 4).

3. EGYPTIANS REPORTED OFFERING ARMS TO LIBYA (page 5).

[PAGE 04]
1. COMMENT ON MOLOTOV'S SELF-CRITICISM

Soviet foreign minister Molotov's admission in an open letter to the editor of the Communist Party's top theoretical journal, Kommunist, that a statement in his speech to the USSR Supreme Soviet on 8 February 1955 was "theoretically mistaken and politically harmful" reflects continuing attacks against him.

In this speech on "the International situation and the foreign policy of the Soviet government," made shortly after Malenkov's demotion, Molotov characterized the Soviet Union as a country "where the foundations of a socialist society have already been built." This was clearly at variance with official dogma on the subject which since 1936 has stated that socialism has been achieved and that the Soviet state is now on the path to the higher stage--communism.

Molotov's "error," however, does not appear to have been an attempt to contradict official doctrine but apparently was a slip in terminology since just five paragraphs earlier in the same speech he had stated, "socialism had already triumphed in our country in the period before the second world war."

Molotov has been under fire for some time and as late as two months ago his retirement as foreign minister appeared imminent. Since then, however, he has headed the Soviet delegation to the United Nations and is still slated to represent the USSR at the foreign ministers' conference in Geneva this month. Pressure may have been brought to bear on Molotov to admit his mistake of February publicly in an attempt to add ideological deviation to the catalog of his sins which include opposition to the Yugoslav rapprochement and being inflexible and out of tune with the times.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. EGYPTIANS REPORTED OFFERING ARMS TO LIBYA

Comment

Egypt has continuously sought to bring Libya within its sphere of influence. Since the Egyptians' own arms requirements will presumably be filled from Soviet bloc sources, they probably did make such an offer.
