I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's Foreign Policy Speech

In his first speech after returning to Moscow, Khrushchev on 28 May elaborated on statements in East Berlin on the future course of Soviet policy and continued his effort to explain and justify the contradiction between his policy of detente and his performance in Paris. Although he ridiculed President Eisenhower and again attacked the United States on the U-2 incident, Khrushchev apparently is beginning to work back toward his pre-summit position, which drew a distinction between the President and "cold war forces" in the US.

While pointing out the contrast between the President's "good intentions" and US foreign policy, Khrushchev said, "I still believe President Eisenhower himself wants peace." In this manner the Soviet premier is apparently seeking to forestall charges that he was mistaken in his judgment and had allowed himself to be deceived by the President. As part of his effort to justify his course over the past seven months and minimize the effects of the Paris breakdown on Soviet policy, Khrushchev asserted that Soviet policy was "correct and just" and asked, "Why should it be changed?"

Khrushchev's awareness of the contradictions in criticizing US intentions while portraying his past policy as correct is reflected in his sensitivity to Western reports that internal opposition or pressure from Communist China was responsible for his behavior in Paris. He took the unusual step of specifically denying these reports and Western speculation that Mikoyan is in trouble.

Although he again expressed hope that a new summit meeting would take place in six to eight months, Khrushchev added that he would not be surprised if this did not occur. His call for the inclusion of Communist China, India, and Indonesia and other countries in future meetings may be the first step toward freeing his hand should he decide to back off from the commitment he made in his 20 May speech in Berlin to maintain the status quo there until a new summit. He again counseled patience until a new meeting and reaffirmed his intention to strive in the meantime for negotiated settlements of outstanding problems, including the German and Berlin questions.

31 May 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
