rebel-held territory, planned an early return to Phnom Penh to convey Phoumi's willingness to meet Souvanna, possibly in Rangoon.

A team from Taipei was expected to arrive in Bangkok by 6 March to negotiate arrangements for the repatriation of Chinese Nationalist irregular troops from the Thai-Burma-Laotian border area. The team plans to visit villages in Laos and Thailand, where irregulars crossing over from Burma have concentrated, to persuade as many as possible to return to Taiwan. Although a Laotian government spokesman has stated that Kuomintang elements in Laos are now being disarmed, in the border area has reported seeing a well-armed unit in his village. The American army attaché in Bangkok reports that about 1,000 irregulars encamped in northern Thailand may have crossed back into Burma.

Pakistan-USSR: The agreement on oil exploration signed in Karachi on 1 March after several months of bargaining is the first major Soviet aid program accepted by the Pakistani Government. The agreement provides for a credit of $30,000,000 to finance a five-year program of technical assistance in oil prospecting and surveying. The credit carries the usual favorable terms--repayment over 12 years at 2.5-percent interest. Pakistani officials, impressed by the discoveries of Soviet teams in India and Afghanistan, hope that the Soviets will succeed where Western oil companies have failed. Leaders of the military government probably are also motivated by political considerations. While maintaining Pakistan's commitment to its Western alliances and continuing to rely strongly on US aid, President Ayub and his associates have sought in recent months to demonstrate a greater "independence" in foreign policy as a reminder that Pakistan's cooperation should not be taken for granted. (Backup, Page 3)

West Germany: In a sudden move, Bonn has raised the exchange value of the West German mark 5 percent in an effort to halt the steady influx of foreign exchange--chiefly dollars--which has contributed to US balance-of-payments difficulties. The Netherlands has announced that the guilder is being similarly revalued. Although
