[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 January 1960
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
27 JANUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Bloc shows displeasure with Qasim; Prague FM broadcast attacks Iraqi Communist splinter group apparently favored by Qasim.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Nehru reportedly considering a meeting with Chou En-lai over border dispute; however, any move in this direction probably awaits results of mid-February talks with Khrushchev.
Ne Win and Chinese Communists drafting a boundary "agreement"- although terms may permit continued Chinese stalling on final settlement, an "agreement" might assist Peipin in getting Nehru - Chou En lai talks.

Iraq--Public allegations implicating high regime officials in October attempt against Qasim likely to create new crisis.

French Army in Algiers reportedly refuses to use force against settler insurgents; De Gaulle, faced also with threats of resignation by Soustelle and other ministers, calls cabinet meeting for today.

III. THE WEST
Bolivia--Clash between left- and right-wing miners leads to mobilization of rural militia and threat of widespread violence.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Sino-Soviet Bloc - Iraq: The first signs of bloc displeasure with Qasim's apparent effort to split Iraqi Communist ranks by supporting a dissident Communist faction in its bid for legal recognition have appeared in Czech propaganda. The Czech press and radio on 20 January attacked Qasim indirectly by accusing this Communist splinter group of conspiring with "right-wing parties" to "disorient the workers." Moscow, in the past, has used Eastern European propaganda media to convey its reactions on issues when it prefers not to commit itself directly.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
India - Communist China: Nehru apparently is considering meeting with Chou En-lai in April or May in an effort to break the present deadlock in the Sino-Indian border dispute. Although Nehru has previously insisted that the Chinese withdraw from Indian-claimed territory and accept the McMahon line as pre-conditions to a ministerial meeting, he apparently now intends to relax these demands. This shift in position probably is tentative pending talks with Khrushchev in mid-February. It may be the result of advice from his ambassadors to Moscow and Peiping, now in Delhi, and may also reflect additional Soviet persuasive efforts by the Voroshilov-Kozlov party now touring India. Peiping, which has persistently called for a top-level meeting to reach "agreement on basic principles," would view any such change in Nehru's position. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
*[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Burma - Communist China:
Ne Win's negotiations on the Sino-Burmese border problem are proceeding smoothly. The Burmese apparently feel that China has made concessions and that the remaining differences can be referred to a "joint commission." A "draft agreement on the boundary and friendship treaty" was expected to be concluded before the Burmese delegation left Peiping on 28 January. Regardless of the prospect of future Chinese stalling tactics in the joint commission, the conclusion of an "agreement" would assist Peiping in its efforts to get a meeting between Nehru and Chou

Iraq: Chief of State General Rubai, military governor General Abdi, and several high Iraqi security officials have been accused in Col. Mahdawi's People's Court of having been privy to the attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Qasim last October. Testimony on 25 January by a defendant claimed that they planned to takeover the government following Qasim's death. These charges, which may have some substance, are likely to create a new political crisis in the Qasim regime[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

*Algeria-France: [[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Premier Debré, following his quick trip to Algiers yesterday, reportedly told De Gaulle that the army in Algeria is no longer reliable and will not use force against the settler insurgents[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]. The question of using force had split the French cabinet on 25 January and several ministers who opposed such action, including Deputy Premier Soustelle, have threatened to resign. De Gaulle presumably will have to deal with these threats at the cabinet meeting scheduled for today.
Soustelle, who had planned to resign yesterday, postponed action on assurance from Debré that De Gaulle will state publicly --without revoking his declared self-determination policy for Algeria--that the government will work for the "Frenchification" of Algeria.

The European extremists barricaded in downtown Algiers, meanwhile, have built up their numbers from 1,000 on 24 January to about 4,000, and apparently are counting on the reluctance of the French army to attack them to induce a statement from De Gaulle pledging a "French Algeria." (Page 2)

27 Jan 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST
Bolivia: All rural militia units in the Cochabamba valley of central Bolivia have mobilized, and widespread violence threatens. Considerable unrest has arisen from bitter rivalry between the two wings of governing Nationalist Revolutionary Movement over selection of presidential and congressional nominees at its convention 15-21 February. This led on 23 January to a violent three-hour battle in a key mining town between left- and right-wing factions of the miners' militia.

(Page 4)

27 Jan 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Nehru Considers Meeting With Chou En-lai in April

Prime Minister Nehru reportedly is considering inviting Chou En-lai to New Delhi just before or just after the East-West summit meeting in an effort to break the Sino-Indian border deadlock. The Indian leader is said to be willing now to relax his demand that the Chinese withdraw from Indian-claimed territory and accept the McMahon line before any such ministerial meeting takes place.

This shift in view is probably tentative, pending discussions with Khrushchev in mid-February and a reassessment at that time of Indian public opinion. In order to appear responsive to Khrushchev's advice or assurances, Nehru might reply to Peiping's 26 December note with a mere acknowledgment at this time and wait until after the Khrushchev conversations to return his ambassador to Peiping to make arrangements for the meeting.

Nehru's reported shift regarding pre-conditions may be the result of advice he received from his ambassadors to Peiping and Moscow. It may also reflect additional persuasive efforts by the Voroshilov-Kozlov party now in India. Any announcement indicating such a shift in Nehru's thinking would be widely criticized within India as a retreat from a just position.

The Chinese, who have persistently called for a top-level meeting unfettered by any "prior conditions" which would hamper their bargaining position, would regard such a shift by Nehru as a concession. Chou has already implied that "activities hostile to Sino-Indian friendship" might preclude India as a site and expressed a preference for meeting in some third country, possibly Burma.

27 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 08]
French Army Reportedly Refuses to Use Force Against
Algerian Settlers

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Premier Debré and Minister of the Armed Forces Guillaumat, following their visit to Algiers on 26 January, reportedly told De Gaulle that the army in Algeria was no longer reliable and would not use force against the settler insurgents.
the premier told General Challe that he had orders to fly in security companies from France to clear out the insurgent-occupied areas of Algiers; a paratroop general warned Debré, however, that the army would not permit these companies to use force against the insurgents[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

The European extremists barricaded in downtown Algiers, meanwhile, have built up their numbers from 1,000 on 24 January to about 4,000, and appear to be procuring supplies from outside the barricades. They are apparently counting on the reluctance of the French Army to attack them to induce a statement from De Gaulle pledging a "French Algeria." Demonstrations in sympathy with the Algiers insurgents have taken place in numerous Algerian cities, including Oran, Bone, and Constantine; none of these appear to have gotten out of control, however, and rightists in outlying areas will probably be governed by the outcome in Algiers.

The US Consul General in Algiers reported on 26 January that most French authorities there believe it is now clear that it would be impossible to apply the self-determination policy for Algeria announced by De Gaulle on 16 September. Marshal Juin is reported to have urged De Gaulle to modify his policy at least to the extent of assuring the European settlers they will not be "left in the lurch" by the French government.

Debré yesterday assured Soustelle, who together with several other cabinet members had threatened to resign, that De Gaulle will state publicly--though without revoking his self-determination policy--that the French government and people desire and will work for the "Frenchification" of Algeria.

In view of the French cabinet's split on 25 January on the question of using force against the settler insurgents, De Gaulle may be obliged to give such assurances to avoid the collapse of

27 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 09]
the Debré government. Such a gesture would probably satisfy most of the military dissidents and influence them to try to persuade the settler insurgents to abandon their barricades. Premier Debré, in his appeal to the settlers to lay down their arms, cited De Gaulle's earlier explanation that the entire military, economic, and social program being carried out in Algeria is designed to ensure the permanence of French presence there. As a further compromise gesture, De Gaulle might elaborate on the reference to partition he made in his 16 September speech announcing his self-determination plan.

An alternative for De Gaulle would be to invoke the provisions of the constitution which gives the president full powers in a national emergency. He might accompany any such action with announcement of a plan to go to the people in a referendum to seek long-term dictatorial powers. Even with such a dramatic gesture, however, he would still face the problem of imposing his will on the army.

27 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Widespread Violence in Bolivia

All rural militia units in the Cochabamba valley of central Bolivia have mobilized, and widespread violence threatens. Considerable unrest has arisen from bitter rivalry between the two wings of the governing Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR) over selection of presidential and congressional nominees at its convention 15-21 February. This led on 23 January to a violent battle in the mining town of Huanuni, formerly a stronghold of the MNR right wing but now in control of Communist-led miners. Celestino Gutierrez, leader of the right-wing miners, was lynched, ten others were killed, and 32 were injured.

American Ambassador Strom notes that the violent death of Gutierrez will intimidate all anti-Communist labor leaders if moderate President Siles allows it to go unpunished. Siles, however, has thus far ordered the armed forces to keep out of Huanuni. Followers of right-wing leader Guevara are pressing him to resign as foreign minister over the incident, but he has thus far insisted he cannot leave his post on the eve of Mexican President Lopez Mateos' visit beginning 30 January.

27 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
