[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
2. British mission sees Chinese Communist Party shake-up probable
(page 3).
3. Peiping admits at least 80,000,000 Chinese facing food shortages
(page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
5. Comment on Djakarta demonstrations (page 5).
6. French defense officials fear air attacks in Indochina (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
8. Confusion in Syria may bring leftist leader to the fore (page 6).
9. Extremist factions emerge following return of Nagib (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE
12. Coty optimistic on EDC but urges some changes (page 9).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. British mission sees Chinese Communist Party shake-up probable:

The British mission in Peiping believes that
"all is not well" in the upper ranks of the
Chinese Communist Party, although there
is no evidence of a serious split.

The central committee's emphasis, in its
plenary session in Peiping in February, on the need for "unity" among
senior civilian and military members is seen as indicating a probable
shake-up, with some expulsions from the party. The mission has no
reason to suppose, however, that the party will depart from its past
practice of avoiding a sensational purge.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: The plenary session provided
good reason to believe that the party's "reorganization," under way
since 1951, will extend into its leadership this year. While several
members of the central committee appear eligible for discard, it is
uncertain whether any member of the 11-man politburo will be affected
or whether Chairman Mao Tse-tung will dramatize the issue publicly.

3. Peiping admits at least 80,000,000 Chinese facing food shortages:

The American consul general at Hong Kong
quotes the official People's Daily of Peiping
as admitting on 10 February that 20 percent
of China's rural population is facing food
shortages. The newspaper classifies almost
half of these as "famine-stricken."

Comment: In broadcasting the gist of this
editorial on 10 February, Peiping omitted the percentage figures,
which would mean that at least 80,000,000 Chinese are affected. This
is Peiping's first admission of widespread rural food shortages, which
have appeared in prospect for several months as a result of subnormal
food harvests, expanding food shipments to the Soviet Union, and preferential treatment for urban labor and the armed forces.
[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Comment on Djakarta demonstrations:

The demonstrations by several hundred
thousand persons in Djakarta on 28 February,
in protest against alleged insults to
Islam by various government and Communist leaders, indicates the
popular appeal the opposition Masjumi Party can muster when it draws
on its religious base.

A smaller demonstration by Moslem groups
on 13 February provoked a larger show of force by government and
Communist supporters on 20 February. The latest outbreak was the
largest and most unruly.

The government's majority in parliament
is secure even if the two small Moslem parties represented in the
cabinet carry out their threat to withdraw. Because of this the Masjumi
and their Socialist allies probably feel that only by showing overwhelming
support can they force the government's downfall. In appealing to Vice
President Hatta, the crowds probably hoped to make it apparent to President Sukarno that his support of the present government is unpopular.

6. French defense officials fear air attacks in Indochina:

French defense minister Pleven told Ambassador Heath in Saigon on 27 February that he
could scarcely recommend a prolonged French
military effort without "fairly precise" assurance of the American reaction to Chinese Communist intervention in the
form of a "Viet Minh air force." He said this applied even if he could obtain convincing assurance of a better Vietnamese contribution.

Earlier the same day, the French army secretary told Heath that the military situation was by no means unsatisfactory
but could change overnight if MIG's were suddenly to appear over Dien
Bien Phu.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Comment: There have been persistent
reports of Viet Minh pilots training in China but no firm evidence
that China has assigned planes to a Viet Minh air force.

The French have been obliged for several
years to carry out their military planning and operations under the
threat of air and troop intervention from China.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

8. Confusion in Syria may bring leftist leader to the fore:

Neither of Syria's old-line political parties
dominates the cabinet coalition,
both may make concessions to the radical
Arab Socialist Party, thus bringing its
leader, Akram Hawrani, to the fore.

The army attaché in Damascus reports that
announcements and congratulatory telegrams
read on the Aleppo radio reflected strong
leftist tendencies, echoing the lines of Hawrani
and even of the Communists. One of the leaders of the current revolt,
Captain Mustafa Hamdun, is reportedly a follower of Hawrani.

Comment: Hawrani is an extreme leftist
with strong anti-Western sentiments. He broke with Shishakli over the
latter's failure to implement a strong land reform program. A year
ago he merged his party with the Arab Resurrectionist Party, an
extremist, pan-Arab group.

9. Extremist factions emerge following return of Nagib:

Ambassador Caffery in Cairo reports that the
"monolithic front" of the Revolutionary Command
Council is no longer intact and that Major Khalid
Muhieddin, young leftist member of the council,
and a group of junior cavalry officers are currently prominent as a result
of their part in the restoration of General Nagib.

Both Moslem Brotherhood and Communist
organizers have been reported as active in the demonstrations supporting Nagib's return. Salah Ashmawi, expelled extremist of the outlawed
Brotherhood, appeared publicly with Nagib as he was being welcomed
back. Caffery believes that both the Brotherhood and the Communists
will use the present unsettled situation to enlist Nagib's support for
their ideas.

Comment: In the renewed struggle for power
in Egypt, extremists and old-line politicians may attempt to form alliances
with current government leaders. Their temptation to accept such support
is now increased.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
WESTERN EUROPE

12. Coty optimistic on EDC but urges some changes:

President Coty told General Gruenther
on 26 February that in his opinion the
prospects for EDC in France were much
better than two weeks earlier. After talking
with many French leaders including opponents of the treaty, Coty
was convinced that a rapprochement between France and a rearmed
Germany is generally acceptable. He felt, however, that efforts
should be made to find some acceptable changes to enable some
opponents to save face.

The permanent secretary of the National
Assembly's Foreign Affairs Committee has told the American embassy
in Paris that assembly debate on EDC is improbable before May for
technical reasons.

Comment: Although Laniel has apparently
been persuaded against treaty changes which would require renegotiation
among the signatory powers, he still feels that minor concessions
are necessary to secure ratification.
[PAGE 11]
