Pakistan's Exports Continue to Decline

The continued decline in Pakistan's exports during recent months is posing a threat to the new government's efforts to improve economic conditions. Exports for the first quarter of 1959 totaled only $73,143,000, a decline of 32 percent from the first quarter of 1958, a period when exports had already fallen substantially below the level of earlier years. Pakistan's exports dropped steadily from $401,000,000 in 1955 to $298,000,000 in 1958, chiefly because of difficulty in exporting raw cotton, Karachi's second most important export.

While the government has limited the impact of the recent decline in exports on its foreign-exchange reserves--which have remained fairly steady during the first quarter of 1959--it has done so only by reducing imports by 20 percent. This action will have a serious impact on the economy, since it reduces the raw materials and spare parts available to the country's industry, which is already operating at about half of capacity. A recently announced reduction in petroleum imports is expected to force the closure of several factories in East Pakistan, which may cause Karachi to reconsider its earlier decision against accepting the USSR's offer to supply petroleum at reduced prices. Such a limitation on production may also cause the government to lose some of the popular support it gained by reducing prices when it came to power.

The difficulty of finding markets in the free world is again causing Pakistan to seek increased barter trade with Communist countries, a device Karachi has occasionally resorted to in the past. Pakistan has already completed arrangements to barter cotton for cement with several European satellites, and is negotiating to exchange jute and cotton for cement from the USSR and coal from China. Pakistan's trade with the Sino-Soviet bloc has amounted to less than 1 percent of its total trade in recent years, however, and it is unlikely to increase substantially in the near future.
