[PAGE 01]
25 September 1953
Copy No. 67
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
GENERAL
1. Britain considering proposals for East-West mutual security arrangements (page 3).
SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Darul Islam participates in North Sumatran revolt (page 3).
SOUTH ASIA
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6. Tunisian Communists open country-wide youth campaign (page 6).
7. Moroccan tribe reportedly clashed with French army (page 7).
WESTERN EUROPE
8. Social Democrats expected to form government in Denmark (page 7).
LATIN AMERICA
9. Cuban government reportedly expects early revolt (page 8).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Britain considering proposals for East-West mutual security arrangements:
The British Foreign Office is considering three alternative versions of an East-West mutual security pact for possible discussion at the proposed four-power meeting at Lugano next month. The suggestions are: (1) a protocol to the North Atlantic Treaty providing for armed action under article 5 against any EDC member attacking the USSR or its Satellites; (2) a nonaggression pact between the EDC and the Soviet bloc with Britain and the United States committed to aid the victim of aggression; and (3) a mutual assistance treaty among the Big Four and Germany limited to attacks in either direction across the frontiers of Germany.

Comment: British officials have stated previously that none of these alternatives seemed attractive. Particularly because of Churchill's apparent continued interest in a Locarno-type pact guaranteeing both East and West against aggression, however, the Foreign Office holds that the Western powers should try to agree on an arrangement which would meet "reasonable" Soviet security needs and would also demonstrate good faith to Western public opinion.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Darul Islam participates in North Sumatran revolt:
The rebellion in Atjeh is being aided by the Indonesian Islamic army, the military arm of the outlawed Darul Islam in Java, according to the American consul in Medan. The rebels launched major attacks on seven large centers, and the governor admits that the situation is serious. Additional troops and planes have been sent to the area from Java.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: If the Darul Islam is aiding the autonomous movement in Atjeh, its activity has been far more extensive than had been generally recognized. Recent reports have been received that rebellious groups in Borneo and the Celebes have links with the Darul Islam. Such a development would provide the Communists, who allege ties between the Masjumi and Darul Islam, with additional material for their campaign to discredit the Masjumi, the government's chief political opposition.

Reports on the revolt in Atjeh are fragmentary and confused. The government admits disturbances, but claims that the situation is "under control."

SOUTH ASIA
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Iranian air force planes sabotaged:
On 22 September the fighter unit of the Iranian air force was sabotaged by three air force officers suspected of Tudeh sympathies, [[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]according to a source with good contacts in the air force[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]. The attempt to burn two hangars at the Tehran airfield failed, but the saboteurs succeeded in cutting the electrical control wires on ten F-47 fighters and three T-6 trainers. Only one F-47 and two T-6's reportedly remain operative.

These planes had been scheduled to drop leaflets over Qashqai tribal territory on 23 September, calling on the tribe to support the shah.

Comment: This appears to be the first major Tudeh sabotage. Reportedly Prime Minister Zahedi will publicly accuse the Tudeh, former prime minister Mossadeq and others of complicity. He is also ordering the purge of all Tudeh and other dangerous elements from the armed forces within one week.

Though the Qashqai have been linked with pro-Mossadeq and occasionally with Tudeh elements, they probably were not implicated in this sabotage.
[PAGE 06]
6. Tunisian Communists open country-wide youth campaign:
A recently organized Communist cell at the Grand Mosque school in Tunis is recruiting Moslem youth to form the nucleus of groups which they plan to establish in secondary schools throughout Tunisia, according to an official at the Grand Mosque. Leaders of this campaign reportedly hope to have cells in operation by early October, the beginning of the school year.

Comment: Communism, though legal, has not enjoyed notable success in Tunisia, and most of its top leaders have been imprisoned since early 1952. Organizers may operate without police interference so long as they do not disturb the national "peace and security."

The prolonged tension and dissatisfaction which prevails in Tunisia provides a receptive atmosphere for Communist propaganda. Organizers have been increasingly active in education and cultural institutions since last March, when political controls were beginning to be somewhat relaxed.
[PAGE 07]
7. Moroccan tribe reportedly clashed with French army:
The Beni Snassen tribe of northeastern Morocco, which refuses to recognize the new sultan of Morocco, engaged French army units on 14 and 15 September.

The tribesmen reportedly left more than 1,000 dead when they fled into the mountains.

Comment: The Beni Snassen historically has been one of the more rebellious and independent of the Berber tribes. In the past two months, it has been in a state of turbulence and on 16 August, during the tension preceding the new sultan's enthronement, it raided Oujda in eastern Morocco.

French army maneuvers, scheduled for 20 to 22 September in the Oujda area, may have occurred earlier and have been used as a camouflage to resubjugate this tribe. The French radio in Brazzaville announced on 23 September that the Snassen had surrendered to French military forces.

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Social Democrats expected to form government in Denmark:
The Social Democrats, who won a two-seat plurality over the coalition government parties in the 22 September elections, will most likely form the next Danish government, in the opinion of the American embassy in Copenhagen. They may, moreover, attempt to secure effective parliamentary control by forming a coalition with the Radical Liberals, whose pronounced opposition to defense measures would make their inclusion "highly disadvantageous to the attainment of US objectives."

The embassy believes that the election results indicate Danish public support for the "slow and cautious international policy" supported by the larger parties rather than for the neutralism of the Radical Liberals.
[PAGE 08]
Comment: The Social Democrats, by far the largest single party in Denmark, have supported NATO but consistently opposed any steps to man NATO air bases in Denmark with American air force personnel. Because of this Socialist position the former Conservative-Moderate Liberal minority government was virtually unable to expand Danish support for NATO.

LATIN AMERICA
9. Cuban government reportedly expects early revolt:
The Cuban government reportedly expects a revolutionary attempt between now and early October.

about 50 navy and air force officers and enlisted men have been arrested this week on charges of involvement in a plot to overthrow the present regime. The plotters allegedly hope to turn the government over to the Supreme Court and re-establish the 1940 constitution.

Comment: Despite the considerable popular opposition to the Batista regime, the armed forces have heretofore been considered a bar to any successful revolutionary attempt. Of late, however, there have been numerous reports that military personnel are associated with the various revolutionary factions. Whether the present disaffection in the armed forces is sufficient to pose a threat to Batista is not known.
