7. U NU REAPPOINTED BURMESE PRIME MINISTER

The Burmese Chamber of Deputies on 28 February unanimously reappointed U Nu as Burmese prime minister. Nu had turned over his office to Socialist Ba Swe last June, citing a desire to devote his full attention to the reorganization and "purification" of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League, the government coalition. For the past three months, however, Nu has been maneuvering intensively, against the opposition of the strong Socialist Party faction of the League, to regain the prime ministership.

While Nu's return probably foreshadows no basic foreign policy changes, he is apt to be more easily manipulated by Communist leaders such as Chou En-lai than the more calculating Ba Swe. Recent reports have indicated that in domestic policy, Nu may be amenable to a new effort to reach a settlement with the insurgent Communists.

The outgoing prime minister will still be a powerful figure. He is to become one of four deputy prime ministers, and retain the portfolio for defense.

8. RESIGNATION OF FINNISH GOVERNMENT

Social Democratic prime minister Fagerholm's coalition cabinet resigned on 1 March following the withdrawal of the six Agrarian Party members. This climaxes a prolonged dispute over means of combating Finland's growing inflation. Socialist insistence on a proposal to reduce the prices of some farm products in order to keep organized labor's demands for wage hikes within bounds brought on the Agrarian resignations.

It seems unlikely that any effective government can be formed without Agrarian participation, although many Socialists feel that labor has more in common with the parties representing business interests than with the farmers. The Communist-front Finnish People's Democratic League, which controls about one fifth of the seats in parliament, is unlikely to secure representation in any new government.

Social Democratic finance minister Simonen, a strong party leader, is regarded as a possible successor to Fagerholm, who had previously announced his willingness to retire. Failing a new parliamentary coalition, however, a "nonpolitical" cabinet of civil servants might be formed to deal with the country's pressing economic problems on an emergency basis.
