[PAGE 01]
13 February 1958
Copy No. 137

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Presses Japan for Peace Treaty

The USSR is using deadlocked negotiations on fishing rights as a means of compelling the Japanese to reopen peace treaty talks. Moscow probably hopes to force the Kishi government to abandon its claim to the Soviet-occupied southern Kuril Islands of Etorofu and Kunashiri--the major obstacle to a peace treaty between the two countries.

In the fishery negotiations which began on 13 January, the USSR has introduced proposals which would greatly hamper Japanese fishermen. On 5 February, Soviet officials refused to discuss measures to safeguard Japanese fishermen from seizure by Soviet patrol boats except in a framework of peace treaty talks.

Japanese Prime Minister Kishi announced on 12 February that his government is willing to undertake peace treaty negotiations with the USSR, but that they should not be linked with any fishing talks. His position, as stated last May, has been that Moscow must first accept Japanese views on the Kurils issue. Domestic pressure by fishing interests may now force Tokyo to allow the peace treaty and fishing talks to be linked. Tokyo probably will not, however, change its stand on the territorial issue despite the major importance to Japan of fishing in the restricted northwest Pacific waters.

[PAGE 05]
Opposition to Ulbricht Not Ended by Party Purge

Opposition to Walter Ulbricht, the Stalinist boss of the East German Socialist Unity (Communist) party (SED), was not ended by last week's purge of three party leaders. Karl Schirdewan, second man in the SED hierarchy until he was purged, has many supporters in the provinces.

There is little likelihood, however, that Schirdewan and his supporters will be able to defeat Ulbricht or his policies as long as the East German leader enjoys Soviet support. Ulbricht coordinated the purge with Moscow, and convinced the Russians that the Germans must still be handled with force and brutality. In an effort to maintain his control of the SED, Ulbricht will probably undertake an extensive purge aimed at eliminating pro-Schirdewan elements and others suspected of holding revisionist or liberal views.

there was no organized conspiracy against Ulbricht, but that Schirdewan and other party officials had attempted "in a friendly manner" to persuade Ulbricht to revise his political and economic policies. Schirdewan favors German reunification, which the USSR refuses to consider, and believes East Germany should have more freedom in dealing with its own political and economic problems.

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

The Indonesian Situation

A period of political and military maneuvering is probable, with all factions hoping to avoid violence. However, isolated incidents, possibly leading to localized conflict, could occur.

President Sukarno is expected to return to Djakarta on 16 February.

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
III. THE WEST

Total French Evacuation of Tunisia Sought by Bourguiba

The American Embassy in Tunis reports that President Bourguiba plans to ask the UN Security Council to order the evacuation from Tunisia of all French forces, including those at the Bizerte base. Bourguiba would be willing to refrain from the UN appeal if assured that France will publicly agree within a few days to evacuate its forces. A phased withdrawal over a period of time would be acceptable to Bourguiba, but he insists that French evacuation of southern Tunisia must be "almost" immediate.

Free world delegations are seeking to devise some type of UN machinery which would ease the impact of future incidents. French Premier Gaillard's defense before the National Assembly of the military action which created the crisis suggests the French Government will be unable to make any major concessions to Tunisia, and is not likely to evacuate Bizerte.

The establishment of a UN observer patrol along the Tunisian-Algerian border--similar to those used during the dispute between Greece and its Balkan neighbors--has been suggested. France, sensitive to any "internationalizing" of the Algerian question, would most likely refuse to allow the patrols on the Algerian side of the border, and Tunisia has pointed out that such patrols would not be able to prevent incursions by air.

An arrangement similar to the UN Emergency Force now deployed along the Egyptian-Israeli border probably would not be acceptable to France. Moreover, the Tunisian incident is not yet sufficiently critical to encourage UN members to contribute troops and equipment for another UNEF. However, some kind of UN action is inevitable.

[PAGE 09]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 10]
