Austrian Trade Discrimination Favors Soviet Bloc

Because of the essentially barter nature of the trade with Eastern Europe, the volume of trade between Austria and the Soviet bloc is dependent ultimately on the volume of bloc sales in Austria. Austrian trade with the bloc has increased steadily over the last five years, but in 1960 seemed to level off at about 15 percent of total trade. Austrians have long hoped to expand this figure to 20 or 25 percent. Khrushchev raised Austrian hopes during his visit to Austria last year by stating that he was prepared to buy everything Austria produced providing Austria was willing to buy an equal amount from him.

Austria recently placed grain imports under a state trading system in the belief that grain is one of the few products it needs which the bloc can readily supply. In September 1960 a contract for 45,000 metric tons of corn was awarded by this semiofficial Grain Board, which, in contrast to previous practice, stipulated the Soviet Union as the sole source of supply. Subsequent contracts, with the same stipulation, were placed for 50,000 metric tons of corn and 30,000 metric tons of barley. At the same time, feed corn could have been bought from free world sources--including the United States--at prices 14 to 18 percent lower.

The US share of the Austrian tobacco market, a state monopoly, has been declining, while leaf tobacco imports from the bloc have increased from 6 percent of Austria's tobacco imports in 1958 to 14 percent in 1960. US coal imports have also been declining, while bloc exports have risen from 37 percent of Austria's bituminous coal imports in 1958 to 52 percent in 1960.

The embassy has reason to believe that the Austrian Government does request and exert pressure on private business organizations to purchase certain commodities from the bloc rather than from free world sources. This pressure on private firms, as distinguished from nationalized firms, is exercised through import licensing controls.

15 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
