III. THE WEST

Situation in Italy

Amintore Fanfani's failure to form a center-left government has brought the Italian political crisis to a dangerous phase. Right-left strains within the Christian-Democratic party, mainstay of Italy's postwar governments, threaten the party with disintegration, to the benefit of the neo-Fascists and Communists. In February the Liberal party withdrew support of Antonio Segni's all-Christian Democratic government on the grounds that, although it depended on the rightist parties in parliament, it was moving to the left. Segni then resigned on 24 February rather than depend for support solely on the Monarchists and neo-Fascists.

Subsequently, the Christian Democratic party directorate authorized Segni to form a government of the center-left which would depend on Nenni Socialist abstention for a parliamentary majority. The Democratic Socialists and Republicans, who were to be partners in such a government, voiced their approval, as did the Socialists, but just as the government appeared about to be formed, Segni withdrew, apparently under pressures from right-wing elements in his own party.

Fernando Tambroni subsequently formed an all-Christian Democratic cabinet but was ordered by his party to resign rather than depend on the neo-Fascists, who provided his majority in the lower house. The Christian Democratic directorate then authorized Amintore Fanfani to try a center-left government, but Fanfani withdrew when party right-wingers objected to dependence on the Nenni Socialists.

President Gronchi has now asked Tambroni, who remains premier-designate, to seek Senate approval. Gronchi has thus passed over the possibility of forming a government based on Liberal and Monarchist support; in so doing, he presumably felt that many left-wing Christian Democrats would reject even a moderate center-right coalition.

In order to avoid elections now--in view of the leftward trend of the electorate, these would be damaging to the Christian-Democratic party--Gronchi probably hopes that a strictly caretaker government, whether headed by Tambroni or someone else, can be formed to carry on until the Christian Democrats can hold an emergency national congress to make a clear-cut decision for either right or left orientation.
