25 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF

Taiwan Strait: Some 50 Chinese Communist jet fighters were moved from other areas into bases opposite the Taiwan Strait last week. The Chinese Nationalist High Command, which believes that the Chinese Communists will start some sort of hostile action prior to the summit conference, has shown its concern by placing the offshore island garrisons on an alert status. While it is possible that the aircraft movements on the mainland presage stepped-up Communist efforts to interfere with Nationalist patrols, US intelligence officials on Taiwan believe it more likely that the moves noted were rotational flights. (Page 6) (Map)

South Korea: The cool reception given President Rhee's announcement on 24 April that he will withdraw from partisan politics and turn the reins of government over to a coalition cabinet suggests that this alone is not enough to rally popular support for the government. There is considerable evidence that the constitutional amendment planned by Rhee would allow him to retain control by leaving him the power to appoint and dismiss cabinet members. An uneasy calm prevails over most of the country, with demonstrations continuing in some localities. Students and professors of universities in Seoul predict that unless the government meets basic student demands for new national elections and punishment of police responsible for repressive acts, new disturbances are inevitable when the army leaves the cities. (Page 7)

III. THE WEST

Italy: The failure of Fanfani's effort to form a center-left government has aggravated the strains within the Christian-Democratic party, threatening party unity. Despite the strong opposition within the party's left wing to Tambroni's dependence on neo-Fascist support in winning lower-house approval for his all-Christian Democratic cabinet two weeks ago, President Gronchi has now called on Tambroni to proceed with seeking Senate approval. Christian Democratic party leaders, who fear losses if new elections are held now, may try for a strictly caretaker government pending a party congress to debate the question of whether to seek support from the right or the left.
