[PAGE 01]
18 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Africa: Albert Luthuli, the president of the African National Congress and the most influential African nationalist in South Africa, appears to be dying as a result of the harsh treat- ment he received after his arrest on 30 March, The death or permanent incapacitation of Luthuli, who had exercised a restraining influence over African extremists, would provide Africans throughout the country with a rallying symbol for further action against the government. Re- gardless of Luthuli's condition, serious disorders may occur if Africans provoke police retaliation by heeding nationalist appeals to begin a week-long stay-at-home campaign on 19 April.

Sudan: Dissension within the top leadership of the Abboud military regime is growing, as each of the several factions tries to line up army and civilian supporters. The regime's unpopular- ity has increased, partly as a result of strong pressures by influ- ential political and religious leaders for a return to civilian govern- ment. It seems doubtful that all five regional army commanders would support the regime in the event of a showdown.

Greece: The recent announcement that Turkish Prime Minis- ter Menderes and Soviet Premier Khrushchev will exchange visits this summer has created difficulties for the Greek Government, according to Foreign Minister Averoff. Opposition groups, both left and right, are again denouncing the "inflexible" foreign policy which has left Greece almost alone in its opposition to the USSR's economic and cultural offensive. Thus the government may decide

18 Apr 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
it must make some dramatic move toward improving relations with the bloc.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel Castro seems intent on making the May Day rally in Havana a demonstration of strong support for his regime not only by the Cuban masses but also by public sentiment through- out the hemisphere. Evidently aware of the cool attitude of most Latin American governments, he is trying to show hemisphere support by inviting numerous political figures who are out of of- fice but have widespread reputations as liberal or "anti-imperi- alist" leaders. The Cuban Communist party is taking a leading part in preparations for the rally, and almost 100 representatives from Communist China and Soviet bloc countries are expected to participate.

18 Apr 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

South African Native Leader Reported Dying

Albert Luthuli, the president of the African National Congress and the most influential African nationalist in South Africa, ap- pears to be dying as a result of the harsh treatment he received from the police after his arrest on 30 March.

Luthuli is almost the only African nationalist whose prestige extends throughout South Africa. His program has been moderate, emphasizing peaceful reform. He has favored the creation of an African-dominated state, with non-African minority rights consti- tutionally guaranteed. Although government-imposed restrictions have hindered his activities, he has heretofore acted to restrain African extremists. His death or permanent incapacitation would provide Africans throughout the country with a rallying symbol for further action against the government.

Regardless of Luthuli's condition, serious disorders may oc- cur if Africans provoke police retaliation by heeding nationalist appeals to begin a week-long stay-at-home campaign on 19 April.

18 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 07]
The Sudanese Situation

The possibility of a sudden move to change or overthrow the Abboud military regime in the Sudan is growing. Dissen- sion within the Supreme Military Council--the top governing body--has become acute, as each of its several factions tries to line up army and civilian support.

Influential political and religious leaders have sustained their pressures for a rapid return to civilian government, and the Supreme Council members have been unable to agree on how to deal with them.
The head of the Ansar religious sect, which could probably muster several thousand partially armed tribesmen in an emergency, has warned the gov- ernment that action against him would force "drastic counter- measures."

It seems doubtful that the regime can count on support of all five regional army commanders in the event of a full-scale show- down.

18 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
Greek Government Faces Increasing Pressure to Improve
Relations With USSR

The announcement on 12 April that Turkish Prime Minister Menderes and Soviet Premier Khrushchev will exchange visits has caused the Greek Government more domestic difficulties than it had anticipated, according to Greek Foreign Minister Averoff. The opposition press, both the far left and the anti- Communist center, is again attacking the government's "inflex- ible" foreign policy. Several non-Communist political leaders have denounced the government for permitting Greece to become isolated in its opposition to the Soviet bloc's economic and cul- tural offensive. Liberal party leader Venizelos has seized the opportunity to announce that he has accepted a month-old Soviet invitation to visit the USSR.

The USSR has alternately used the "carrot and the stick" in attempting to "normalize" its relations with Greece, and late last year the Soviet ambassador in Athens vainly attempted to arrange an exchange of visits between Karamanlis and Khrushchev.

Athens is "resentful and unhappy" over Ankara's precipitate announcement of the visits and its omission of the fact that Men- deres will visit Athens before going to Moscow.

Averoff has told the American ambassador that Athens must soon decide if it will "fall in line" and abandon its resistance to a detente. Thus Athens may decide to make some dramatic move to improve its relations with the bloc.

18 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Plans for Cuban May Day Rally

Fidel Castro seems determined to make the May Day rally in Havana a demonstration of strong support for his re- gime not only by the Cuban masses but also by public senti- ment throughout the hemisphere and by the Sino-Soviet bloc.

A parade by the armed forces and militia units is planned to show Cuba's capacity to repel the foreign invasion Castro of- ficials insist is being plotted by "imperialism!" Previous plans for a march of a million workers are rumored to have been abandoned because of a bitter fight within the Cuban Labor Con- federation (CTC) over the government's endorsement of efforts to purge non-Communist leaders. The Cuban Communist party has taken advantage of this situation to usurp CTC responsibility for organizing the May Day celebration, hoping thus to strengthen its influence with Castro and within the CTC.

Delegations invited from other Latin American countries in- clude liberal leaders--many of them widely respected--who re- cently signed a "statement of solidarity with the Cuban Revolu- tion." Their presence would be used to demonstrate support by nonofficial hemisphere groups and to offset the coolness of most Latin American governments toward Castro and their concern over his rejection of the Rio de Janeiro Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance.

Castro will also probably attempt to attract to Havana a large number of the prominent liberals and leftists from all Latin Amer- ican countries and the United States who have been invited to Maracay, Venezuela, from 21 to 26 April to attend the sched- uled conference of the Inter-American Association for the Defense of Democracy and Freedom--a meeting which is supported by Vene- zuelan President Betancourt's regime. Those invited to the Maracay conference include eight former chiefs of state and other influential

18 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
political leaders and government officials, several of whom have long been considered unfriendly toward the US.

Along with 73 Soviet visitors and other bloc delegations, the Chinese will probably be given a prominent place in the demonstration.

The American Embassy in Havana is convinced the rally will have a strong anti-US and Communist-line flavor.

18 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
