II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos

Communist partisans continue guerrilla raids in scattered areas of Laos. A 27 August raid on a government post only 16 miles east of Vientiane apparently was designed to sow confusion and weaken morale in the administrative capital. Villagers along the Mekong River in central Laos are described as extremely jittery over the prospect of Communist raids.

The government has redeployed troops in an effort to check dissident activity developing in an area northeast of Luang Prabang, the royal capital. Several groups of armed Communists--one totaling 300--are reported operating in central Laos.

The USSR, in a reply described by British officials as "moderately worded," rejected Britain's proposal of 17 August that the UK and USSR as cochairmen of the Geneva agreements request the UN secretary general to appoint a neutral observer to Laos. In a meeting with a high British Foreign Office official on 27 August, Soviet Ambassador Malik proposed instead that the heads of the three delegations making up the suspended ICC for Laos--India, Poland, and Canada--plus some "auxiliary staff," investigate the causes of present tension in Laos and report to the cochairmen. The Soviet counterproposal would pave the way for a complete resumption of ICC activity.

Prime Minister Nehru's reaction to Secretary General Hammarskjold's proposal that India intercede with Vientiane and Hanoi as a first step toward UN mediation indicates that New Delhi will follow its usual policy of offering its "good offices" only if all governments concerned agree on the nature and usefulness of such an effort. Hammarskjold had written Nehru on 22 August suggesting that India approach the Laotian and North Vietnamese governments to try to work out a "mediation formula" leading to the appointment of a "neutral"--and probably non-Asian--mediator. In his reply, Nehru expressed the view that assurances of "active support" would be needed from Britain and the USSR, as Geneva cochairmen, and from Poland and Canada, as members of the ICC. Nehru's desire for an assurance of "cooperation" from Laos and

29 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
