probably at least partly intended to serve notice to the West that the USSR will fully support East Germany should the Western powers in the future apply economic sanctions against that country. In the past few months Khrushchev has told Western diplomats that he expects such economic retaliation in the event Moscow signs a separate peace treaty with East Germany. Under this protocol, which followed months of negotiations, the USSR has promised to deliver during the next four years essential raw materials and machinery over and above the amounts provided for under the five-year trade agreement between the two countries. According to the East German press, Moscow has also agreed to make available a long-term credit of "over two billion Deutsch marks," approximately $500,000,000 at the official rate of exchange normally used for such transactions. At this rate, this would be the largest single economic development credit ever extended by the USSR to any country. Soviet deliveries of investment commodities may enable East Germany to raise its investment goals which had been cut back last year. The West, and particularly West Germany, however, will continue for some time to be an important source of modern highly specialized commodities not available within the bloc.
(Backup, Page 2)

Angola: the Angolan governor general relayed to Lisbon an official report on the worsening military situation in one of the important districts of northern Angola. The district official reported, "Without military forces to ensure the safety of the Europeans and the workers, it is useless to think about a coffee harvest. Please realize that I am in a powerless position where I must watch the collapse of a district of the government without being able to prevent it."

four thousand nationalists recently scored a significant victory by capturing the major Portuguese military air base in the Angolan Congo district and killing all of its 950 Portuguese defenders.

According to the same report, the nationalists now plan to capture several other towns in northern Angola and hope to be able to cut the

3 June 61 DAILY BRIEF v
