Sudan: The Abboud military government has shown its determination to stamp out further dissident activity in the army by discharging 16 junior officers suspected of involvement in the antiregime plotting which led to the abortive coup of 10 November. The coup leaders were executed or sentenced to long prison terms early this month. The power of Deputy Army Commander in Chief Hasan Bashir Nasir, who was primarily responsible for thwarting the coup attempt and who for several months has been advocating a purge of the officer corps, probably is increasing.

Japan-Korea: The only condition blocking an accord between Seoul and Tokyo on repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to South Korea is said to be Japan's insistence that South Korea agree that in the future all Japanese fishermen who violate the Rhee line will be released automatically on completion of their prison sentences. Seoul has expressed its willingness to return on 24 December those fishermen who have already served their sentences. The Japanese Government fears, however, that South Korea may back out on its promise to release the fishermen when the repatriation to North Korea scheduled for 14 December begins. Such action would cause the Japanese to nullify any agreement for repatriation to South Korea.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: The political campaign on Cyprus will culminate on 13 December in the election by the Greek population of a president for the new republic. Observers on the island predict that Archbishop Makarios will defeat his 72-year-old rival, John Clerides, who is supported by an alliance of dissident rightists and Communists. Makarios' margin of victory must be over 60 percent of the total vote or he will suffer a damaging blow to his prestige both on the island and abroad. Makarios has the backing of the Greek Government, and Turkish Cypriot leaders as well as the British authorities favor his election.

Guatemala: The extensive fraud used to assure the victory of a majority of pro-administration candidates in the 6 December congressional election has led the moderate leftist Revolutionary party (PR) to announce its refusal to accept the election outcome. PR leaders plan protest demonstrations; some violence may occur but the government does not appear in immediate danger. On 10 December all public demonstrations were prohibited, and the police and army are likely to be used quickly to prevent serious disorder.
