I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's Scandinavian Visit Canceled

The official explanation that an "unfavorable atmosphere" caused Khrushchev to cancel the Scandinavian tour that had been planned in detail for 9-27 August appears to be incomplete, although the real reasons remain obscure.

The pace of Khrushchev's recent activities could have proved too strenuous and he may have been advised to moderate his schedule. According to the press, sources close to the Danish prime minister stated that the Soviet authorities arranging the visit repeatedly stressed that the program should not be too crowded. Signs that he has begun to tire more easily than heretofore began to appear early this year.

Ambassador Thompson has recently noted a tendency for Khrushchev to drag his left leg. However, Governor Harriman, who made a deliberate attempt to test Khrushchev's physical condition during the ten hours he spent with him on 23 June, did not observe any peculiarities in Khrushchev's walk and has reported he appeared in good health.

Moscow may consider that recent statements by Scandinavian leaders strongly opposing the Soviet-proposed nuclear-free zone in the Baltic area, as well as the plans of the Scandinavian countries and Finland to open negotiations on 20 July for a little free-trade area, have made a visit at this time inopportune. The Soviet notes delivered in Moscow to the three Scandinavian countries and Finland on 19 July cited Scandinavian press criticism of the visit and the "hostile" view of certain political leaders toward Khrushchev's tour. Moscow charged that Swedish newspapers "had been permitted to make insulting attacks on the USSR and the Soviet premier personally," and the official Danish paper was quoted as saying that the invitation had been issued "out of sheer courtesy."

Pravda stated on 19 July that the USSR was unalterably opposed to the formation of the "Outer Seven" market area, alleging that

21 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
