[PAGE 01]
23 May 1961
Copy No. C 90

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
23 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. South Korea. (Page ii)

3. Burma: Government campaign against Shan and Karen separatist movements. (Page iii)

4. Cyprus: Communist influence in organized labor movement. (Page iii)

5. South Africa: Government taking further security measures in attempt to prevent non-white demonstrations. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
South Korea: South Korea's revolutionary government is still consolidating its power and neutralizing elements which might oppose it. Colonel Kim Chong-pil, who is reported to be the principal adviser of the coup strongman, Major General Pak Chong-hui, told an American official on 22 May that everyone involved in the new regime has been too busy with internal affairs to pay much attention to relationships with the United States. He asserted that the United States should not be concerned, since the revolutionary leadership was anti-Communist and pro-US. The officer said that this was true despite the resentment engendered by statements of American officials in Seoul on 16 May, which had urged support of the former Chang Myon government.

The adviser to Pak admitted that military command principles in relation to the UN Command had been violated, but said that the intent was to make the relationship between South Korean military forces and the UN Command as close as in the past. He said the leadership feels that Army Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Chang To-yong has too many duties in the present arrangement--he is chairman of the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction, head of the cabinet, and minister of defense--and that a new chief of staff should be appointed.

Interservice rivalries and tension between the senior and the more numerous junior officers of the revolutionary leadership are continuing. The marines and paratroops in Seoul are reported to have refused on 21 May to obey an order by Chang To-yong to return to their camps.

(Backup, Page 3)

23 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
Burma: Although there has been an over-all decline in insurgent activity during the past decade, the Shah and Karen separatist movements in the eastern part of the country have gained momentum since U Nu resumed the premiership last year. These movements, which have no strong ties with each other, are suspected by Rangoon of having obtained arms and recruits from the evacuating Chinese Nationalist irregulars. The government reportedly is now planning to expand its campaign against them, despite the onset of the rainy season.

Cyprus: Relations between the Greek and Turkish communities remain strained, with activists on both sides reportedly seeking arms and preparing for a possible breakdown of the Cypriot Agreements which established the present government. These political problems, and chronic economic difficulties facing President Makarios' government, have recently been compounded by a deteriorating situation in the organized labor movement. A Communist was recently chosen as the workers' representative in the Cypriot delegation to the June conference of the International Labor Organization. Simultaneously, the island's largest labor federation not already dominated by the Communists elected as its head an ineffective personality who appears to be falling under Communist influence.

(Backup, Page 7)

South Africa: The Verwoerd government has increased its security precautions as a result of a continuing threat of non-white strikes and demonstrations. An inter-racial committee heavily infiltrated by Communists, has called on non-European workers to stay at home on 29 and 30 May, in protest against the Union's assumption of republic status on 31 May. The government, which earlier had ordered several non-white and liberal European leaders to refrain from attending political gatherings, on 19 May imposed a sweeping ban on all meetings until 26 June. Four militia units and a number of Citizen Force units have been called up, and arrests of Black Africans in the last few days probably total more than a thousand.

23 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Minister Louw recently told Ambassador Satterthwaite that the government hopes these measures will prevent shootings such as that at Sharpeville last spring.

23 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
South Korea

Apprehension appears to be growing among civilians who originally supported the coup or were apathetic to the overthrow of the Chang Myon government over the adoption of increasingly repressive tactics by the revolutionary leaders. some 3,000 persons have been arrested, but it is unclear how many are hoodlums and criminals and how many are political offenders. Most newspapers have been forced to adopt a position of complete endorsement of the new regime and give a distorted picture of American reaction implying that Washington supports the revolution.

Meanwhile, new Foreign Minister Kim Hong-il appears to be attempting to allay American concern regarding the

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
revolutionary government. At his first press conference Kim gave assurances that the new government's foreign policy will not differ basically from that of the Chang Myon administration. He added that negotiations would be continued for the normalization of South Korean-Japanese relations and that the new regime opposed the "march north" unification policy of the old Rhee government. Kim is a former South Korean ambassador to Nationalist China and a retired lieutenant general. He is believed to be strongly anti-Communist and to favor an authoritarian government similar to that of Chiang Kai-shek on Taiwan.

Peiping's People's Daily, in an editorial of 21 May, claims the US "stage-managed the coup" and labels the coup leaders "fascist." Pyongyang has broadcast reports of atrocities allegedly perpetrated by US personnel and has depicted the coup as a US-sponsored effort to "force more unbearable calamities on the South Korean people."

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 11]
CHINA
BHUTAN
INDIA
PAKISTAN
NAGA HILLS
SPECIAL
DIVISION
BAY OF BENGAL
RANGOON
IRRAWADDY
MARTABAN
ANDAMAN
SEA
KACHIN
STATE
CHINA
MANDALAY
SHAN
LAOS
THAILAND
BANGKOK
GULF
OF
SIAM

BURMA
ETHNIC POLITICAL UNITS
KAREN INSURGENT AREA
SHAN INSURGENT AREA

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page

[PAGE 12]
Burmese Army to Extend Its Anti-Insurgent Campaign

Insurgency in Burma stems primarily from the dislike and distrust of the ethnic minorities in the Burmese highlands for the Burman-dominated government. These groups joined the Burmese Union reluctantly when the British granted independence in 1948, and the largest minority elements, the Shans, Karens, Kayahs, and Kachins, insisted on separate states drawn along ethnic lines as the price of participation. Since then Rangoon's "Burmanization" policies and the arbitrary actions of army personnel in the hill country have built up the minority peoples' distaste for the Burmans. In addition to Shan and Karen demands for independence, the non-insurgent Chin and Arakanese communities--and even the Mons, who are almost entirely absorbed into other ethnic groups--are demanding statehood for themselves, and the combined minority communities, under the leadership of Burma's former President Sao Shwe Thaike (a Shan prince), are proposing a looser federal structure for the Union government.

Except among the Shans and Karens, antigovernment military action has been largely brought under control. The Communist forces which revolted in 1947 and 1948 have been reduced to the status of bandits. The evacuation to Taiwan of over 4,000 Chinese irregulars in April has left a relatively small force of about 1,200 in the country along the Burmese-Thai border. Many of these, although they still reject Burmese authority, appear anxious to merge quietly with the local populace. However, as of early April the Burmese Foreign Office reported that some 500 irregulars had joined the Karen National Defense Organization, and since that time press reports of army skirmishes have suggested that Chinese irregulars are collaborating with the insurgents.

Following General Ne Win's retirement from the prime ministership in April 1960, military pressure against the insurgents slackened appreciably. Troops were diverted to the China border area on survey and demarcation missions and, later, to the joint campaign with the Chinese Communists against the Chinese Nationalist irregulars. Many of the army's senior

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 13]
officers, who had opposed the return of civilian government, lost their enthusiasm for the struggle against the insurgents. The Shan and Karen insurgents took advantage of this respite to regroup and have recently launched strong attacks against government-held towns and the Rangoon-Mandalay railway. The commitment of six of the army's 13 infantry brigades to the suppression of these marauding bands underscores the government's concern with the deterioration of internal security. However, unless these units are prepared to operate through the rainy season as they did during General Ne Win's administration, the campaign is likely to have little lasting effect.

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 14]
Cyprus

The two basic political problems between the Greek and Turkish communities stem from their leaders' disagreement on implementation of provisions in the Cyprus constitution calling for a 7:3 ratio between Greeks and Turks in the civil service and for separate municipalities for the Turks in the island's five largest cities. The stalemate has caused a sense of frustration within the Turkish community which could lead to more active hostility against the Greek Cypriot majority. Rumors that members of both communities are smuggling and storing arms and that underground organizations are being formed are causing nervousness.

The murder on 13 May of a British citizen in Kyrenia and the subsequent arrest of a former leader of the Greek Cypriot organization EOKA have heightened tension. Both Makarios and the minister of interior, himself a former EOKA leader, immediately denounced the murder. The possibility exists that the act was designed by intransigent former EOKA elements to embarrass the more moderate government.

Meanwhile, the government is plagued with substantial unemployment and is seeking funds in Britain and the United States for development programs. According to a Greek Cypriot weekly newspaper, the government may seek a loan from the USSR if unsuccessful in negotiations with the West.

The Communists appear to be on the verge of taking over the labor movement. The largest federation on the island is Communist dominated, and it now appears likely that the only other significant Greek Cypriot federation will fall under Communist domination or will break into small competing factions. The anti-Communists within the federation and the governments were unable to cooperate in supporting an anti-Communist candidate.

23 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 15]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 17]
TOP SECRET
