[PAGE 01]
23 September 1954

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

NSA review completed            State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Italian Foreign Ministry fears nine-power London conference will fail (page 5).

LATE ITEM

5. army opposes Quwatli's return to power (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Italian Foreign Ministry fears nine-power London conference will fail:

A high official of the Italian Foreign Ministry expressed the view to the American embassy in Rome on 20 September that the London nine-power conference might fail, like the Brussels meeting, unless a firm basis for agreement is established in advance through adequate diplomatic soundings. The official felt the French proposals for an EDC alternative, which he described as "full of discrimination against Germany," vaguely drafted and alluding only indirectly to German admission into NATO, would only create confusion and dismay.

The Foreign Ministry continues to be suspicious of Mendes-France. It has expressed regret to the French embassy that he has apparently agreed to having his memoirs published in a newspaper which the Foreign Ministry describes as Communist.

Comment: Italian pessimism on the nine-power conference is generally shared by other Western European governments.
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

5. army opposes Quwatli's return to power:

the bulk of the Syrian army officer corps is now opposed to the election of Shukri Quwatli as president of Syria.

a quarter of the present officer corps participated in the coup that overthrew Quwatli in 1949 and fear the consequences of his return to power. One half of the corps entered the Syrian military academy after Quwatli's exile and were appointed from families not sympathetic to him.

Ambassador Caffery in Cairo reports that the real reason for the Syrian prime minister's visit to Cairo was to convince Egypt that his candidacy for the presidency has the backing of the Syrian army. army support of Ghazzi is based less on enthusiasm for him than on fear of Quwatli.

This unexpectedly strong, last-minute opposition to Quwatli could portend trouble on the occasion of the parliamentary elections to be held on 24 September. It seems more likely, however, that the army will allow the elections to be held but exert strong pressure to prevent the parliament elected from then choosing Quwatli as president.
