[PAGE 01]
23 September 1954

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Possibility of violence to prevent Yoshida trip reported (page 3).
2. Chinese Nationalists reported planning raid on coast after 30 September (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3.

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Italian Foreign Ministry fears nine-power London conference will fail (page 5).

LATE ITEM
5. army opposes Quwatli's return to power (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Possibility of violence to prevent Yoshida trip reported:

Comment: While Japanese labor union leaders are generally anti-Yoshida, most of them would probably oppose the use of force. Extremists in some of the unions may well employ violence, however, in the hope of preventing Yoshida's departure on a world tour which they believe would enhance his domestic political stature.

During the past six months there have been several abortive attempts on Yoshida's life. The Japanese police have labeled these the work of cranks. Many observers, both American and Japanese, however, have expressed alarm at the similarity of the present situation in Japan with that in the 1930's, when extremists committed a series of assassinations.

2. Chinese Nationalists reported planning raid on coast after 30 September:
[PAGE 04]
Comment: It is probable that the planned "raid" will be merely an attempt to reconnoiter the Amoy area for intelligence purposes.

There is a possibility, however, that the Nationalists will deliberately attempt to provoke major Communist counteraction, in the hope of involving American forces. Recent Nationalist moves to strengthen the Quemoy garrison, would improve Nationalist capabilities for such an operation.

In the past the Chinese Communists have frequently known in advance of operations planned by the Nationalists. They may well learn of the raid scheduled for next month.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3.
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. Italian Foreign Ministry fears nine-power London conference will fail:

A high official of the Italian Foreign Ministry expressed the view to the American embassy in Rome on 20 September that the London nine-power conference might fail, like the Brussels meeting, unless a firm basis for agreement is established in advance through adequate diplomatic soundings. The official felt the French proposals for an EDC alternative, which he described as "full of discrimination against Germany," vaguely drafted and alluding only indirectly to German admission into NATO, would only create confusion and dismay.

The Foreign Ministry continues to be suspicious of Mendes-France. It has expressed regret to the French embassy that he has apparently agreed to having his memoires published in a newspaper which the Foreign Ministry describes as Communist.

Comment: Italian pessimism on the nine-power conference is generally shared by other Western European governments.
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

5. army opposes Quwatli's return to power:

the bulk of the Syrian army officer corps is now opposed to the election of Shukri Quwatli as president of Syria.

a quarter of the present officer corps participated in the coup that overthrew Quwatli in 1949 and fear the consequences of his return to power. One half of the corps entered the Syrian military academy after Quwatli's exile and were appointed from families not sympathetic to him.

Ambassador Caffery in Cairo reports that the real reason for the Syrian prime minister's visit to Cairo was to convince Egypt that his candidacy for the presidency has the backing of the Syrian army.

army support for Ghazzi is based less on enthusiasm for him than on fear of Quwatli.

This unexpectedly strong, last-minute opposition to Quwatli could portend trouble on the occasion of the parliamentary elections to be held on 24 September. It seems more likely, however, that the army will allow the elections to be held but exert strong pressure to prevent the parliament elected from then choosing Quwatli as president.
