Situation in Laos (Situation as of 0400 EST)

Moscow has consistently avoided committing itself on whether an international conference would have to meet before a cease-fire could become operative. It has at various times called for reactivation of the International Control Commission for Laos, but has always specified that this body could not resume its activities in Laos without new directives from a conference. On 22 March, however, Moscow broadcast without comment Souvannah Phouma's suggestion that a cease-fire could be arranged by the ICC pending the convocation of an international conference.

The Pravda article maintains this careful avoidance of the question of timing, while heavily emphasizing the dangers of international conflict through the "intervention" of SEATO and the United States and the consequent urgency of an international conference. By driving home the point that it has long favored a conference, Moscow has put itself in position to claim that the convocation of a conference and a cessation of hostilities is a consequence of its initiatives and another example of the ability of the "Socialist camp" to prevent "aggression" by the imperialists.

Accompanying its charges that SEATO members are preparing for direct military action in Laos, Pravda warns that "peace-loving countries will not remain indifferent" to direct intervention by SEATO which could lead to "far reaching consequences." A more explicit threat has been made in the presence of US Ambassador Ravndal in Prague by the Czech Deputy Foreign Minister. Responding to a remark from the Indian Ambassador, the Czech stated: "If the United States invades Laos, members of the Warsaw Pact have decided to enter Laos in return."

Peiping has not yet commented on President Kennedy's press conference on Laos, although, the Chinese Communists have broadcast a substantial account of his remarks. Peiping's last comment suggesting its disapproval of a cease-fire before an international conference is convened was contained in a People's Daily article of 23 March. Since then there have been only hints that its attitude remains the same. The first

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
