The Situation in the Congo

In Stanleyville, Gizenga told a press correspondent that his regime was based on positive neutralism and would accept unconditional aid from any source. He said, however, that practically nothing had been forthcoming and that of the 20 countries which had recognized his government, only ten had done so in writing. He added that his government would respect present and future foreign investments, and claimed his troops would be willing to surrender their arms to the UN if this would lead to "republican legality." He disclaimed being a Marxist, saying that he had never studied Marxism and that although he had visited Moscow as recently as 1960, he had spent more time in Western capitals and had twice been to the United States.

UAR military representatives in Stanleyville complained to Cairo of difficulties in working with Gizenga's forces. The representatives said that in addition to linguistic problems encountered "because we did not know French," they almost became embroiled in a fight with Gizenga's troops when the weapons arrived in Aketi "because they imagined we were spies, in spite of the fact that it was they themselves who got the weapons. They wanted to hold Major Samir as a hostage until they were sure." Moreover, the mission was unable to effect an adequate training program for Gizenga's troops. It could not find officer material to train in the use of UAR-supplied weapons and also encountered delays in recruiting noncommissioned officer trainees and in distributing weapons. The mission also complained of the lack of discipline on the part of the Congolese during a trip to reconnoiter the air-drop zone--a trip that should have taken two days but took five--and of a lack of appreciation for its efforts by "anyone but Gizenga and some of the ministers." In contrast, "because her broadcasts are heard here," there was a growing appreciation for Ghana. Finally, the representatives complained of inadequate food and medical facilities and the harshness of conditions generally.

The Malayan UN commander in Kindu has been able to establish contact with the "Leopard men" in southwestern Kivu

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
