FAR EAST

1. Comment on Chinese Communist threat to Quemoys:

The Chinese Communist artillery bombardment of the Quemoy Islands on 3 September (see map, p. 4) appears to be aimed at testing American intentions as to defense of the major Nationalist-held islands off the East China coast. As of 2400 on 3 September (Washington time) the Communists had apparently taken no additional action against the Quemoys.

Following several weeks of propaganda threats to "liberate" the offshore islands and several days of reported Communist troop movements in the Amoy area and reconnaissance of the Quemoys, on the afternoon of 3 September Communist artillery fired on the Quemoy area for more than five hours, reportedly giving Little Quemoy a "thorough working over." Nationalist sources report that two members of the American military advisory group there were killed.

The Chinese Communists are believed to have in the Amoy area at least 150,000 troops estimated to be required for capture of the Quemoys. Air units as currently disposed could not provide effective support for an attack but could be brought up quickly. Lacking regular landing craft in the area, the Communists would depend on a large number of junks and fishing vessels to transport forces for any attack.

Chinese Nationalist forces on the Quemoys amount to about 43,000 regular troops--1200 of them on Little Quemoy--plus perhaps 11,000 guerrillas; the regulars are American-trained and newly equipped. Nationalist air units based on Formosa could provide the defenders with fighter and bomber support, and destroyers and destroyer escorts could provide supporting fire against landing attempts. A Nationalist official said last week that Taipei is determined to defend the major offshore islands "come what may." The morale of Nationalist forces now on the Quemoys is said to be good, but it could deteriorate rapidly in the absence of effective support.

It is doubtful that a Communist assault on the Quemoys would presage an early assault on Formosa, as the Communists would be expected to bypass these islands if a Formosa operation were imminent. The Communists presumably calculate that capture of the Quemoys--the most heavily defended of the Nationalist island outposts--would depress morale on Formosa and make Nationalist officials more vulnerable to current Communist propaganda aimed at securing their defection.
