Pro-Castro Demonstrations by Mexican Students

Mexican public universities, like those in most of Latin America, are "autonomous" or independent of direct government control, and students take frequent advantage of this wide latitude for irresponsible political activity. In this setting, Communist-led minorities have become powerful in several Mexican universities. Known Communists from the University of Michoacan led a mob which on 17 April destroyed the cultural institute in Morelia sponsored by the Mexican and United States governments. The Mexican Government is investigating reports that at least one of the students was with Soviet Embassy officials in Morelia on 16 April. Demonstrations in Mexico City in late April--at which fellow-traveling former President Lazaro Cardenas exhorted the crowd to active support of Castro--were organized by Communist and leftist students at the National University.

There has been little evidence of Communist influence at the University of Puebla until recently, when radical students capitalized on an internal struggle over the choice of a rector and over university "reforms." After a long strike and destructive attacks by armed students on the more moderate colleges within the university, the leftists succeeded on 9 May in electing a rector and in obtaining almost all their demands for other changes. Local authorities evidently continued to recognize the former rector, a moderate, and the leftists barricaded themselves in certain university buildings, declaring their candidate to be the rector. Business and Catholic Action organizations have staged counterdemonstrations against the agitators, and one student group has charged that the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City supports and controls the leftists. Several anti-Communist groups have petitioned President Lopez Mateos for federal intervention.

The Mexican Government seldom acts against student demonstrations unless serious violence threatens, and Lopez Mateos is particularly averse to the use of force so close to congressional elections scheduled for July. However, the earlier concessions have evidently emboldened the Puebla agitators. Their

2 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
