Pan-African Labor Federation Established

Controversy both on and off the floor over the affiliation issue was the dominant feature of the confused six-day meeting. Contrary to earlier indications of what their strategy would be, the representatives from Ghana and Guinea displayed no inclination as the conference progressed to moderate their insistence on a non-affiliation clause--a demand clearly aimed at the ICFTU. This stand was backed by Mali's labor organization. Spokesmen for most of the ICFTU affiliates, led by Tunisia's Ahmed Tlili and Kenya's Tom Mboya, fought for the right of "dual" affiliation.

In this situation, the leaders of the principal Algerian and Moroccan unions, who share the neutralist outlook of the Ghanaians and Guineans on most other issues but wish to preserve their ICFTU ties, made strenuous efforts to develop a compromise formula. When this proved impossible, Morocco's Mahjoub Ben Seddik, the chairman and dominant personality of the conference, allowed the Ghana-Guinea position, modified only by the provision of the ten-month "grace" period, to be written into the charter adopted "unanimously" by the rump session. The Algerians likewise associated themselves with the AATUF on this basis. Despite this decision, both Ben Seddik, who has demonstrated his opportunism in the past, and the leader of the Algerian union approached an ICFTU representative after the conference to request a "more dynamic" ICFTU program in Africa; Ben Seddik is also reported to have told an African associate that he did not plan to disaffiliate his union from the ICFTU.

Ben Seddik appears to have circumscribed somewhat the ability of the Ghanaians and Guineans to use the new organization to advance their pan-African ambitions by having Casablanca accepted as both the headquarters of the AATUF and the site of its next general conference. Moreover, he managed to secure for himself the key position of chairman of the AATUF's permanent secretariat. Other members named to this group are from Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Algeria, the UAR, Morocco,

2 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
