CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
31 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Probable Soviet ICBM launching: The high level of operational communications activity observed on the USSR's Tyura Tam-Klyuchi ballistic missile test range on 30 January culminated in a launching at 1500 EST on that date. The type of vehicle launched and the degree of success of the operation cannot yet be determined. All factors considered, a test ICBM launching is considered most likely. (Page 5)

Communist China: Peiping's First Five-Year Plan, which ended in December 1957, has shown results in the key industrial sectors which compare favorably with the rapid advances of the USSR's First Five-Year Plan (1927-1932). Peiping begins its Second Five-Year Plan on a clear note of determination and optimism, and the economy will probably continue to expand at about the same rate (6-7 percent) during the next five years, provided that the regime is able to obtain the necessary peasant cooperation.

Afghan-Pakistani relations: Afghan King Zahir's visit to Karachi from 1 to 5 February begins a new round in the exchange of state visits which began in 1956 with the aim of improving relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Continuing differences over such problems as a transit agreement and "Pushtoonistan" are likely to limit progress toward any substantial cooperation between Karachi and Kabul. (Page 3)

Burma: Burmese Prime Minister Nu's public rejection of Marxism on 29 January as a guiding political philosophy is his most forthright repudiation of Communist methods in favor of democratic procedures. He thus joins Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia as the second leader of a neutral Southeast Asian country openly to denounce international Communism in the past few weeks. Neither leader is likely to abandon his attachment to the principle of neutrality. (Page 4)

Indonesia: The resignation of the Djuanda cabinet has been publicly called for by two dissident leaders, Col. Simbolon and Col. Djambek, in Sumatra. Their demand may be the prelude of an ultimatum to Djakarta. They also suggested that Acting President Sartono nominate former Vice President Hatta and the Sultan of Jogjakarta to form a new cabinet.

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that there is no evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily involved in the Indonesian situation. There is evidence that dissident leaders on Sumatra plan to issue an ultimatum in early February requiring changes in the central government and posing the threat of a rival government. Continued failure to resolve the basic differences between the central government and the dissident leaders would lead to a situation even more favorable to the Communists on Java.
