The Congo Situation

Secretary General Hammarskjold, under severe attack from both Congo Premier Lumumba and the USSR, is taking the chaotic Congo situation back to the Security Council in order to obtain council support for his position. He maintains that the UN forces are not authorized to intervene in internal Congolese disputes despite the demands of Lumumba that the UN crush the rebellious Katanga government.

The session may be of crucial importance because Lumumba, backed by the Soviet Union, is increasingly critical of Hammarskjold and has threatened to demand the withdrawal of all European elements of the UN force--an action which Hammarskjold has said he would reject in favor of urging the withdrawal of the entire emergency force. Either course would remove present restraints from Lumumba and provide a wide opportunity for exploitation by opportunistic African governments as well as Communist bloc countries.

In Leopoldville, Lumumba continues to take repressive measures against Belgians and to harass UN personnel. Subsequent to the widespread police checks of personal documentation on 16 August in Leopoldville, Congolese troops on 17 August set up machine guns at the airport and interfered with plane landings. The premier threatened to seize all Belgian assets in the Congo if within two weeks Brussels has not returned Congolese funds, including gold, which were sent to Belgium several months ago.

He also reportedly has given the UN one week to take "satisfactory" action in regard to Katanga or he will send Congolese troops into that province. It is estimated that Lumumba has nine infantry and six gendarmerie battalions scattered throughout the five provinces, exclusive of Katanga, five of which are in Leopoldville Province. Gendarmerie battalions have no support weapons or transport, while all battalions are short of supplies, transport, and trained officers.

Tshombe, on the other hand, is believed to control about 2,000 troops of the former Force Publique organized into four battalions.
