El Salvador Reducing US Assistance Program

El Salvador's provisional government, which contains a considerable number of pro-Communists and Castro sympathizers, is now apparently moving to reduce US economic and military assistance programs. One such project--the National School of Public Administration--was closed by the government on 24 December, and the US Embassy has learned that a second project is scheduled to be shut down shortly.

Defense Minister Col. Castillo Navarrete told a group of US officials on 28 December that the government intends to replace US advisers to the National Police with Chileans or Italians or both. He termed all US assistance programs "void of beneficial results for El Salvador," and maintained that the US' primary interest in Latin America is to ensure a pro-US voting bloc--presumably in the OAS and UN. He added that North Americans are not "attuned" to the Latin American mentality and do not make good advisers, and that aid should be sought from "developed" European countries and, in some instances, other Latin American countries.

These statements, which completely reverse expressions of support Castillo had made within the past three weeks for US assistance programs, may reflect a high-level policy decision by the government.

These developments coincide with several Communist moves to organize rural workers into a peasant militia, to gain control over the country's electoral machinery, and to place the government's internal security functions under the control of the attorney general--a suspected Communist who has been spearheading a drive to "demilitarize" the National Police. Roberto Carias Delgado, leader of the active Communist front, the April and May Revolutionary party, reportedly said on 21 December before leaving for Cuba that plans are under way to seize the government by exploiting the assistance given his party by the junta.

This increasing Communist activity, under cover of a "democratic" front party, appears to stem from confidence resulting from the confusion and lack of coordination among anti-Communists, both civilian and military.

3 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
