WESTERN EUROPE

8. Allies to suspend interzonal trade if Berlin harassing continues:

The Allied High Commission has decided to suspend interzonal German trade if Soviet and East German authorities do not within a week satisfactorily carry out previous assurances that harassing measures in Berlin would cease. Meeting with West German Economics Minister Erhard, the High Commission pointed out that the Allies, in permitting signature of the trade pact on 20 September, had demonstrated good faith which has not been reciprocated by the USSR.

Erhard stated that, since East and West Germans had on 23 October reached agreement on schedules for deliveries of the iron and steel shipments urgently needed by East Germany, there would now be greater inducement for the East Germans to fulfill their oral promises. He therefore urged the Allies to give the East Germans a week before applying countermeasures.

Meanwhile, shipments of steel to East Germany were suspended as of 24 October.

Comment: Although French and British authorities had earlier been unwilling to go so far as to suspend interzonal trade, they appear to have been persuaded to change their stand because of recent more flagrant violations of the oral agreement to cease certain interferences with Berlin trade. The recent East German seizure of Steinschmuecken, the small outlying community of the American sector of Berlin, has further demonstrated the Soviet intention to continue harassing tactics in the vulnerable city.

9. French more amenable to German NATO membership:

The attitude of the French NATO Deputy Alphand and his counselor on the question of German membership in NATO has "softened" considerably in recent weeks. They feel nevertheless that early raising of this question might swing the balance against French ratification of the European Defense Forces treaty, which will be difficult to obtain in any event. Alphand expects the Germans to demand NATO representation soon, and he sees no logical basis on which to refuse the demand.

- 7 -
