[PAGE 01]
24 April 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Nepal: TASS announced on 23 April that the USSR has reached agreement with Nepal on the exchange of resident diplomatic missions. (Soviet Ambassador Ponomarenko told a high Indian official on 20 April that the agreement was "in response to Nepali overtures.") India, which regards Nepal as being within its sphere of influence, will not look with favor on this move. (Ponomarenko--accredited to Nepal as well as India--will pay his farewell call to Katmandu over the week end of 25-26 April, at which time he may seek to finalize agreement on Soviet economic aid to Nepal of about $7,500,000.)

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

Finland-USSR: Evidently under pressure from President Kekkonen, the commander in chief of the Finnish Defense Forces will make a "friendship visit" to Moscow in early May in response to an invitation from the Soviet defense minister. (The visit is in line with Kekkonen's belief that Finland must make special efforts to assuage Moscow's doubts concerning Finland's neutrality.)

France: (In a move designed to emphasize De Gaulle's desire for a US-UK-French division of the world into areas of defense responsibility), France is establishing two new "major" military commands--one including the Western Mediterranean, North Africa, and the Sahara; the other embracing the French Community area in Africa. The precise relationships which De Gaulle envisages between the new commands and NATO are unclear. The first presumably would include the French Mediterranean fleet, and might involve a formal declaration of withdrawal of part of the French ground forces now in Algeria from their NATO commitment. The second apparently would involve only non-NATO forces in west and tropical Africa.

24 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR and Nepal to Exchange Resident Diplomatic Missions

TASS announced on 23 April that the USSR has reached agreement with Nepal to exchange resident diplomatic missions. Heretofore diplomatic contact has been maintained through the Soviet and Nepali embassies in New Delhi and by occasional trips to Katmandu by Soviet Ambassador Ponomarenko--accredited to Nepal as well as India--and other Soviet diplomats from New Delhi.

The USSR is breaking a "gentlemen's agree- ment" to postpone opening of a diplomatic mission in Nepal. The Indian Government, which regards Nepal as being within its sphere of influence, will not look with favor on this move. Should the United States accept the long-standing Nepali invita- tion to open an embassy in Katmandu, Communist China--which now has permission to open a consulate in Katmandu--can be ex- pected to press for establishment of an embassy.

A 20-man Soviet economic delegation has been in Nepal since mid-February negotiating on economic aid projects; Nepal has reportedly agreed to accept a Soviet credit of about $7,500,000 to construct a sugar mill, a hydroelectric plant, and communications projects, but an agreement has not yet been signed. (Ponomarenko is to visit Katmandu over the week end of 25-26 April, at which time he may seek to sign a formal agreement covering the aid.)

Ponomarenko is being replaced as ambassador to India by I. A. Benediktov, who served in the post for five months in 1953. It is not known whether Benediktov will also be accredited to Katmandu or whether a resident ambassador will be appointed to head the new diplomatic mission there.

24 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

Finnish Commander in Chief to Visit Moscow

General K. A. Heiskanen, commander in chief of the Finnish Defense Forces, accompanied by four major gen- erals, will make a "friendship visit" to Moscow in early May at the invitation of Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Malinovsky. Although a group of Finnish officers attended the 1956 May Day celebration in Moscow, General Heiska- nen has resolutely opposed making a visit himself. The US Embassy concludes that he has yielded to pressure from President Kekkonen.

(During Kekkonen's state visit to the USSR in May 1958, Premier Khrushchev emphasized the desirability of visits by Finnish officers as an indication of good will and peaceful intentions. Kekkonen has since indicated that he feels that the USSR is taking a hard attitude toward Finland and that the Finnish Government must be prepared to follow a flexible policy and to make certain "tactical concessions.")

24 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 09]
