III. THE WEST

Belgian Government Weakened by Dispute Over Congo Policy

The resignation on 3 September of Congo Minister Maurice van Hemelrijck, which followed the refusal of the Belgian cabinet to approve his plan for the rapid "Africanization" of the Congo administration, has further weakened the shaky Social Christian - Liberal coalition of Prime Minister Gaston Eyskens. Powerful financial circles in Brussels which support the Liberal party have opposed Van Hemelrijck's plan since its announcement on 13 January, and the influence of the Palace, exerted chiefly through former King Leopold, has also been thrown against it. Earlier, the Palace had blocked the appointment of a new governor general of the Congo and forced the retention of Governor General Cornelis, who is not in sympathy with Van Hemelrijck's program.

Friction within the Socialist Christian - Liberal coalition has been growing since its formation last November. Serious differences developed over local issues such as electoral reform and the relaxation of restrictions on World War II collaborators. A crisis was avoided in early July by adjourning Parliament with the government's program only partially enacted. It was hoped to reconcile interparty differences before Parliament reconvened in November, but this has proved impossible.

Eyskens has replaced Van Hemelrijck with August de Schryver, an elder statesman of the Social Christian party who has generally backed Van Hemelrijck's Congo policy and is widely respected--even by the opposition Socialist party, which criticizes the Congo program as not going far enough in the way of economic and social reforms. The Socialists now are trying to exploit the resignation by demanding that Parliament be reconvened to discuss Congo policy, and there is press speculation that they may combine with Social Christian supporters of Van Hemelrijck to form a new coalition government. The Socialist party congress starting 18 September will probably decide whether to attempt this course or to press for early parliamentary elections.

8 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
