[PAGE 01]
24 December 1959
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-Bhutan: Bhutan's prime minister has agreed that India should make a complete survey of Bhutanese passes into Tibet, build airstrips capable of accommodating C-47 aircraft, and supply limited equipment and training for Bhutanese armed forces. The proposed Indian undertakings would be an extension of survey, airdrop, and training activities already under way. It is not yet known, however, whether the Maharajah of Bhutan, the ultimate authority, will approve the commitments of his prime minister.

Watch Committee Conclusions: The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future:

In Iraq, the influence of the Communists continues to disturb nationalist elements and a new attempt to assassinate Qasim could occur at any time.

In Laos, the young reformist group is restive after its exclusion from the cabinet and may, with the support of influential

[PAGE 04]
army elements, attempt an early power move against the premier.

III. THE WEST

Finland-USSR: Finland has officially accepted a Soviet 12-year $125,000,000 credit in rubles to purchase capital goods from the Soviet Union. The Finns, who have not been enthusiastic about the loan, may be reluctant to draw upon it but probably hope that the agreement will lessen Moscow's opposition to some kind of Finnish association with the European Free Trade Area. Finland and the USSR also reached an accord on the 1960 exchange of commodities under their long-term trade agreement.

24 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Further Indian Aid to Bhutan Discussed

General K. S. Thimayya, Indian chief of army staff, states that Bhutan's de facto Prime Minister Jigme Dorji has agreed that India should make a complete survey of Bhutanese passes into Tibet, build airstrips capable of accommodating C-47 aircraft, and supply limited military equipment and training for Bhutanese armed forces.

This attitude on the part of Dorji suggests an increasing awareness that semi-independent Bhutan cannot indefinitely hold out in traditional isolation against any increase in Chinese Communist pressure from Tibet. Dorji maintains a residence in Indian territory at Kalimpong, a major center of news and rumor regarding the Sino-Indian border dispute.

Dorji's feeling is shared to some extent in Bhutan itself, despite long-standing distrust of India among the Bhutanese, who are racially and ethnically akin to the Tibetans and who have long feared Indian imperialist tendencies. In recent years the Bhutanese Government has permitted Indian map survey parties to enter the country, has allowed Indian aircraft to overfly Bhutan to trade goods at selected locations, and has sent a few Bhutanese military officers to India for training. The Indian undertakings which Jigme Dorji now supports would, in effect, constitute an extension of such activities.

Dorji, however, cannot speak for the government of Bhutan with the same authority as the prime minister of countries using the British parliamentary system, and his agreement with General Thimayya on the advisability of various actions probably represents as yet only his personal commitment. The Maharajah of Bhutan, the ultimate authority, may agree to the above proposals, but their implementation must await formalization of the arrangements.

24 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Finland Accepts $125,000,000 Ruble Credit From USSR

Finland has accepted a 12-year ruble credit equivalent to about $125,000,000 to purchase capital goods from the USSR. The commodity credit was originally offered and accepted in principle during President Kekkonon's state visit to the USSR in May 1958, but the Finnish Government and commercial interests have been unenthusiastic about the offer. Finland has had a chronic ruble surplus in its annual trade balance with the USSR, and Finnish buyers show little interest in Soviet capital goods and equipment. The new five-year trade agreement (1961-65) signed during Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Mikoyan's visit to Finland in October, however, anticipates a closer balance in Soviet-Finnish trade.

The Finns may be reluctant to draw extensively on the credit; they are probably more concerned with assuring the USSR of their neutrality. Faced with the necessity of protecting their markets in Western Europe through some kind of association with the recently formed European Free Trade Area (EFTA), they probably hope that accepting the credit will convince the USSR that Finland's interest in EFTA will not mean a reduction in its trade with the USSR or in its political neutrality.

Finland and the USSR also agreed on 22 December to exchange some $250,000,000 worth of commodities in 1960 under the 1956-60 trade agreement.

24 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
