[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

9 January 1961

Copy No. C 75

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Iraq-Jordan: Jordan, which extended recognition to Qasim's Iraqi regime in October 1960, is now seeking financial assistance from Iraq, according to diplomatic circles in Baghdad. Qasim is reported to be favorably disposed toward the request but has not yet made a final decision. Financial aid to Jordan probably would arouse considerable opposition among the Iraqis, many of whom disapprove of the re-establishment of Iraqi-Jordanian relations because they view it as aligning Iraq and Jordan against the UAR.

III. THE WEST

Belgium: The Socialist-led strikes which have crippled much of Belgium for almost three weeks appear to be gradually receding and now remain concentrated largely in the Walloon areas of the south and the port of Antwerp. There is growing concern on all sides over the revival of old antagonisms between linguistic and economic groups engendered by the strikes which threaten to become more acute as the strike action is prolonged. Negotiations are continuing for a compromise, but Prime Minister Eyskens' Social Christian - Liberal government has given no indication

9 Jan 61
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 04]
that it intends to agree to Socialist demands to withdraw its controversial austerity program. The lower chamber of parliament reconvenes on 10 January to resume debate on the measure.

LATE ITEM

*France-Algeria: De Gaulle is expected to consider the referendum vote as a mandate to accelerate his search for an early solution of the Algerian problem. Three-fourths of the voters in metropolitan France voted their approval; in Algeria, many Moslems abstained from the balloting, but incomplete tallies indicate that a clear majority of the voters had approved. De Gaulle may soon make another offer to the rebels in terms less rigid than before, perhaps waiving his previous insistence that a negotiated cease-fire precede political discussions. Although rightist opposition leader Jacques Soustelle has warned that the European settlers in Algeria will regard the vote in France as "abandonment," the key to any successful settler opposition to defy De Gaulle or delay his next move remains the attitude of the army. The army has maintained discipline thus far, but its morale is reported to have sagged as a result of De Gaulle's recent swift policy moves.

Algerian rebel leaders are to meet in Tunis tomorrow to consider their next moves in light of the referendum.

9 Jan 61
DAILY BRIEF
iii

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Jordan Seeking Financial Aid From Iraq

Iraqi Prime Minister Qasim is favorably disposed toward a Jordanian request for financial assistance, according to information from the Lebanese ambassador in Baghdad who until recently handled Jordanian affairs there. The amount and terms of the aid sought were not disclosed. Qasim reportedly has not made a final decision on the matter.

Iraqi aid to Jordan probably would arouse considerable opposition among many Iraqis who are displeased over the rapprochement with Jordan, which they view as aligning Iraq against the UAR. Qasim, however, may consider that benevolence toward Jordan would enhance his prestige as an impartial Arab leader amid apparently rising pan-Arab sentiment in Iraq. A progovernment Baghdad newspaper has referred to possible efforts by the Iraqi Government to eliminate differences between the UAR and Jordan.

The Jordanian Government is preoccupied with the UAR's threat to its security and with its perennial financial problems. The Jordanians apparently hope Qasim will be helpful in both of these situations. King Husayn's regime swallowed its outrage over the murder of Husayn's Hashemite relatives in the Iraqi revolution of 1958 and recognized Qasim's regime in October 1960. Since then gradual progress has been made in re-establishing relations between the two countries.

9 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3

[PAGE 07]
Belgian Strike Situation

The three-week-old Socialist-led strikes which have crippled much of Belgium appear to be gradually receding and now remain concentrated largely in the Walloon areas of the south and the port of Antwerp. An early end to the work stoppages in the "red belt" of the industrial south is not expected, however, because of the 7 January vote by the Socialist-controlled General Federation of Belgian Workers to continue the strikes.

Prime Minister Eyskens' Social Christian - Liberal government remains determined to proceed with parliamentary considerations of its controversial austerity program--the omnibus bill--and the lower chamber will reconvene on 10 January to resume debate on the measure. Eyskens has indicated he is prepared to return the bill to committee with certain conciliatory amendments after its debate in the chamber, but he has refused to agree to Socialist demands to withdraw the bill. He has the support of the powerful Roman Catholic trade union federation which has refused to support the strikes.

Efforts to mediate the strikes are continuing, but there has been little basis for negotiation because of the refusal of both sides to retreat from their basic positions. In this stalemated situation the Belgian press is mentioning increasingly the possibility of new elections this spring after the austerity legislation is passed or a reorganization of the government.

The prolonged strikes have also served to revive antagonisms between linguistic and economic groups and created breaches which may be difficult to heal. On 3 January, Walloon Socialist deputies, meeting without their Flemish and Brussels colleagues, for the first time in the party's history adopted a resolution implying support for an autonomous French-speaking Walloon area within a federal state. The Walloon representatives maintain that the steadily deteriorating economic situation in southern Belgium is attributable to government policies which favor the Flemish-speaking north.

9 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
