[PAGE 01]
9 January 1961
Copy No. C 75

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 JANUARY 1961
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Situation in Laos
Situation in the Congo.
Jordan seeking financial aid from Iraq.

III. THE WEST
Belgian strikes gradually receding.

LATE ITEM
Referendum voters approve De Gaulle's Algerian policy

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The fall of Nam Bac to the Pathet Lao increases the threat to Luang Prabang, although the royal capital does not appear to be in any immediate danger. Government troops meanwhile have secured the junction between the Vientiane - Luang Prabang road and the road running eastward toward the Plaine des Jarres. Little fighting has been reported in Xieng Khouang Province as government troops continue their withdrawal to a reassembly point south of Xieng Khouang town. In contrast to press reports alleging that the USSR had stopped its airlift to the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces with the investiture of the Boun Oum government on 5 January, North Vietnamese communications reflected the flights of 16 of 20 scheduled aircraft for 6 and 7 January and the scheduling of six IL-14 flights from Hanoi to Vang Vieng and five to Sam Neua for 8 January.

Bloc propaganda coverage of the Laotian situation continues to claim widespread victories for the Pathet Lao, while Moscow obscures the question of the Soviet airlift by asserting that the United States is unable to convince its allies that the USSR is transporting military personnel into Laos. (Page 1) (Map)

Congo: The Gizenga dissidents appear to have assumed control of the governmental apparatus in Kivu Province, and continue to reinforce their military forces in the area. Arms and money which formed part of the cargo of an IL-14 from the UAR were delivered to Gizenga at Stanleyville on 6 January. There are indications that northern Katanga--largely controlled by anti-Tshombe

[PAGE 05]
Baluba tribesmen--may be receptive to overtures by the dissidents. In a conversation with a UN military commander, Baluba leaders recently reiterated their opposition to Tshombe, called for the return of Baluba leader Jason Sendwe from "exile" in Leopoldville, and demanded assurances that their tribal areas would remain part of a united Congo rather than of Tshombe's "independent" state.

In an apparent effort to capitalize on anticolonial themes which were expressed at the recently concluded Casablanca conference of radical African states, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin on 7 January called for a meeting of the UN Security Council as soon as possible to discuss "new acts of aggression" by Belgium against the Congo.

Iraq-Jordan: Jordan, which extended recognition to Qasim's Iraqi regime in October 1960, is now seeking financial assistance from Iraq, according to diplomatic circles in Baghdad. Qasim is reported to be favorably disposed toward the request but has not yet made a final decision. Financial aid to Jordan probably would arouse considerable opposition among the Iraqis, many of whom disapprove of the re-establishment of Iraqi-Jordanian relations as aligning Iraq and Jordan against the UAR. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Belgium: The Socialist-led strikes which have crippled much of Belgium for almost three weeks appear to be gradually receding and now remain concentrated largely in the Walloon areas of the south and the port of Antwerp. There is growing concern on all sides over the revival of old antagonisms between linguistic and economic groups engendered by the strikes which threaten to become more acute as the strike action is prolonged. Negotiations are continuing for a compromise, but Prime Minister Eyskens' Social Christian - Liberal government has given no indication

9 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF II

[PAGE 06]
that it intends to agree to Socialist demands to withdraw its controversial austerity program. The lower chamber of parliament reconvenes on 10 January to resume debate on the measure. (Page 4)

LATE ITEM

*France-Algeria: De Gaulle is expected to consider the referendum vote as a mandate to accelerate his search for an early solution of the Algerian problem. Three-fourths of the voters in metropolitan France voted their approval; in Algeria, many Moslems abstained from the balloting, but incomplete tallies indicate that a clear majority of the voters had approved. De Gaulle may soon make another offer to the rebels in terms less rigid than before, perhaps waiving his previous insistence that a negotiated cease-fire precede political discussions. Although rightist opposition leader Jacques Soustelle has warned that the European settlers in Algeria will regard the vote in France as "abandonment," the key to any successful settler opposition to defy De Gaulle or to delay his next move remains the attitude of the army. The army has maintained discipline thus far, but its morale is reported to have sagged as a result of De Gaulle's recent swift policy moves.

Algerian rebel leaders are to meet in Tunis tomorrow to consider their next moves in light of the referendum.

9 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF III

[PAGE 07]
CHINA
BURMA
NORTH VIETNAM
LAOS
THAILAND
SOUTH VIETNAM
CAMBODIA

9 JANUARY 1961
Selected roads
STATUTE MILES 100
UNCLASSIFIED
31439

[PAGE 08]
Situation Laos

The loss of Nam Bac village to the Pathet Lao increases the threat to Luang Prabang, although the royal capital does not appear to be in any immediate danger. Control of Nam Bac will enable the Pathet Lao to proceed down the Hou River toward Luang Prabang, 55 miles south. Laotian defense officials anticipate, however, that the Pathet Lao will first move on Muong Sai, 30 miles to the west of Nam Bac, which would pose a threat to the Pathet Lao rear in any attack on Luang Prabang by way of the Hou River. The government plans to send general Ouane to Muong Sai to set up defenses there.

Five government companies meanwhile have secured the junction between the Luang Prabang - Vientiane road and the road running eastward to the Plaine des Jarres. The government force apparently met no resistance; however, there are indications it is already coming under Pathet Lao harassment. In Xieng Khouang Province, little fighting has been reported in the past two days. Government troops are withdrawing southward from the Nong Het - Plaine des Jarres road. Col. Kham Kong has been assigned to command a task force whose mission is to retake the Plaine des Jarres. His headquarters will be at Pak Sane, but he plans to establish a command post at Tha Thom. Preparations for a drive against the Plaine des Jarres will take considerable time as it will be necessary to regroup the scattered government forces available for such a mission and resupply them by air.

In contrast to press reports alleging that the USSR had stopped its airlift to the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces with the investiture of the Boun Oum government on 5 January, North Vietnamese communications reflected the flights of 16 of 20 scheduled aircraft for 6 and 7 January and the scheduling of six IL-14 flights from Hanoi to Vang Vieng and five to Sam Neua for 8 January. North Vietnamese LI-2s were also scheduled for flights on the same day to Vang Vieng and Sam Neua.

On 5 January Izvestia, in Moscow's first reference to the Soviet airlift, charged that US allegations the USSR was carrying

9 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 09]
military personnel from North Vietnam to Pathet Lao forces was "imperialist propaganda" and that the US was unable to convince SEATO allies of the validity of this accusation.

In Phnom Penh, Souvanna Phouma does not appear disposed to accept King Savang's offer of an early audience in Luang Prabang. Although he has as yet not given a final answer, Souvanna's initial reaction was that he would not return to Laos until a coalition government was possible. He has long believed that the only solution to Laos' problems is a reconciliation between the Pathet Lao, centrist, and rightist forces. Souvanna is reported to have told one of his fellow exiles in Phnom Penh that he would not tender his formal resignation as premier, since the installation of the Boun Oum government automatically removed him from that office. Although this position is technically correct, Souvanna's failure to resign formally facilitates the bloc's maintenance of the fiction that his government remains the "lawful government of Laos," as does a statement attributed to him by the press that the Boun Oum regime was imposed by force.

9 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 10]
Jordan Seeking Financial Aid From Iraq

Iraqi Prime Minister Qasim is favorably disposed toward a Jordanian request for financial assistance, according to information from the Lebanese ambassador in Baghdad who until recently handled Jordanian affairs there. The amount and terms of the aid sought were not disclosed. Qasim reportedly has not made a final decision on the matter.

Iraqi aid to Jordan probably would arouse considerable opposition among many Iraqis who are displeased over the rapprochement with Jordan, which they view as aligning Iraq against the UAR. Qasim, however, may consider that benevolence toward Jordan would enhance his prestige as an impartial Arab leader amid apparently rising pan-Arab sentiment in Iraq. A progovernment Baghdad newspaper has referred to possible efforts by the "Iraqi Government to eliminate differences between the UAR" and Jordan.

The Jordanian Government is preoccupied with the UAR's threat to its security and with its perennial financial problems. The Jordanians apparently hope Qasim will be helpful in both of these situations. King Husayn's regime swallowed its outrage over the murder of Husayn's Hashemite relatives in the Iraqi revolution of 1958 and recognized Qasim's regime in October 1960. Since then gradual progress has been made in re-establishing relations between the two countries.

9 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
Belgian Strike Situation

The three-week-old Socialist-led strikes which have crippled much of Belgium appear to be gradually receding and now remain concentrated largely in the Walloon areas of the south and the port of Antwerp. An early end to the work stoppages in the "red belt" of the industrial south is not expected, however, because of the 7 January vote by the Socialist-controlled General Federation of Belgian Workers to continue the strikes.

Prime Minister Eyskens' Social Christian - Liberal government remains determined to proceed with parliamentary considerations of its controversial austerity program--the omnibus bill--and the lower chamber will reconvene on 10 January to resume debate on the measure. Eyskens has indicated he is prepared to return the bill to committee with certain conciliatory amendments after its debate in the chamber, but he has refused to agree to Socialist demands to withdraw the bill. He has the support of the powerful Roman Catholic trade union federation which has refused to support the strikes.

Efforts to mediate the strikes are continuing, but there has been little basis for negotiation because of the refusal of both sides to retreat from their basic positions. In this stalemated situation the Belgian press is mentioning increasingly the possibility of new elections this spring after the austerity legislation is passed or a reorganization of the government.

The prolonged strikes have also served to revive antagonisms between linguistic and economic groups and created breaches which may be difficult to heal. On 3 January, Walloon Socialist deputies, meeting without their Flemish and Brussels colleagues, for the first time in the party's history adopted a resolution implying support for an autonomous French-speaking Walloon area within a federal state. The Walloon representatives maintain that the steadily deteriorating economic situation in southern Belgium is attributable to government policies which favor the Flemish-speaking north.

9 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 January 1961
Copy No. C 75
