[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

11 December 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR may be helping Communist China
produce Tupolev turbojet bomber or
transport.

Bloc nations laying groundwork to seek
diplomatic exchanges when Cyprus becomes independent.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian rebel leadership meeting to discuss talks with French imminent.

Nigerian general elections Saturday considered crucial by rival tribes.

Yemen claims to have decided on pro-Western policy.

Fiji Islands--Attempt to suppress oil strike touches off anti-European riots.

III. THE WEST

British inclined to compromise at Geneva for early agreement on atom test cessation treaty.

Brazil, USSR complete negotiations for three-year trade increase.

Soviet exhibit now in Mexico to open in Cuba in February.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - USSR:
Soviet Union is assisting Communist China in the production of a Tupolev-designed aircraft and a turbojet engine for this aircraft. This production may involve Badger (TU-16) jet medium bombers or possibly Camel (TU-104) transports. The Soviet Union is apparently continuing to help Communist China modernize its aircraft and its aircraft industry. (Page 1)

Cyprus - Communist Bloc:
The Soviet bloc apparently is preparing to bid for diplomatic representation when Cyprus becomes independent. Polish and East German officials are reliably reported to have visited the island recently. Hungary has asked permission to open a consulate, and the Soviet ambassador in Athens is planning a trip to Nicosia. While Moscow propaganda has criticized the London and Zurich agreements providing for the independence of Cyprus, bloc countries can be expected to extend prompt recognition and to concentrate their efforts on stimulating Cypriot opposition to remaining British base rights. In mid-1959 Moscow and Peiping indicated to a delegation of local Cypriot officials their willingness to give economic aid to the new republic.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algeria:
An important meeting of the rebels' policy-ratifying group, the Revolutionary Council, is scheduled to be held shortly. The meeting may result in one or two cabinet shifts, but will probably concern itself mainly with discussion of rebel policy concerning contacts with the French, in the light of the UN debate on Algeria. The source said that rebel military commanders
[PAGE 05]
TERR. OF NEW GUINEA
SOLOMON ISLANDS
AUSTRALIA
CORAL SEA
NEW HEBRIDES IS.
New Caledonia
VITI LEVU IS.
SUVA
FIJI IS.
GILBERT IS.
ELLICE IS.
SAMOA IS.

UNCLASSIFIED
[PAGE 06]
remain critical of the rebels' political leadership, and question whether it can secure from the French satisfactory guarantees concerning Algerian self-determination. Defeat of the UN resolution on Algeria would probably weaken the position of rebel moderates at the forthcoming meeting. (Page 2)

Nigeria:
Nigeria's general parliamentary election on 12 December is expected to determine the make-up of the federal government which will be in power when the country--with an estimated 35,000,000 people--becomes independent next October. The election is therefore regarded as crucial by Nigeria's three major parties--each of which is largely tribal in composition and controls one of the federation's three self-governing regions. One of these, the party of the conservative Moslem rulers of the north, is especially determined to secure a controlling voice in the new federal government. Should it fail to achieve this, its adherents may react violently and possibly attempt to secede. (Page 3) (Map)

Yemen:
Yemeni officials have told the American chargé that the recent economic agreements with the United States and a private American firm result from a definite Yemeni policy decision "in favor of the West." They are now urging prompt American action to prove the wisdom of this decision. Yemeni assurances have often been unreliable, but the agreements cited by the Yemenis, together with other recent actions, reflect the Imam's growing suspicion of Soviet and Chinese Communist motives. (Page 4)

Fiji Islands:
The American consul in Suva, on Viti Levu Island, reports riots and anti-European violence have resulted from efforts by the British government of the islands to suppress an oil workers' strike now spreading to other industries. He suggests that evacuation of Americans may become necessary. There is basic antagonism between Fijians and the Indians who comprise more than half the islands' population.
[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

Britain-Geneva:
UK Foreign Office Minister of State Ormsby-Gore, sent to Geneva to examine the atmosphere of negotiations at the conference on cessation of nuclear tests, believes that the political need to achieve agreement has become so great that it may be necessary "to deviate slightly from our traditional position of 'no disarmament without thoroughly effective control.'" Ormsby-Gore told US Ambassador Wadsworth that international political pressures for an agreement have doubled in the past year, and that a special session of the UN General Assembly will be convened if the conference breaks down without any treaty. Ormsby-Gore proposes that "comparatively minor" issues be cleared away quickly in order to focus attention on the major questions of on-site inspection and the phasing of the control system.

Brazil-USSR:
The Brazilian-Soviet trade agreement of 9 December calls for the exchange of goods, mainly coffee and petroleum products, projected at $107,000,000 each way over a period of three years. It is still subject to approval by both governments and requires further negotiations over the composition of deliveries. This could further Moscow's plan to send a trade mission to Brazil in hopes of opening the way for renewed diplomatic relations. The agreement may have exceeded Brazil's expectations, especially by the USSR's offer to triple its annual coffee imports. (Page 5)

Cuba:
The Soviet technical and cultural exhibit now showing in Mexico will open in Havana on 5 February, according to Moscow radio. Mikoyan publicly offered the exhibit to any Latin American country when he visited Mexico to inaugurate the fair. The Cuban showing gives the Castro government further occasion to invite a high-ranking Soviet official to the opening, and might serve as a prelude to an offer to resume diplomatic relations with the USSR.

11 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 08]
IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Prospects for Indonesia. NIE 62-2-59. 8 Dec 59.

Short-term Prospects for Ecuador. SNIE 95-59. 8 Dec 59.

11 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 09]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China May Produce Tupolev-Designed Aircraft

Soviet Union is assisting Communist China in preparing for the production of a Tupolev-designed aircraft and a turbojet engine for this aircraft.

similar to those observed before Communist China began making the Fresco (MIG-17) jet fighter, the Colt (AN-2) piston transport, and the Hound (MI-4) helicopter. Therefore the Chinese may be preparing to produce the Badger (TU-16), the Camel (TU-104), or some other unidentified aircraft of Tupolev design. The Badger seems more likely, as China recently received a small number of Coot (IL-18) turboprop transports, which suggests that it has less immediate need for the Camel.

China's medium bomber force now consists of approximately 20 Bull (TU-4) piston-engine aircraft and possibly two TU-16s which may have been turned over to it early in 1959. No other bloc country is known to have been provided with TU-16s by the USSR.

despite recent signs of friction between the two countries, the Soviet Union is apparently continuing to assist Communist China to modernize its aircraft and its aircraft industry.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian Rebels Schedule Policy Conclave

An important meeting of the rebels' policy-ratifying group, the Revolutionary Council, is scheduled for 12 December in Tunis. Among topics to be discussed is a reorganization of the provisional government and the ouster of Foreign Minister Lamine-Debaghine and Minister of Armament and Supply Mahmoud Cherif. Lamine-Debaghine has long been at odds with his cabinet colleagues, and the likelihood of his ouster has periodically been a topic for speculation. The planned ouster of Cherif suggests that the rebels may require a scapegoat for the serious supply and ammunition shortages which have plagued their units in Algeria.

An important rebel meeting is to be held shortly, but cited Tripoli rather than Tunis as the likely location. The rebels' holding of such a conclave outside of their headquarters in Tunis would reflect irritation at President Bourguiba's recent curbing of their supply operations in Tunisia. It would also be interpreted as a move away from Bourguiba's moderate council on the issue of a cease-fire.

Rebel military commanders continue critical of the provisional government leadership and of its ability to secure from the French satisfactory assurances concerning Algerian self-determination. The UN General Assembly is scheduled to vote on 11 December on a resolution endorsing talks between the rebels and the French. The provisional government hopes that passage of this resolution would strengthen its hand for an approach to De Gaulle. Defeat of the Algerian resolution in the UN would tend to weaken the position of rebel moderates.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 11]
Nigeria

NIGER
BRITISH CAMEROONS (Trust Terr.)
CHAD
CAMEROUNS (Fr. Trust Terr.)
NORTHERN REGION
WESTERN REGION
EASTERN REGION
SOUTHERN CAMEROONS
GULF OF GUINEA

UNCLASSIFIED
[PAGE 12]
The Nigerian Election

Nigeria's general election on 12 December is expected to determine the make-up of the federal government in power when this most populous of all African countries--it has an estimated 35,000,000 inhabitants--gains its independence from Britain next October. The election, which is to fill 312 seats in the House of Representatives, is regarded as crucial by Nigeria's three major parties--the Northern People's Congress (NPC), the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC), and the Action Group (AG). Respectively, they represent, for the most part, Fulani, Ibo, and Yoruba tribal interests and control the federation's self-governing Northern, Eastern, and Western Regions.

Especially concerned about the outcome are the traditional Moslem rulers of the north--the controlling elements in the NPC--whose greatest fear is domination by the more dynamic Christian and pagan tribesmen of the south. These rulers and their adherents may react violently if they fail to secure a controlling voice in the new government, and might even attempt to secede.

Neutral observers have predicted an almost even three-way division of seats among the major parties and their minor-party allies--a result that would probably enable the NPC, which has an "understanding" with the NCNC leadership, to achieve its minimum goal. However, the election is unprecedented in many respects and forecasting is more than normally hazardous--especially after the NPC's unexpected major defeat in last month's UN-supervised plebiscite in the Northern Cameroons trust territory, an area long administered as an integral part of Nigeria's Northern Region.

Although tribal and regional loyalties will be the most influential factors, intimidation and harassment of opposition forces may also play a significant role in determining the final result, particularly in the north. There the traditional rulers enjoy a freer hand with respect to control over local police than do the southern governments. Moreover, the British, anxious to avoid the complications likely to follow a defeat of the NPC, appear to have taken a more lenient attitude toward that party's use of repressive measures against its opponents.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 13]
Yemeni Officials Now Profess to Be Pro-Western

Crown Prince Badr and other prominent Yemeni officials recently assured the American chargé in Taiz that Yemen has made a significant policy decision "in favor of the West." The assurances followed Yemeni approval of a basic aid agreement with the United States as well as the signing of several private and government contracts with an American investment company early last month. The officials stated that they and the Imam--who made the decision to accept American assistance--are now "on the spot" to prove the wisdom of their action and dispel the doubts of Yemeni proponents of a "closed door" policy. The chargé, who feels that "at least for the time being" Yemen has indeed "turned the corner," has received numerous pleas from Yemeni officials for prompt implementation of the assistance program.

The Yemeni assurances are given some credibility by the fact that no new aid agreement was announced following the recent Soviet-Yemeni negotiations in Moscow. Significant factors in the new policy may be Cairo's improvement of its relations with the West and the Imam's growing suspicion of Soviet and Chinese Communist motives. The cordial reception granted the British governor of Aden during his November visit to Yemen also seems indicative of the Imam's change of heart.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 14]
III. THE WEST

Brazil and the USSR Sign Draft Trade Agreement

The Brazilian-Soviet trade and payments agreement signed in Moscow on 9 December is the largest yet concluded by a Latin American country with the USSR. It calls for $107,000,000 worth of trade each way--mainly coffee for petroleum--over the next three years. The agreement is still subject to approval by both governments, and details regarding specific deliveries of products remain to be decided. The agreement is an entering wedge into Brazilian foreign trade, which in 1958 totaled $1.2 billion in exports and $1.4 billion in imports.

The trade targets quoted in a Moscow radio report call for each country to export $25,000,000 worth of goods to the other in 1960, $37,000,000 in 1961, and $45,000,000 in 1962. Aside from coffee, Brazil is to export cocoa, vegetable oil, leather, and various other goods. The main Soviet products are to be petroleum and its by-products, wheat, machinery, and metals. The USSR reportedly will take $18,000,000 worth of coffee in 1960, which is more than triple its current consumption.

the USSR accepted twice as much coffee as Brazil had expected.

The head of the Brazilian delegation told the press on 9 December that trade with the USSR would supplement, not displace, traditional trade with the United States, and that diplomatic relations were not involved.

however, the USSR plans to follow up these talks with a high-level trade mission to Brazil in hopes of opening the way for re-establishment of diplomatic relations.

11 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
