[PAGE 01]
28 April 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
28 APRIL 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet trawler unsuccessfully attempts to recover Polaris test vehicle launched by US sub off New Jersey coast.
USSR planting rumors of Khrushchev-Ayub exchange of visits.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Arab boycott of US ships set for 29 April.
Libya--Chamber of Deputies censure motion against government reveals strength of the opposition which opposes US base agreement.
Communist efforts to gain foothold in Belgian Congo pose threat to area's pro-Western inclination.
Indonesia reacts vehemently to expected visit of Dutch warships to Netherlands New Guinea.
South Korea--Proposed appointees to caretaker cabinet considered to be generally reputable men who could implement cleanup.

III. THE WEST
Cuba to exchange May Day delegates with Communist bloc countries, hires Czech technicians.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
28 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The Soviet trawler Vega, fitted with an unusual amount of electronic equipment and towing an unidentified object astern, attempted to recover a Polaris test vehicle launched by the US submarine George Washington during tests on 26 April about 120 miles off the coast of New Jersey. The trawler was forced from the immediate vicinity by the maneuvers of a US Navy tug, but remained in the general area throughout the day. Soviet trawlers have been suspected for some time of engaging in electronic collection efforts against US missile programs. The activities of the Vega are the most aggressive noted to date, and the first to be related to the Polaris program.

USSR - Middle East: The USSR, as part of an effort to exploit the forthcoming Khrushchev-Menderes exchange of visits, now is planting hints that a similar exchange is being worked out with Pakistan. By circulating these rumors of a Khrushchev-Ayub meeting, Moscow is trying to bring pressure on other countries, such as Greece and Iran, to moderate their antibloc policies. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Arab Boycott: The International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions (ICATU) has set up a "Supreme Committee" to direct the boycott of American ships scheduled to begin in Arab states at midnight on 29 April if a UAR freighter, the Cleopatra, is not unloaded in New York by that time. Unanimous enforcement in all the Arab states is improbable, but the boycott will be fairly widespread, especially in view of the fact that the Arabs believe that Israel is involved in the dispute. A parallel boycott of American aircraft is also being planned. The secretary general of the ICATU has said American vessels will not be prevented from transiting the Suez Canal. (Page 3)
[PAGE 05]
Libya: On 25 April, for the first time in Libya's eight and a half years as an independent state, the Chamber of Deputies passed a motion of censure against the government. While the specific issue was the government's unpopular decision permitting the visit of Italian fleet units in February 1960, the chamber's action clearly showed the increased strength of opposition elements following January's parliamentary elections. These elements can be expected to exert further strong pressure for modification of the American military base agreement, and King Idriss may soon appoint a new prime minister and other cabinet officials who will be more susceptible to such pressure.

Belgian Congo - USSR: Stepped-up efforts by both bloc officials and Belgian Communists to gain a foothold in the Belgian Congo, which becomes independent on 30 June, pose a threat to the Congo's pro-Western inclination. The consul general in Leopoldville observes that Communist contacts with the Congolese have increased since the round-table conference in Brussels last February, when numerous Congolese delegates took advantage of invitations to visit the bloc. The Soviet Union is willing to give the Congolese "all the aid that they desire" after independence. (Page 5)

Indonesia-Netherlands: Indonesia has reacted vehemently to the expected departure in June of the Dutch carrier Karel Doorman and two destroyers for Netherlands New Guinea (West Irian) and to the recently announced plans for reinforcement of Dutch forces there. Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio had informed the Dutch last fall that any effort by Dutch warships to transit what Indonesia considers its waters would be a "casus belli," and the current acting foreign minister stated on 26 April that this still was the Indonesian position. In view of acute political and economic stresses in Indonesia and the need for diversionary measures, the Dutch naval cruise is likely to precipitate

28 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
a frenzied propaganda drive for West Irian liberation. Such a development would strengthen the appeal of Indonesia's strong Communist party, which has consistently used the West Irian issue to promote anti-Western sentiment. (Page 6)

South Korea: Minister of Foreign Affairs Ho Chong, acting as president, is reported to have selected most of the members of his new cabinet, although their appointments have not been announced. Although Ho is facing difficulties securing men of top caliber for service in a caretaker cabinet in a fluid political situation, Ambassador McConaughy considers the proposed appointees to be generally reputable figures who would be able to begin the cleanup the public expects. Ho is worried over whether the cleanup move will be fast enough to satisfy the high tide of popular expectations. South Korean constitutional authorities have pointed out that an announcement of a new election for president and vice president must be made by 17 June to meet legal requirements. The issue of these elections, however, is being complicated by the controversy in the National Assembly over demands that election of a new assembly should have priority over any other political action. (Page 7)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Exchange visits between Cuban and Communist bloc delegates for May Day celebrations and the hiring of Czech technicians by the Cuban Government highlight Castro's rapidly growing involvement with Communist countries. The Brazilian ambassador in Cuba says he does not know whether the Cuban leader retains "sufficient autonomy and freedom of action publicly to define himself clearly regarding Communism." (Page 9)

IV. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

28 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]
B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the orbit in the immediate future.

Note: Although the Chinese Nationalists have shown concern over the possibility of an attack on the offshore islands, the Chinese Communists do not appear to intend major offensive military action in the immediate future. They have, however, maintained their capabilities to bring heavy pressure on the Taiwan Strait area and could initiate an attack on the offshore islands with little or no warning.

C. The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future:

None.

28 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF
iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Plants Rumors of Khrushchev-Ayub Meeting

The Soviet Union, as part of its efforts to exploit the exchange of visits between Khrushchev and Turkish Premier Menderes announced on 12 April, is planting hints that a similar exchange is being worked out with Pakistan.

Pakistani officials are reliably reported to be concerned that their government's pro-Western posture may be unsuited to the East-West "thaw," but they plan to make no decision on whether to revise their line toward the USSR until after the Commonwealth conference in May.

By circulating rumors of a Khrushchev-Ayub meeting, Moscow apparently hopes to bring additional pressures on other countries as well, particularly Greece and Iran, to get in step and moderate their antibloc policies. Greek Foreign Minister Averoff recently told Ambassador Briggs that Athens must soon decide whether to "fall in line" and abandon its resistance to a detente with Moscow. In an obvious effort to play on Athens' fear of political isolation, a
[PAGE 09]
Menderes, after returning from Moscow, will go to Sofia to negotiate outstanding issues. In mid-April, Moscow rejected Iranian proposals for a high-level meeting unless Tehran agrees to ban foreign military bases of all types from Iranian territory; Soviet leaders apparently believe that the Iranian Government can be induced to make new efforts to improve relations.
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Arab Boycott of American Shipping Impending

The International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions (ICATU) has established a "Supreme Committee" to direct the boycott of American ships which is scheduled to begin in Arab ports at midnight on 29 April if the UAR freighter Cleopatra is not unloaded in New York by then. A parallel boycott of American aircraft is also planned. The secretary general of the ICATU has said American vessels will not be prevented from using the Suez Canal.

Members of the Seafarers International Union (SIU) and the International Longshoremen's Association (ILA) have been picketing and refusing to unload the Cleopatra since 13 April as a protest against the UAR's boycott of American ships trading with Israel. The Cleopatra's owners have thus far failed to obtain a federal court injunction against the picketing, and the SIU asserts it will not be "swayed or intimidated" by Arab retaliatory measures.

The effect of the scheduled Arab counteraction probably will be widespread, although the unanimity the ICATU hopes for is unlikely. The governments of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Sudan, Jordan, and Lebanon appear reluctant to give full support, but they probably will be inclined toward token observance in view of the Arab belief that Israel is involved in the dispute. A wildcat refusal to off-load an American ship already has been reported in Kuwait, and similar activity is likely wherever Arab governments fail to support the boycott fully.

Nasir apparently regards the situation as unfortunate but feels he must countenance and even encourage the Arab boycott. The UAR is also considering a possible closure of its borders to American goods in case the boycott is not effective. The Foreign Ministry, however, has asked the Greek Government if, when the boycott goes into effect,
[PAGE 11]
US wheat destined for the UAR on American ships could be off-loaded at Piraeus and transshipped to the UAR under another flag.

The American Embassy in Cairo reports that there are signs the heretofore lenient UAR view of the US Government's role in the dispute is beginning to give way to a more hostile attitude.

Picketing of the Cleopatra is welcomed by the Israeli press as a possible turning point in efforts to secure passage for Israeli ships through the Suez Canal. American seamen have been hailed, while the US Government has been criticized for its failure to take effective action against the UAR boycott of Israeli shipping and for its statement on the potentially adverse effect the picketing could have on American foreign relations.
[PAGE 12]
Communist Influence in Belgian Congo Apparently Increasing

Stepped-up efforts by both bloc officials and Belgian Communists to gain a foothold in the Belgian Congo, which becomes independent on 30 June, pose a threat to the Congo's pro-Western inclination.

Belgium's policy of isolating its colony from outside political influences--successful until 1959--appears to have prevented the establishment of a Communist party in the Congo. At the same time, this enforced isolation produced a group of first-generation Congolese leaders with little experience in other than local affairs and little understanding of Communist techniques.

Following the round-table conference in Brussels last February, which set the date for Congolese independence, numerous Congolese delegates accepted invitations to visit the Soviet Union or one or more of the European satellites. A number of Congolese politicians solicited Communist financial support for the legislative election campaign now in progress. One of the Congo's leading political figures, Patrice Lumumba, is believed to have Communist financial backing. Possibly in the hope of Communist support after independence, a number of Congolese groups have indicated to the Belgian Communist party that they are in accord with and will follow some of the party's policies.

Lumumba stated on 19 April that the Congo, when it becomes independent, will follow a policy of nonalignment and "positive neutrality." In an apparent bid for recognition as the leading Congolese spokesman, he added that "we welcome all who wish to help our country develop."

the Soviet Union is willing to give the Congolese "all the aid they desire" after independence. Belgian officials have indicated that they expect the USSR to have an ambassador in Leopoldville "on 1 July."
[PAGE 13]
Increasingly Vehement Indonesian Reaction Developing Over Dutch Naval Cruise to New Guinea

Indonesia has reacted with increasing vehemence during the past week to the expected visit this summer of Dutch naval units to New Guinea (West Irian) and the recent Dutch announcement of plans to augment forces there. The naval force will consist of an aircraft carrier and two escort destroyers; reinforcements will include at least 12 jet fighters, modern replacements for amphibious reconnaissance aircraft, antiaircraft artillery, and increased contingents of naval and army forces.

The Indonesian foreign minister has taken the position that any entrance of Dutch warships into Indonesian waters will be considered a "casus belli," a posture which is complicated by Indonesia's claim to sovereignty over all waters within the archipelago.

Indonesia would not attempt to prevent such a passage by force of arms, warned that danger of violence would exist, particularly if the "Dutch were careless." An official of the West Irian Liberation Front told the press on 23 April that Indonesia could not ignore an "act of war." He warned against individual actions, however, and suggested that the populace await the command of the Sukarno government. The Foreign Ministry is considering a request to Cairo that the Dutch mission be denied transit through the Suez Canal.

In view of acute political and economic stresses in Indonesia and the need for diversionary measures, the Dutch naval cruise and anticipated Dutch reinforcements are likely to precipitate a frenzied propaganda drive for the "liberation" of West Irian. All political elements, including President Sukarno and the Communist party, will try to capitalize on Dutch activity and each will try to surpass its opponents with increasingly inflammatory statements. Such a development will principally benefit Indonesia's strong Communist party, which has consistently used the West Irian issue to promote anti-Western sentiment.
[PAGE 14]
New South Korean Cabinet

Minister of Foreign Affairs Ho Chong became Acting President of South Korea on 27 April with a cabinet of only two other members--Yi Ho as home minister and Kwon Sung-yol as justice minister. Ho, who immediately ordered holdover cabinet ministers of the Rhee administration to transfer their powers temporarily to the incumbent vice ministers, is reported now to have selected most of the men he will appoint to his new cabinet. As a result of the fluid political situation, Ho is facing difficulties securing men of top caliber for service in a caretaker cabinet. Ambassador McConaughy considers the proposed appointees--whose names have not been announced publicly--to be generally reputable figures who should be able to begin the cleanup the public expects.

The expected appointees include a respected banker with a reputation for honesty as finance minister, a qualified agricultural expert as minister of agriculture, and a prominent Seoul surgeon as minister of health and social affairs. Kim Chung-yol, minister of defense in the last Rhee cabinet, is expected to remain in this post in the new administration. Kim has been a capable and relatively honest administrator, and he may have received some credit for the way the enforcement of martial law has maintained the good will of the public.

Ho is worried over whether he can move fast enough in cleaning up and making reforms to satisfy the high tide of public expectations. Seoul is reported to be returning to normal with students helping in removing debris, performing traffic duties, and cooperating with the martial-law commander. Kyonghyang Sinmun, the paper closed by Rhee, issued its first edition on 27 April featuring a front-page picture showing a statue of Rhee being dragged down the street while people spat on it.

South Korean constitutional authorities have pointed out that the announcement of a new election for president and vice president
[PAGE 15]
must be made by 17 June to meet legal requirements. Such an election would be for full four-year terms. The issue of a new election, however, is complicated by a controversy in the National Assembly over demands by some opposition Democrats that voting for a new assembly should be held before any other political action is taken. The Democrats are also divided over whether the assembly should be dissolved before or after the amendment of the constitution to provide for a parliamentary system of government. One Democratic assemblyman argues that it is not valid for Liberal party members who were elected through fraud to participate in changing the constitution.
[PAGE 16]
III. THE WEST

Castro's Involvement With Communist Bloc

Cuba's involvement with Communist countries has progressed rapidly in recent months. An observer close to Castro thinks the Cuban leader may not be free to oppose the trend even if he wishes.

Cuban delegates representing labor and the Communist party who are attending May Day celebrations in Communist China and other bloc countries seem to be receiving special attention and propaganda treatment. The Castro government is known to be paying the expenses of a Chinese Communist delegation now in Havana for the much-publicized rally planned for May Day. Delegates from other Communist countries are also probably subsidized, as Latin American guests are known to be.

visas for Czech technicians hired by the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, government arbiter of Castro's planned takeover of Cuba's economy. numerous Czech technicians and economic representatives have arrived in Cuba in April, including Minister of Foreign Trade Frantisek Krajcir.

Brazilian Ambassador da Cunha in Havana reported to Rio on 20 April that he is not sure whether Castro has sufficient autonomy and freedom of action publicly to define clearly his attitude toward Communism, as the ambassador had hoped Castro would do on May Day to allay growing confusion and doubt in Cuba. Da Cunha, who has been generally sympathetic to the Cuban revolution, feels that internal tension is more serious each day and has reports that disturbances are planned for the eve of May Day.
[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 18]
