[PAGE 01]
13 August 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 38
NO CHANGE IN CLASS
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO:
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH:
DATE: 11/18
REVIEWER:

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 August 1959

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Laos: A Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry spokesman on 12 August stated that tension in Laos could be reduced only by the withdrawal of all American personnel and arms, the abolishment of all "US military bases" in Laos, and the return of the International Control Commission. Peiping denied the competence of the United Nations to deal with the situation on the grounds that the UN was not a party to the Geneva agreements. Although Communist propaganda has previously made threatening observations on the Laotian situation, this strong statement takes on additional weight by virtue of its official source.

The Laotian Army's demonstrated weakness during the initial phase of the insurgency in northeastern Laos may have further undermined the government's already tenuous authority in the affected areas. In some instances army units panicked and abandoned the local population with little or no resistance. The Laotian fieldcommander in Sam Neua reportedly has said that he cannot rely completely on the loyalty of his troops.

A total of 114 men of a recently integrated Pathet Lao battalion have escaped from their encampment near Luang Prabang and are heading toward Sam Neua Province. This incident highlights the Laotian Army's weakness and, when it becomes known, will further reduce its prestige.

[PAGE 04]
Watch Committee conclusion--Laos: Laotian Government forces apparently control the majority of their outposts in northern Laos. Dissident elements have the capability to renew their attacks and, with North Vietnamese guidance and logistic assistance, to threaten seriously the internal security of the country. A resumption of dissident activity is probable.

Cambodia - South Vietnam: The recent meeting in Saigon between Premier Sihanouk and President Diem has helped ease Cambodian-Vietnamese tensions, but Sihanouk's advocacy of a "safe" policy of neutralism remains a root cause for regional dissension. Rejecting rebuttals from his Vietnamese hosts, Sihanouk is said to have insisted that the USSR has military superiority over the United States, especially in the missile field. Sihanouk implied the predestined ascendancy of Communist China in the Far East, and cited current fighting in Laos as the result of too strong an anti-Communist position. (Page 4)

Indonesia: A recent series of feelers from Indonesian Government sources, including one of General Nasution's aides, strongly suggests to the American ambassador that the new cabinet may soon ask the US for expanded military and economic assistance in meeting both short- and long-term problems. Indonesia remains sensitive, however, to the conditions which are normally a part of large-scale US aid agreements.

13 Aug 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Iran. The initiation of significant hostilities is unlikely in this area in the immediate future.

13 Aug 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos

The Laotian Army's demonstrated weakness during the initial phase of the insurgency in northeastern Laos may have further undermined the government's tenuous authority in the affected areas. In some instances, army units panicked and abandoned the local population with little or no resistance. The army's performance will disillusion government sympathizers and revive memories of the Viet Minh invasions of 1953-1954, when the Laotian Government was forced to abandon Sam Neua and was unable to reimpose its authority until November 1957.

Poor training and inexperienced leadership limit the Laotian Army's capabilities, and in addition the Communists may have had some success in subverting military personnel, especially the village militia. The Laotian field commander in Sam Neua is reported to have said he could not rely completely on the loyalty of his forces.

The US army attaché in Vientiane reports that 114 men out of a total of about 750 in the recently integrated former Pathet Lao battalion encamped near Luang Prabang escaped on 8 August from the encampment and are heading toward Sam Neua Province. Laotian Army officials are attempting to maintain secrecy over this development, but when it becomes known it will further reduce the army's rapidly dwindling prestige and probably embolden Communist cadres to risk new acts of violence against the regime.

In Thailand, Marshal Sarit reportedly is concerned over the Laotian situation, and reinforcement of border police in the northeast has been authorized. South Vietnam reportedly is planning to send a study mission to Laos for contingent planning on the defense of southern Laos in the event of an all-out Communist offensive in Laos sponsored by North Vietnam.

On 12 August, a Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry spokesman in a strong statement declared that tension in Laos could be

13 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
reduced only by the withdrawal of all American military personnel and arms, the abolishment of all "US military bases," and the return of the International Control Commission. Peiping warned that all activities of the US and Laotian authorities "violating the Geneva agreements, creating tension in Indochina, and further to menace China, will certainly be firmly opposed by the Chinese Government and people." Peiping also denied the competence of the United Nations to deal with the Laotian situation on the grounds that the UN played no part in negotiation of the Geneva agreements.

13 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
Cambodian - South Vietnamese Relations

Immediate tensions between Cambodia and South Vietnam have been eased as a result of the discussions in Saigon last week between Premier Sihanouk and President Diem. The three-day informal talks between the two leaders and their top advisers were cordial and produced substantial agreement on a number of issues, such as trade relations and border controls, that have long been a source of friction. Sihanouk, flattered by the attention he and his party received, described the outcome as "clearing the way for an entente."

Lasting rapport between Cambodia and South Vietnam, however, seems improbable, given Sihanouk's fatalistic belief in inevitable Communist victory in the East-West struggle--a view which conflicts directly with Diem's aggressively anti-Communist position.

Sihanouk is reported to have expounded on his belief in Soviet superiority in the missile field, rejecting rebuttals from Vietnamese officials present. Specifically, Sihanouk said that the USSR is superior to the US in ICBMs; he also maintained that the continued existence of American IRBM bases in foreign lands is being questioned.

Sihanouk claimed that Cambodia's neutralist policy is the only "safe" policy for small nations, and referred to the current fighting in Laos as an example of problems which come to governments that adopt too strong an anti-Communist stand. At another time during his visit, he explained that his recognition of Communist China in 1958 merely acknowledged the fact that Chinese Communist agents were already operating in Cambodia; when a Vietnamese official remarked that this gave a legal cover for these activities, Sihanouk replied, "That is destiny...and one cannot oppose destiny." Implicit in Sihanouk's conversations was his belief that Communist China is predestined for ascendancy in the Far East--a belief he apparently has held for some time.

Diem feels that this defeatist attitude has facilitated Communist subversion in Cambodia, particularly by Peiping. He is not reassured by Sihanouk's claim that he can successfully oppose Communism with "his own weapons."

13 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
