Growing Pressure for Korean Unification

The Chang Myon government is concerned that an increasing segment of public opinion favors some direct contact with North Korea. Although South Korean economic conditions are improving, a small but vocal minority of intellectuals and students is propagating the idea that unification based on a vague formula of Korean neutralization offers the only solution to the country's chronic economic difficulties. In addition, some leaders of the conservative opposition, at a loss for issues to differentiate their party from the administration, are advocating exchanges with the North.

There is a widening rift between the older generation and some of the younger educated group, who recall little of Communist actions in the Korean war and favor some sort of accommodation with the North. Furthermore, despite South Korea's continued strong friendship for the United States, a few student leaders are blaming the country's difficulties on its continued close ties with the US. There also is some indication that discontent among the civilian youth is spreading to the military, particularly to the younger officers.

In recent months North Korean propaganda on Korean reunification has reached an all-time high. Kim Il-sung called last August for a loose federation of North and South Korea and a joint economic commission to be composed of representatives from both sides. Since that time Pyongyang has bombarded the South with aid offers and detailed remedies for South Korea's economic problems. Growing South Korean agitation for contacts with the North probably will lead to a further increase in Communist efforts to incite popular dissatisfaction with the Chang Myon government.

Seoul's ruling party and responsible opposition leaders have agreed to the establishment of a citizens' council on unification. The government also is attempting to implement extensive economic reforms designed to stem dissatisfaction and

11 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
