Ceylon's National Elections Unlikely to Resolve Long-Standing Political Stalemate

Ceylon's national elections on 20 July are unlikely to resolve the political stalemate which resulted from the elections last March, since once again no single party seems capable of winning a majority. The two leading contenders are closely balanced, and no last-minute issue has developed which would set a distinct election trend. The relatively conservative United National party (UNP) seems to hold a slight lead, however, and should maintain the four-seat plurality it won over the moderate-socialist Sri Lanka Freedom party (SLFP) last March.

The UNP's efforts to exploit Singhalese-Buddhist nationalism and to expose the role of international as well as local Communism in Ceylon have kept the opposition on the defensive throughout the campaign. The much-publicized meeting in mid-June between two local Trotskyite leaders and the Soviet ambassador has recently become the UNP's chief weapon against the SLFP. Press speculation that the SLFP's electoral pact with the Trotskyite and orthodox Communist parties is merely the traditional first step in Marxist strategy for seizing power may have aroused latent suspicion of Communist intentions. While it is not clear whether enough voters are aware of this issue to affect election trends, some 200 people in Colombo demonstrated against the Soviet Embassy on 12 July, demanding the ambassador's return to Moscow.

However, support for the SLFP does not appear to have dropped substantially since March. Moreover, the party should benefit from its no-contest agreement with the two leftist parties. If the SLFP again ranks a close second, with leftist support it probably could command a larger parliamentary coalition than the UNP. SLFP President Mrs. Bandaranaike reportedly indicated recently that she would not object to having Trotskyite party leader N. M. Perera join an SLFP government. This reverses earlier denials that the party would cooperate with the Marxists after the elections.

19 July 60    Page 7
