New Japanese Government Faces Renewal of Leftist Disorders

Hayato Ikeda, elected Japanese prime minister on 18 July, faces an almost immediate crisis caused by disorderly leftist elements who are planning to use force to bar resumption of operations at a major mine in the depressed coal industry.

Top labor, Socialist, and Communist leaders are reported to be on the scene mobilizing a force of at least 30,000--including radicals from the Zengakuren student federation--to prevent the enforcement of a court injunction against picketing at the Miike mine of the Mitsui Coal Company on the island of Kyushu. The leftists probably have been encouraged by the success of recent demonstrations against the Kishi government, and they may receive financial assistance from the USSR and the World Federation of Trade Unions for the Miike struggle. Some 10,000 police are expected to attempt to enforce the injunction within the next few days, and a violent clash is considered likely.

The Miike mine has become a focal point in the struggle between management and labor over moves to reduce the labor force and raise efficiency and productivity in key Japanese industries. The outcome of the dispute at the mine is expected to have a sweeping effect on this problem in industry and strongly influence future developments in labor and the Socialist party. A split between moderates and pro-Communists in the union at the mine, which has been struck since last January, has led to at least four pitched battles and one death in recent months.

Ikeda favors forceful action, but his awareness of the Japanese public's disapproval of the use of strong police measures may induce him to move cautiously. The new labor minister, Hirohide Ishida, followed a firm but nonrepressive program when he occupied this post in 1957. It seems doubtful at this time, however, that anything less than an all-out government effort will overcome leftist resistance at the mine.

The ruling Liberal-Democratic party's almost solid backing for Ikeda in his election as prime minister, as well as the speed

19 July 60    Page 3
