Showdown Between King Saud and Royal Princes Near

After more than two years of intermittent maneuvering, King Saud succeeded in reasserting his authority over the Saudi Government on 21 December by assuming the post of prime minister and forming a "progressive" cabinet. To oust his brother Faysal, Saud obtained the support of Saudi Arabian "liberals" by naming four of them to cabinet posts and including several among his personal advisers.

Viewing Saud's "liberal" cabinet as a threat to their interests, several factions among the princes have combined to return Faysal to power as prime minister. Motivations behind the opposition are varied--support of Faysal, mistrust of some cabinet ministers, resentment by some princes who had been ousted from the cabinet, and dissatisfaction over the distribution of the King's largess. A strongly worded petition signed by 45 princes is said to have been presented to Saud on 13 February demanding the restoration of Faysal to full authority. Since that time Riyadh has been the scene of "frenzied" activity. Apparently, Saud has attempted to conciliate as well as divide his opponents by dropping two controversial advisers and appointing them to ambassadorships. Jealousy between cabinet ministers and advisers, as well as cabinet dissension, has further weakened the King's position. He is likely to appoint one or two dissident but important princes as advisers in a further effort to split the opposition.

Crown Prince Faysal, who following his ouster as prime minister had been on a hunting trip in the Hijaz, where his support is strongest, has returned to Jidda and is holding court. Ambassador Heath, who talked with Faysal on 18 February, found him in better health than usual. Faysal said emphatically that he had not given up in any way his "interest in life."

Saud's "liberal" cabinet also appears to have alarmed religious leaders of the powerful Wahhabi sect--Islamic reactionaries who adhere to strict interpretation of the Koran and have

23 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
