Rioting in Rangoon

The anti-American demonstrations in Rangoon were professionally led and clearly intended to result in violence. Supplies of bricks and stones--and, Molotov cocktails intended for burning the embassy building--were stored in the park across the street before the demonstrators arrived. Order was restored only when the army reinforced the 200-man police guard at the embassy and fired into the mob.

The leaders--left-wing students from the pro-Communist Rangoon University Student Union and the All-Burma Federation of Student Unions, as well as representatives from the Communist-dominated Burma Trade Union Congress and the National United Front--flouted police orders to stay away from the embassy. As soon as the mob turned violent, a number of the student demonstrators returned to the university campus to pass resolutions condemning the "police brutality." Such a move has in the past preceded expanded student strikes and demonstrations and, although Rangoon remained quiet on 22 February, there were widespread reports that new violence aimed primarily at the police would be undertaken.

Student-led demonstrations have long been major political weapons, and only the army-led administration of General Ne Win was uninfluenced by them. Now provided with "martyrs"--two dead and 33 injured, according to the latest reports--as well as the emotionally charged issue of American materiel captured from the Chinese Nationalist irregulars, student demonstrators may again become a significant influence on government policy.

The popularity of the demonstrators' cause is underscored by a statement issued by the ruling Union party on 22 February which sympathized with the demonstrators' "strong spirit of nationalism" and appealed to the people to "observe restraint" but failed to condemn the mob violence. Although responsible government officials have not sought to stir up anti-American sentiment, their own handling of the irregulars issue has served to promote the violence.

23 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
