The Situation in the Congo

Tshombe had initially reacted vigorously to the UN Security Council's 21 February resolution, charging that the resolution was a "declaration of war by the UN against Katanga and the whole former Belgian Congo." He announced the mobilization of the province's population to "defend lives and property menaced by the United Nations, which would be responsible for any bloodshed as a result of the resolution. Pressures on Tshombe from hard-line mining interests which counseled an immediate attack against UN forces were subsequently softened by his official Belgian advisers. Tshombe is reported to believe he was "fighting for his job and life" in the face of UN determination to punish him for the death of Lumumba.

The Stanleyville administration is said to have consolidated its authority locally but not necessarily for Gizenga's benefit. The native elements there are reported to be under the provincial leader, Bernard Salumu, while Gizenga is said to be regarded as a "foreigner" from Leopoldville and his "central government" officials are inactive. Frictions inherent in this situation may well develop further as a result of Lumumba's death and the reported execution of 15 political and military opponents of Gizenga.

Meanwhile, Gizenga appears to have been drawing on the cash reserves of the Stanleyville branch of the central bank to pay his troops--whose loyalty, at least in the Stanleyville area, apparently can be counted on only as long as they are paid.

unless replenished, cash available for troop payment probably will not last through March. Gizenga and his subordinates probably could be persuaded to permit disarmament of these forces, especially if Gizenga's cohorts are offered responsible posts in the Ileo government. The best disciplined and least undependable of Gizenga's forces are reported to have been sent into Katanga and Kivu provinces and against Mobutu's reported "invasion" up the Congo River.

Supporters of the Gizenga regime continue to attempt to send in aid and personnel through the Sudan. Soviet authorities

23 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
