reduce the army's power in return for major economic and military assistance from the USSR.

*Khrushchev's public reception during the first five days of his Indonesian tour has not been markedly enthusiastic except in Jogjakarta, where university students wildly applauded him, and in the Communist stronghold of Surabaya, where he addressed a cheering mass rally.

India -- East Germany: Indian Foreign Ministry Secretary Dutt believes India may be compelled to recognize East Germany by the end of 1960. Although Prime Minister Nehru has made it clear to East German representatives that he has no intention of extending such recognition in the near future, Dutt currently believes trade and political considerations may force Nehru to change his position.

III. THE WEST

France: The initial series of French nuclear tests is expected to involve three additional explosions of lighter, smaller devices. The next shot is planned before May and possibly within a month. The third and fourth shots in the series are planned for the fall of 1960, presumably after September, when the summer heat abates. A version of the device suitable for use as a weapon is not expected, however, for about a year. The extent of adverse foreign reaction to the first test has reportedly annoyed President de Gaulle and will probably stimulate France to study means for underground testing. One of the three remaining shots may be an underground test, although the site has not yet been selected.

Peru: A Peruvian Communist congressman has requested Moscow to grant a loan for reconstruction in the area of southern Peru affected by the earthquake on 15 January and is said to have received an encouraging response. The reported reply offered a loan of $7,100,000--not a usual form of Soviet disaster relief--conditioned on official government acceptance from Lima. While the conservative Peruvian Government would prefer not to accept this offer, Prime Minister Beltran informed the US Embassy in Lima that he was on the spot, intimating that he might feel obliged to accept. (Page 3)

23 Feb 60
DAILY BRIEF
