SECURITY INFORMATION

The Nationalist official, however, expressed deep concern over Burmese attacks on the Chinese forces and requested the committee to ask the Burmese to stop their military operations in the interest of preserving the "good work" accomplished by the committee in the past four months.

Comment:
Ambassador Donovan in Bangkok has characterized the Nationalist evacuation proposal as unsatisfactory and unrealistic. The Burmese delegate to the United Nations has indicated that it is highly improbable that his government would accept it, largely because the 1,500 to 2,000 troops to be withdrawn are far below Burma's minimum position.

3. France sees Indochina peace depending on negotiations with Viet Minh:

The French Foreign Ministry believes that the Indochina hostilities can be settled only by negotiations with either the Viet Minh or the Chinese Communists, or both. A Foreign Ministry spokesman envisaged consultation with the United States and possibly Great Britain prior to any negotiations, but emphasized that conversations with the Viet Minh are not under consideration now. He did refer to the possibility of exploratory conversations with the Russians and Chinese Communists during the Korean political conference.

Comment: This is the first official acknowledgment that the French see an end to the war only through a negotiated peace with the Viet Minh. Recent public statements by Premier Laniel and Finance Minister Faure as well as press comment have encouraged the French public to believe that the additional American aid and the Navarre plan are intended to improve France's negotiating position with the Viet Minh rather than achieving military victory as is understood in connection with the recent grant of additional US aid.

4. Quirino may charge American officials with interference in Philippine affairs:

The American embassy in Manila reports that President Quirino may at any time charge that US imperialism is being reimposed and
