Tension Rising in Rhodesian Federation

Release of the Monckton commission report on 11 October is likely to increase racial tension in the British-controlled Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. This advisory report of a largely British study group is designed to prepare for later constitutional discussions in London between representatives of Britain and the Federation. However, its basically pro-African outlook may so inflame Rhodesian white settlers as to endanger cooperation between Salisbury and London.

The report calls for continuation of the federation of three constituent territories but endorses a loosening of their ties and later secession under certain conditions. It also proposes a great increase of African membership in the federal parliament until parity with the whites is attained. Some of its most far-reaching conclusions dealt with the colonial territory of Northern Rhodesia, which was clearly envisaged as a future African state. The report hoped that constitutional advance would lead to full self-government with an African majority in the legislature and an elective African majority in the executive council. Other provisions called for an end to racial discrimination in the Federation.

The federal government of Prime Minister Welensky has previously indicated its opposition to any such proposals, and earlier in October Welensky was assured of support from the Dominion party, the white opposition party, if he chose to resign and call new elections to renew his popular mandate.

Racial tension is already high following a week end of African riots and strikes. On 8 October, African rioting in Salisbury resulted in at least seven deaths, over 80 injuries, and considerable property damage. Later at Gwelo an African nationalist meeting erupted into looting and arson. At Salisbury African transport workers struck on 11 October; at Bulawayo 2,000 African factory workers have kept up a wage strike.

As a result of these actions, white civilians on 11 October reportedly demanded permission to take the law into their own hands and shouted down the appeals of senior government officials to respect the law.
