Future of Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland Appears Gloomy

Growing political and racial problems imperil the existence of the white-dominated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Ranking members of the British Labor party, who include James Callaghan, the party's spokesman on colonial affairs, characterized the federation's prospects as "extremely bleak" following conversations with Nyasaland nationalist leader Dr. Hastings Banda. Some Conservative MPs have expressed similar views.

Pressure by Nyasaland nationalists for early self-government and secession of the protectorate from the federation has increased since Banda's recent release from prison. British officials have agreed to discuss Nyasaland's future in July with Banda, although any concessions satisfactory to him would probably be considered unacceptable by the federation government. At present, there is little agitation in Nyasaland, in compliance with Banda's call for calm. If he is dissatisfied with London's offer in July, however, he will probably spur a renewal of nationalist violence.

White groups in Northern and Southern Rhodesia--the federation's other two territories--are increasing their demands for continued dominance. In Northern Rhodesia a white politician has gained impressive support for his recently organized association to oppose rapid Africanization of the area. He calls for formation of a self-governing state in the small, mineral-rich Copperbelt area--to be linked with Southern Rhodesia--if Britain should accede to black pressure for an African regime on Northern Rhodesia's 80,000 white settlers.

The prime minister of Southern Rhodesia, Sir Edgar Whitehead, said on 13 April he "would not take no for an answer" from London when he demands the removal of Britain's veto powers over his government's right to legislate on racial affairs. The matter will be discussed when he visits London in late April to discuss the political evolution of this self-governing colony.

16 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
