[PAGE 01]
8 August 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]SOUTH ASIA

1. India organizing league of neutrals (page 3[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Western representatives in Athens concerned over Evros River incident (page 3).
3. Greece considers abandoning plans for naval maneuvers with Yugoslavia (page 4).
4. Britain hopes to reopen talks with Egypt on Sudanese constitution (page 5).
5. Change in French policy on UN discussion of Tunisia reported (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. West Germans discouraged by Schuman's stand on the Saar question (page 6).
7. Rome Embassy comments on Nenni's relations with Italian Communists (page 7).

LATIN AMERICA

8. American Ambassador sees danger in Czech missions in Latin America (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
[[PRED_REDACTION_2]]SOUTH ASIA

1. French Ambassador sees India organizing league of neutrals:
press report originating in Cairo that India was attempting to promote an Arab-Asian "league of neutrals" opposed to the Western world and its traditions.

Prime Minister Nehru probably aimed to have the bloc pledge neutrality to the USSR and China in the event of war. He believes that Nehru opposes Arab participation in a Middle East defense organization and intends to support the campaign for international settlement of the Tunisian and Moroccan questions.

Comment: India has been attempting to further its influence in the Near East by signing friendship treaties with Turkey and Syria, agreeing to recognize the Egyptian King's title to the Sudan, and inviting the Regent of Iraq to visit India.

India has not so far taken a leading part in the Arab-Asian bloc. The bloc as it now exists is not fundamentally anti-Western, but on certain issues does conflict with the West[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]].

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Western representatives in Athens concerned over Evros River incident:
Ambassador Peurifoy reports that certain Western European representatives in Athens show "genuine concern" over the Evros River incident between Greece and Bulgaria,
[PAGE 04]
[[PRED_REDACTION_3]]which the Greeks regard as a routine border matter.

The UN Balkan Peace Observation Committee expected a dangerous situation to develop if the Greeks used force to evict the Bulgarian troops which they claim had occupied a small island in the Evros River. However, when Greek troops opened fire the morning of 7 August there was no sign of life on the island and no immediate reaction from Bulgaria.

Comment: The Greek attitude seems to be that public opinion demanded some physical action. Acting Prime Minister Venizelos and Defense Minister Mavros have insisted that the Greeks do not intend to occupy the island. They remain confident that no serious situation will develop.

A similar incident between Greece and Bulgaria in September 1950 subsided without serious consequences[[/PRED_REDACTION_3]].

3. Greece considers abandoning plans for naval maneuvers with Yugoslavia:
Greek Minister of Defense Mavros told Ambassador Peurifoy on 6 August that adverse Italian reaction to the planned joint Greek-Yugoslav naval maneuvers had caused Greece to "stall indefinitely on concrete arrangements." Mavros indicated, however, that he was willing to approach the Italians again to attempt to convince them that the maneuvers would not be contrary to Italian interest. He suggested that the United States try to persuade Italy to withdraw its objections.

Comment: Greece has been anxious to proceed with Greek-Yugoslav defense planning and welcomed the Yugoslav suggestion to hold naval maneuvers.
[PAGE 05]
4. Britain hopes to reopen talks with Egypt on Sudanese constitution:
The British Foreign Office desires to discuss with Egypt the new Sudanese constitution before it is due to go into effect in early November. The official presenting this view believes Egypt may now be willing to separate the Sudan problem from the Suez and Middle East defense questions, and doubts that constitutional discussions would necessarily cause Egypt again to tie the two questions together.

The official sees little chance of postponing the Sudan elections planned for November, as this would cause trouble among the Sudanese, who generally understand that Britain favors the attainment of self-government by the end of the year.

Comment: There is no indication that the new Egyptian regime is more willing than previous governments to be connected with constitutional developments in the Sudan.

5. Change in French policy on UN discussion of Tunisia reported:
The French Director General of Political Affairs believes that his government will not oppose inclusion of the Tunisian question on the agenda of the regular session of the UN General Assembly, and that it will then vigorously defend its position.

Meanwhile a British Foreign Office spokesman, anticipating that the French would oppose inclusion, had stated that Britain would support France. He felt that inclusion would create a precedent for UN interference in internal affairs and weaken Britain's position in its colonies. He noted that British policy in Cyprus may be placed on the agenda at Greek insistence.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: In the past France has consistently followed a policy of opposing UN discussion of the Tunisian and Moroccan questions. However, an increasing number of French officials have urged reversal of this policy on the ground that the French program for Tunisia is a good one and that the government has nothing to conceal.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. West Germans discouraged by Schuman's stand on the Saar question:
Following a conversation with Chancellor Adenauer, the West German Deputy Foreign Minister expressed disappointment over Schuman's alleged reluctance in the current talks to alter France's economic relations with the Saar. Schuman's attitude, he feels, is incompatible with the Federal Republic's minimum demands which include the radical revision of the French-Saar convention and the equal participation of all European Community nations in the administration of the Saar.

American observers in Bonn consider that France will probably have to modify its special economic privileges before agreement is possible.

Comment: Another explosive issue, as yet undiscussed, relates to the licensing of the pro-German Saar political parties, which Adenauer desires as part of the general settlement.

Meanwhile, the French Foreign Office describes as "rude in tone" a letter just received from Chancellor Adenauer characterizing the initial Hallstein-Schuman talks as most unsatisfactory.
[PAGE 07]
7. Rome Embassy comments on Nenni's relations with Italian Communists:
The American Embassy in Rome believes that Socialist leader Nenni's appeal for an Italo-Soviet rapprochement amply demonstrates his determination to work for a Socialist-Communist victory in the 1953 elections. The Embassy estimates that the appeal will not substantially improve this bloc's electoral prospects, but anticipates that Italy's basic socio-economic difficulties may, on a long-range basis, facilitate "penetration of the Italian political picture" by Nenni's "peace" forces.

Comment: Nenni's appeal for close Italo-Soviet relations may be designed to exploit Italian disillusionment should progress toward a European political community be too slow. Italy recently announced it would reconsider participation in the European Defense Community unless the formation of a European army were quickly followed by political federation.

LATIN AMERICA

8. American Ambassador sees danger in Czech missions in Latin America:
Ambassador Briggs believes that the primary purpose of the Czech missions in Latin America is propaganda, espionage, and "other Kremlin purposes," rather than trade and normal diplomatic activity. He feels that it would be "greatly to our advantage to encourage termination" of these missions, or if this proves impractical, the reduction of the personnel to the number of Latin American officials stationed in Prague.
[PAGE 08]
Comment: Czechoslovakia now has missions in Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Ecuador, and also maintains relations with several other Latin American countries. While these missions are in some cases engaged in illegal activities, they have also been active commercially in procuring dollars and raw materials. Covert activities of any terminated Czech missions could be taken over by Soviet missions in three of the countries, and a Polish mission in a fourth.

Brazilian officials have recently stated that there is no apparent reason for breaking relations with the Satellites so long as the United States does not do so. A similar reaction could probably be expected from Mexico and Uruguay and also from Argentina, which receives significant quantities of manufactured goods from Czechoslovakia.
