Comment: Governor Tri of North Vietnam, a reliable official, recently expressed similar views.

Alessandri's opinion that decisive action could be taken as early as next October appears overly optimistic in view of past French and Vietnamese performance in developing a Vietnamese army.

4. Indonesian Foreign Minister may approve rubber sale to Communist China:

The Indonesian Foreign Minister informed the American Ambassador on 20 January that he is under pressure from the Finance and Economic Ministers to approve the sale of rubber to Communist China. The Foreign Minister stated that the Chinese have made an offer for an initial cash purchase in Swiss currency equivalent to $263,000.

Meanwhile, a responsible Singapore source quoted information from Djakarta that a rubber-rice agreement had been reached by the Chinese and Indonesians on 16 January. He said delivery of some 15,000 tons of rubber per month was envisaged and that the terms of exchange were very favorable to the Indonesians.

Comment: Many Indonesian officials, reportedly including the Foreign Minister, are undoubtedly eager to negotiate a rice-rubber deal with Communist China despite the present embargo. There is no firm evidence, however, that an agreement has yet been reached. A reliable private trading source stated recently that actual negotiations have been stalled.

5. Burmese reported preparing to outlaw Communist parties:

The Burmese premier is drafting legislation to outlaw Communist parties, The new law, to be submitted to Parliament in the near future, will call for the banning of all "foreign political parties."

Comment: Although the Burmese Government did not revoke the 1946 British order outlawing the smaller of Burma's two Communist parties, no legal action has been taken against the larger, which has been carrying on armed insurrection during the past five years.

The passage of strong anti-Communist legislation, closely following a speech this week by the premier which contained the first public expression of gratitude by a Burmese official for American economic aid, would be the most striking evidence to date of Burma's orientation toward the West.
