Common Market Leaders Prepare to Discuss European Confederation

De Gaulle's plan for a European "confederation" was first advanced to Adenauer in mid-1960 and has been the subject of numerous bilateral exchanges since. The plan has never been committed to writing, but in general it calls for the establishment of ministerial-level committees to promote six-nation cooperation in political, cultural, economic, and defense affairs, probably to be serviced by a permanent political secretariat. In addition, there would be periodic meetings of heads of governments.

When initially proposed, the plan evoked strong opposition from most of the other EEC countries, partly on the grounds that it would weaken the supranational powers of existing European Community institutions and would involve a major departure from the eventual goal of a federally organized Europe. This opposition has moderated considerably in recent months, however, partly because of apparent assurances from De Gaulle that the EEC would not be weakened, and partly because even ardent federalists like Jean Monnet have come to feel that confederation is at present the only feasible approach to political unity. Others evidently also feel that if the Six accepts parts of De Gaulle's plan, he might be persuaded to agree to simultaneous steps to strengthen Community institutions.

Continuing opposition was demonstrated, however, in a Dutch request on 31 January that the US issue a "strong statement" prior to the 10 February meeting in "support of NATO." The Dutch expect De Gaulle to argue that the US will "inevitably leave the Continent" and will accordingly press for "formalization of political consultations among the Six"--which, the Dutch feel, will be "divisive in NATO."

The 10 February meeting was initially scheduled for 5 December but postponed because of Adenauer's illness. The private meeting between Adenauer and De Gaulle on the preceding day is expected to set the tone of the plenary talks, and the Dutch believe Adenauer will join in urging definite action at the 10 February session. While there is doubt

7 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 11
