Japanese Conservatives Maintain Superiority Over Socialists In Nationwide Elections

Prime Minister Kishi's Liberal Democratic party maintained its predominance over the Socialists in the 23 April elections held throughout Japan for gubernatorial and municipal offices. Although the elections do not reveal a major shift in the relative strength of the two major parties, the prestige of the conservatives has risen as a result of their winning the key governorships of Tokyo, Osaka, and Hokkaido on which national attention was focused. Hokkaido has been a Socialist stronghold during most of the postwar period.

While local issues and personalities played the major role in the outcome, both parties made an effort to present international issues in the major contests. However, the narrow margin of the conservative victories in Tokyo, Osaka, and Hokkaido, where such issues normally would have the most impact, precludes any assessment of popular reaction to the Socialist leadership's identification with the Chinese Communist position on Asian issues on the one hand, and the conservatives' policy of cooperation with the United States on the other.

Conservative success in stemming the pro-Socialist trend of recent years should exert an important psychological influence in favor of the conservatives in the important upper-house elections in early June. It should also strengthen Prime Minister Kishi's personal position in the party, since conservative dissidents had warned that they would demand that Kishi "take responsibility" if the conservatives did poorly. Conversely, the Socialist leadership is certain to come under fire, and their adverse showing will possibly weaken the unity of the party.

A conservative-led administration in Hokkaido will probably improve civilian-military relations in a major defense area where there is a relatively large concentration of Japanese forces and American installations. In addition, the conservative gubernatorial victory in Tokyo may clear the way for Japanese Defense Agency plans to establish a missile testing center on Niijima Island which would have been opposed by a Socialist governor.

25 Apr 59 Page 8
