assurances, together with Chile's previous pledge to grant greater operational autonomy to the American-owned copper companies, meet the general terms set by the United States as a prerequisite to its purchase of 100,000 tons of Chilean copper.

Finance Minister Del Pedregal now states that the cabinet statement of 17 March implying Chilean interest in sales to the Orbit was made for domestic political purposes. This factor was influential in the repeal last September of the decrees prohibiting trade with the Orbit.

LATE ITEM

16. Comment on Soviet grant of "sovereignty" to East Germany:

The Soviet grant of ostensible "sovereignty" to the East German government announced on 25 March includes freedom to make its own decisions on domestic and foreign affairs, including relations with West Germany. It provides, however, that the Soviet armed forces will be retained "temporarily" to enforce security, and indicates that East Germany must continue to pay occupation costs.

The Soviet high commissioner's control functions over the East German government are abolished, but he will continue to "insure security" and to maintain relations with the Western occupation forces in "all-German" matters and in questions affected by agreed quadripartite decisions on Germany. This statement indicates that the USSR will not at present risk challenging Western rights of access to Berlin.

The Soviet high commissioner will of course be aided in his security function by the Russian occupation army, now estimated at 400,000 men.

The timing of the announcement suggests that the primary purpose was to strengthen the position of the East German government, which was seriously weakened by the June 1953 riots and the subsequent unrest and economic instability. The announcement attempts to give a maximum of prestige to the Communist regime on the eve of the Socialist Unity Party congress, and to strengthen the position of the party's first secretary, Ulbricht, whose authority has been threatened by the increased factionalism and internal discontent in the party. This

- 14 -
