[PAGE 01]
5 March 1955

Copy No. 88

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 40
NO CHANGE IN CLASS
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 1 Jan 80

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Egypt failing to counter Turkish-Iraqi pact (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Churchill's new defense policy wins strong support in Britain (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Egypt failing to counter Turkish-Iraqi pact:

Egypt's attempt to get quick agreement to a new Arab defense arrangement, aimed at countering the Turkish-Iraqi pact, appears to have failed.

none of these countries is now prepared to enter such an arrangement, although the neutralist Syrian cabinet apparently has agreed in principle with the Egyptian proposals.

Egyptian minister of national guidance Salah Salim, accompanied by Syrian foreign minister Azm, left Jordan on 4 March for Saudi Arabia instead of for Lebanon as originally planned. They are to consult with the Saudi Arabian government, which is almost certainly supporting Egypt's overtures to the other Arabs.
[PAGE 05]
While Egyptian and Saudi maneuvering toward a new agreement will probably continue for some time, nothing stronger than the present ineffectual Arab League Collective Security Pact is likely to result.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Churchill's new defense policy wins strong support in Britain:

The Conservative government's strong presentation of Britain's new defense policy in "Churchill's best prose" has been persuasive in parliament. The American embassy in London believes that the concept that British possession of nuclear weapons will act as a deterrent to general war will probably be supported by the majority of the British public.

In the parliamentary debate on defense on 1 and 2 March, Labor Party criticism focused on failures in the government's performance thus far on such details as aircraft production. Attlee's closing speech, however, placed him close to the government's basic position. There was little opposition, except from pacifists, to the government's decision to make the H-bomb.

Most of the 56 Laborites who joined Bevan in abstaining on the opposition's censure motion did so in order to express their disapproval of the suggestion that nuclear weapons might be used to repel a "conventional" attack. The American embassy regards this as marking the renewal of a serious challenge to the official Labor Party leadership.

Comment: The responsible British press generally regards Churchill's 1 March speech as "an urgent call to diplomatic action" while the West still enjoys nuclear superiority. Many commentators now see diplomacy as the only alternative to what Churchill describes as "the peace of mutual terror."
