[PAGE 01]
2 November 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Retention of Okazaki in Japanese Cabinet indicates continued pro-Western orientation (page 3).
2. Japan sees jurisdiction issue as only major block to UN forces agreement (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Comment on Kashani's plans to attend Vienna Peace Congress (page 4).
4. Iran may be willing to receive West German diplomatic mission (page 5).
5. Egypt and Britain reaching agreement on two irritating problems (page 5).
6. Comment on Egyptian proposals for solution of the Sudan issue (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. France seen more favorable to EDC ratification (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Retention of Okazaki in Japanese Cabinet indicates continued pro-Western orientation:

Prime Minister Yoshida's decision to retain Katsuo Okazaki as Foreign Minister in the new Japanese Cabinet is a clear indication that Japan's pro-Western policy will continue, according to Ambassador Murphy.

Okazaki has been publicly criticized in Japan for his "weak-kneed diplomacy." The Ambassador believes he was retained in the post because Yoshida desired a foreign minister who would execute policies without question or argument.

Comment: The new cabinet selections include only one follower of Ichiro Hatoyama, Yoshida's rival for leadership of the Liberal Party. The Prime Minister's failure to render more than lip-service to his post-election agreement with his rival and his failure to appoint additional Hatoyama followers suggest that he will be unable to maintain a Diet majority for more than a few months. The character of the present Diet indicates that any succeeding government, while still pro-Western, may be more nationalistic than the present one.

2. Japan sees jurisdiction issue as only major block to UN forces agreement:

if UN members would recognize Japan's legal jurisdiction over their forces on its territory, most of the remaining points of disagreement could be settled by mutual concessions.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: The UN-Japan negotiations on the status of non-American UN forces in Japan have reached an impasse over the question of criminal jurisdiction. Sensitive to public and Diet criticism, the Japanese insist that for political reasons they cannot waive the right to arrest and try UN personnel accused of serious crimes involving Japanese law. The agreement governing the status of American troops in Japan may come up for review in April.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Comment on Kashani's plans to attend Vienna Peace Congress:

Mullah Kashani recently told Italian Senator Berlinguer in Tehran that he would go to the Vienna Peace Congress in December if it is attended by "enlightened and noble persons," according to the Iranian press. Kashani reportedly also told the Senator, a Nenni Socialist who has been active in promoting Communist peace activities, that he intended in any event to send a representative and an "effective message." He asserted that his participation in the congress meant the participation of all Moslems, and he denounced American and British imperialism in Italy and North Africa.

Kashani's influence among Moslems outside Iran is not as great as he claims, but his direct or indirect participation in the Vienna Congress would lend itself to Communist exploitation. The Mullah has in the past attempted to obtain American support by threatening to turn to the Communists. His announced intention now to become involved in Communist "peace" maneuvers indicates that Mossadeq's most likely successor may be ready to promote further Iranian estrangement from the West.

[PAGE 05]
4. Iran may be willing to receive West German diplomatic mission:

Ambassador Henderson believes that Iran may be willing to accept a West German diplomatic mission. He points out that the Iranian desire to strengthen economic and political relations with West Germany may now outweigh fears of a Soviet reaction. Germany is more favored in Iran than any other Western nation and its trade would contribute to strengthening the country's economy.

Remarking that the presence of a German diplomatic mission friendly to the West could be an asset, the Ambassador warns that delay in establishing full relations may give neutralists and Communists time to raise opposition.

5. Egypt and Britain reaching agreement on two irritating problems:

Egypt is ready to assure Great Britain that compensation will be paid the victims of the January riots in Cairo now that Britain has released 5,000,000 pounds sterling to Egypt. Colonel Amin of the Egyptian High Committee told American Minister Holmes in London that he was certain such assurance would be forthcoming shortly.

Meanwhile, the British Cabinet has approved the release of 15 jet fighters to Egypt as soon as the latter agrees to a settlement of the compensation problem.

Comment: Egypt and Britain are apparently approaching agreement on important problems which, although subordinate to the larger issues, have tended to poison Anglo-Egyptian relations. Such agreement, however encouraging, would not necessarily mean that the two countries were close to a solution of the more fundamental Sudan and Suez disputes.

[PAGE 06]
6. Comment on Egyptian proposals for solution of the Sudan issue:

The agreement concluded by General Nagib with the representatives of the pro-British Sudanese Independence Party on 29 October calls for substantial modification of the British-proposed draft constitution for the Sudan if Egypt is to cooperate in its future political development. The Egyptian proposals, particularly those relating to the authority of the Governor General and the assimilation of Sudanese into the administration, are designed to eliminate all British influence in the Sudan within three years.

The Egyptians have proposed that in the three years prior to Sudanese determination of their future political status, the Governor General will share constitutional authority with a specially constituted five-man commission composed of two Sudanese, a British, an Egyptian and an Indian or Pakistani member. The British Government, which has consistently opposed the interference of any international body in the daily administrative process, is likely to object to this commission. It may also object to Indian or Pakistani membership on grounds of anti-colonial bias.

General Nagib appears to be attempting to force Great Britain to prepare the way for a fully independent state or lay itself open to the charge that it is not acting in good faith in its insistence on Sudanese independence.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. France seen more favorable to EDC ratification:

Returning to Bonn after a week of consultations in Paris, French Deputy High Commissioner Berard informed American officials that he is "certain" France will ratify the EDC treaty before the end of February 1953. French opinion, he thinks, is becoming more convinced that a European Defense Community with German contingents is the lesser of two evils. As the result of a long conversation with Radical Socialist leader Herriot, Berard expressed the belief that the latter would not persist in the extreme position taken in his recent speech.

Comment: In contrast with such indications of a general improvement in the official French attitude toward EDC, there have been reports that the French Socialist Party, whose support is necessary for EDC ratification, may decide at its National Council meeting this month to oppose the treaty.

[PAGE 07]
