The Situation in the Congo

Reports from Leopoldville indicate that Gizenga troops,
following their push into Katanga, have entered Equateur
Province as well. Seven planeloads of Congolese Army sol-
diers reportedly have been flown by Mobutu to an undisclosed
location in Equateur to meet the new threat. Ambassador
Timberlake, however, is skeptical concerning Mobutu's abil-
ity to arrest the present military trend in favor of the dis-
sidents.

could invade Equateur Province
if provided with large-scale UAR aid. Previously, he had
indicated that massive outside
aid would be a prerequisite for any invasion of Katanga. In
view of his supporters' recent military successes--achieved
despite severe logistical obstacles and with comparatively
little outside assistance--Gizenga probably will exploit to the maximum his present psychological momentum. In Equateur
the dissidents will be able to count on at least the tacit sup-
port of the UAR battalion--the only UN force in the north-
ern part of the province--which controls at least three air-
fields there.

In Katanga, the UN has moved a 600-man Moroccan bat-
talion to the northern part of the province in a move to try to
prevent large-scale fighting between the dissidents and Katan-
gan forces. According to the American Consulate in Elisabeth-
ville, Europeans there are despondent and Africans tense; there
continue to be rumors of increasing anti-white as well as anti-
Tshombe sentiment in the area.

President Toure of Guinea, following a visit to Yugoslavia,
on 11 January requested the UN to withdraw Guinea's 750-man
contingent from the Congo by 20 January.
Toure and President Tito called upon the UN to disarm
Mobutu's army, to release ex-Premier Lumumba, and to re-
store normal governmental operations in the Congo. Toure's
move appears designed to emphasize his solidarity with his host
--who earlier withdrew Yugoslavia's token UN contingent--as
well as to place Guinea in the forefront of those African states
supporting Gizenga. The UN appears unlikely to oppose a
Guinean withdrawal.

13 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
