Bolivian President Invites Official Czech Visitors

Czech Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hajek, accom-
panied by representatives of the foreign and commerce min-
istries, is to make a six-day visit to Bolivia beginning next
week. President Paz invited Hajek, who is reportedly en
route to the Brazilian presidential inauguration on 31 Jan-
uary. A government spokesman is quoted in the press as
stating that Hajek is authorized to make a definitive offer of
Czech installation of an antimony smelter in Bolivia. Bolivia's
annual antimony production is five to six thousand metric tons.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may have been prompted in part by
an interest in dramatizing Bolivia's interest in foreign economic
help. Paz is seeking an emergency increase in American aid.
Vice President Juan Lechin recently interrupted a trip to the
United States, Europe, and Asia after a stop in Washington and
returned to Bolivia in order, as a close associate of Lechin's
described it, "to urge the government to make the United States
implement its aid promise" before the Eisenhower administra-
tion goes out of office.

The Bolivian Government has been under heavy domestic
pressure since last fall to accept bloc economic aid first sug-
gested to a Bolivian parliamentary delegation in Moscow last
July. A Soviet parliamentary delegation which visited La Paz
in late December tentatively offered a credit of $150,000,000
with details of the offer to be worked out during a visit to Mos-
cow probably in February or March of a Bolivian economic del-
egation.

Paz' invitation to Hajek may alternatively be designed to
tighten the pressure of extremist agitation for acceptance of bloc
aid by presenting an appearance of new Bolivian-bloc economic
negotiations. The Paz administration appears to be close to the
final stages in its negotiations for substantial economic and tech-
nical aid from sources which include the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank, the US Government, and a private West German
company which has secured a federal government guarantee in
Bonn. The aid is for the virtually bankrupt Bolivian Mining Cor-
poration (Comibol). Paz believes that the rehabilitation of
Comibol will provide him with a significant increase in support
from the politically important miners.

13 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
