Dominican Reactions to OAS Sanctions

The Trujillo dictatorship has responded to the OAS diplomatic and economic sanctions in a variety of ways--the most dramatic being the announcement of a mass meeting for 24 September to demonstrate its popular support. Trujillo has often used this device in the past, and his well organized political machine now is reported to be intent on surpassing all previous turn-outs.

The government-controlled Radio Caribe has warned US business men to begin defending Trujillo against US attacks if they wish to continue doing business in his country. Trujillo reportedly said on 29 August that if sanctions are applied against his regime he will seize three large US-owned firms as a first step toward taking over all private US investment in the Dominican Republic--estimated at $200,000,000. American officials in Ciudad Trujillo see the future of US interests there as "increasingly bleak" as long as Trujillo retains control.

Paraguay is the only OAS member that has still not announced reduction of its embassy to consular level or withdrawn diplomatic representation from the Dominican Republic entirely. Trujillo is also having difficulty in obtaining oil and shipping services. A former high-ranking member of his regime said on 1 September that Trujillo will make arrangements to buy oil from Canada and Near Eastern countries and is already trying to charter the necessary tankers. Foreign Minister Herrera Baez now is visiting Western European countries in an effort to strengthen trade ties and ensure the continuance of European shipping services.

The USSR's demand in the UN Security Council on 6 September that the council endorse the OAS sanctions has resulted in a marked cutback in Radio Caribe's propaganda favorable to Castro and to the Soviet bloc, although its attacks on "US imperialism" continue. A Trujillo opponent has told a US official that the USSR's UN move has, however, strengthened the hand of the pro-Castro faction among the dissidents. Most of the dissidents are pro-US moderates and professional men.

12 Sept 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7
