[PAGE 01]
14 May 1960

Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Cambodia: US Ambassador Trimble views Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai's visit to Cambodia earlier this month as having a profound impact on Cambodia's international outlook. He feels that Cambodian leader Sihanouk, in effect, regards Chou's public pledges of Communist China's support for Cambodia, which Chou was careful to describe as "moral and political," as a guarantee of Cambodian national integrity, and accordingly will be more inflexible than ever in disputes with South Vietnam and Thailand. Continued efforts by these two countries to undermine Sihanouk may well influence Cambodia to abandon its policy of strict neutrality.

India: The Indian Communist party has postponed a showdown between its "moderate" leaders and hard-line extremists until a party congress is held in January 1961. The Communists' national council, having failed during its meeting from 6 to 12 May to resolve the bitter controversy over future party policy, appointed a balanced committee to formulate another draft program. The radical "leftist" faction, encouraged by Peiping's hard-line Red Flag articles, has gained some ground recently, but the "moderates," reflecting Moscow's views, have retained control. The party outwardly has closed ranks since last fall's open split on the Sino-Indian border dispute, but deep differences remain, especially over the degree of support to be given generally to Nehru.

14 May 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: The US Embassy in Moscow considers that the public campaign in the USSR concerning the U-2 Plane incident has been "stepped up one notch." The keynote of the workers' protest meetings, now widely organized throughout the USSR, is the condemnation of the concept that there could be justification of US efforts to penetrate the "iron curtain" in the interests of the people. This program to create an "outraged" Soviet public appears designed to strengthen Khrushchev's hand in Paris against any Western efforts in summit negotiations to breach the basic assets of bloc secrecy.

14 May 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Cambodian Internal Outlook Following Chou En-lai Visit

The visit to Cambodia by Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai from 5 to 9 May, coming at a time of serious Cambodian - South Vietnamese friction, may have a far-reaching effect on Cambodia's international outlook, in the opinion of American Ambassador Trimble. While it made relatively little impact on the general public, except for the enthusiastic Overseas Chinese community, Chou made a deep and favorable impression on Cambodian leader Sihanouk, the royal family, and Cambodian officialdom.

The Chinese leader, who came to Cambodia to deepen Sihanouk's preference for a neutral foreign policy and to counterbalance American influence there, apparently was determined to achieve a maximum impact without making any formal commitment to protect Cambodia's borders. Chou En-lai on 8 May made no commitment beyond stating that it was "moral and political" support China was offering and cautiously added that any "other" kind would depend on the needs of Cambodia, the possibilities at Peiping's disposal, and conditions prevailing at the time.

Despite the innocuous joint communiqué ending the visit, Sihanouk probably looks upon Chou's oft-repeated public pledges of Communist China's support for Cambodia as a guarantee of Cambodian national integrity. Sihanouk, in his personal press organ, The Nationalist, commented on 7 May that the Cambodian people are convinced that Cambodia's escape from the "murder prepared by its neighbors!" is due to the attitude of Communist China.

Sihanouk probably intends to use the threat of Chinese Communist support in disputes with South Vietnam and Thailand, and will be more inflexible than ever. In connection with current difficulties with South Vietnam over several offshore islands in the Gulf of Siam, Sihanouk's hand has been strengthened by Chou's tour of the area in a Cambodian gunboat and his flat statement that they belong to Cambodia.

Whether Sihanouk abandons his policy of strict neutrality will depend largely on future South Vietnamese and Thai policy toward Cambodia. He has repeatedly warned that continued efforts by these countries to undermine him could push him "into the arms of the Chinese Communists."

14 May 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]
Indian Communists Fail to Resolve Party Split

Indian Communist leaders have again failed to resolve the deep division in their party between proponents of a moderate line and those favoring more radical tactics. The showdown expected during the national council's meeting from 6 to 12 May in Calcutta now has been put off until a full-scale party congress is held in January 1961. The council, recognizing its inability to reconcile the differences, has appointed a committee, representing both the moderates and the hard-line extremists, to "study" the problem further and formulate another draft resolution for discussion in January. The party meanwhile is to be guided by the moderate "Amritsar thesis" adopted in 1958, which emphasized a peaceful, parliamentary approach to power.

Moderate General Secretary Ajoy Ghosh has been granted sick leave for three months, and E. M. S. Namboodiripad, former chief minister of Kerala, will act as party leader during this period. Namboodiripad has long been identified with the faction favoring parliamentary tactics, although he reportedly sided with the radical group in recent intraparty maneuvering.

Ideological confusion among the Indian Communists has been compounded by recent indications of similar differences between Peiping and Moscow. Extremist leaders--representing the "internationalist" viewpoint--have seized on Peiping's Red Flag articles to bolster their advocacy of a harder line, but the moderate faction enjoys the stronger advantage of support from the Soviet party.

14 May 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
