Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma, who claims he will not attend the Geneva Conference, has returned to Xieng Khouang from Phnom Penh, possibly to assume a more direct role in negotiations with the Boun Oum government. He recently told Ambassador Trimble in Phnom Penh that he would have to contend with a well-organized and highly trained leadership core of "perhaps 200" Communists in the Pathet Lao, but expressed confidence that he could impose his will. He insisted he could keep major cabinet portfolios--such as defense, interior, and foreign affairs--out of Communist hands by holding these positions himself if necessary. He felt that new general elections could not be held for seven or eight months at the earliest.

Outlining his program in some detail to Ambassador Trimble, Souvanna said his government would maintain close contact with the people and strive to meet their needs while setting an example of sacrifice and hard work. He held that the abandonment by present Laotian leaders of the country's traditional socialism, based on simple small holdings, was the root of much of Laos' difficulties. Souvanna felt that foreign economic aid, to be accepted unconditionally from both East and West, should be on a bilateral basis but that there would be no need for military aid, since the army would be reduced to two battalions. In addition to a police force, he envisaged a universal military training program in which all young men would receive ten months' instruction in military matters, manual trades, and good citizenship.

The Boun Oum government, meanwhile, plans to submit its recommendations to King Savang today on the composition of the government delegation to Geneva. Phoumi still holds the view, apparently shared by the King, that initially at least the delegation's role should be purely consultative. He feels there can be no serious negotiations with the other side until an international framework is established and foreign influence excluded from Laos.

The Communists, foreseeing protracted negotiations over formation of a new Laotian government, are publicizing the

9 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
