British Labor Party's Defense Policy

Two of Britain's largest trade unions, the 890,000-member Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU) and the 354,000-member Union of Shop, Distributive, and Allied Workers (USDAW) voted last week to support Gaitskell's policy of continued loyalty to NATO with the US supplying the nuclear deterrent. Both of these were among the four major trade unions which voted in favor of unilateral British nuclear disarmament at the party conference last October where the Gaitskell policy was defeated by 297,000 in a total vote of 6,381,000.

The American Embassy in London considers it unlikely that these reversals will affect the unilateral stand of the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU)--Britain's largest--but believes it could influence the votes of the railwaymen whose "unilateralist" stand last year passed by an extremely narrow margin. Last week the union's executive voted to support the Gaitskell policy. Both the TGWU and the railwaymen will vote on the issue in July.

Even if all other unions, Labor party constituencies, and the allied Cooperative party reaffirm last year's stands, however, the AEU and USDAW switch, involving more than a million votes, would be more than enough to reverse the votes to be taken by the Trades Union Congress and Labor party conferences this fall. This should greatly ease Gaitskell's problems of keeping the Labor party members in Parliament pledged to collective security, undercutting the dissident campaign against him as party leader, and presenting the party as a cohesive organization.

Another resolution approved by the USDAW may presage new trouble for Gaitskell, however, and will furnish more ammunition to the neutralists. This calls for "an end to the need" for American nuclear bases in Europe and Britain and opposes the basing of Polaris missiles in British waters. The official position of the party leadership states that for the present British soil must be available for US and NATO bases, without mentioning whether nuclear weapons should be allowed on them.

9 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
