Moroccan King Delegates Certain Powers

Even prior to the publication on 4 May of the decree delegating certain of the King's powers, Guedira was reported to be the most powerful man in Morocco after King Hassan II. Guedira was said in effect to be running the Moroccan Government as a result of Hassan's ineffectiveness in performing his official duties and to be the only person from whom ministers could obtain decisions. He is believed to have antagonized the ministers of foreign affairs and interior by making ambassadorial and internal appointments without consulting them. He is also widely believed to have "sold out" to the French and to have extensive financial holdings outside Morocco.

The Istiqlal daily newspaper Al Alam characterized the delegation of powers as incompatible with the popular will, which wanted a government organized on sounder foundations. At Tahrir, published by the left-wing National Union of Popular Forces (UNFP), called for a government based on popular will and stated that Morocco lives "a year after the great experiment began, in constitutional anarchy under the dictatorship of an irresponsible and corrupt administration which is submitted to neither ministerial nor governmental control."

The Istiqlal-sponsored General Union of Moroccan Workers (UGTM) has the avowed purpose of liquidating the left-wing Moroccan Labor Union (UMT), which is aligned with and forms the base of the UNFP. The far superior strength of the UMT, however, was evident during the separate parades staged by the two groups in Casablanca and Rabat on May Day. Just prior to May Day the Rabat regional chief of the UMT informed an embassy official that his organization was "ready for a test of strength." The King, while apparently unwilling either to endorse the UGTM or challenge the strength of the UMT, publicly deplored the division in the ranks of labor and expressed a hope that next year would see a "rediscovery of unity and harmony."

9 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
