[PAGE 01]
4 January 1957

Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

4. PAKISTAN PRESSES FOR SUPPORT ON KASHMIR ISSUE
IN UN

5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

7. HUNGARIAN DEFIANCE CONTINUES

8. RUMANIAN COMMUNIST PARTY CALLS FOR REVISION
OF ECONOMIC PLANS IN FAVOR OF CONSUMER
(page 10).

4 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
4. PAKISTAN PRESSES FOR SUPPORT ON KASHMIR
ISSUE IN UN

Pakistan's Prime Minister Suhrawardy
and Foreign Minister Noon told the
American ambassador on 2 January
that any retrogression in US support of
a plebiscite in Kashmir when the issue comes before the
UN Security Council this month will be considered "an out-
right betrayal of the Pakistani government" resulting from
Nehru's visit to the United States.

The two officials said that Pakistan in-
tends to ask the Security Council to introduce UN troops
into the disputed state and to proceed with the plebiscite
agreed to in 1948. They admitted, however, that they would
be satisfied with the dispatch of a nonmilitary UN group to
Kashmir, provided such a group would implement the pleb-
iscite agreement and not merely engage in a new "fact-finding"
mission.

Comment
Pakistan's primary objective in the UN
discussions is to obtain a reaffirmation
of the principle of a plebiscite. Karachi has rested its case
throughout the eight-year-old dispute on its willingness to
comply with the UN plebiscite proposal which Nehru publicly
rejected a year ago.

Suhrawardy recently countered strong
internal criticism of Pakistan's pro-Western foreign policy
in the Middle East by emphasizing the advantages gained
through association with the West. Without Western sup-
port on the Kashmir issue, he will find it increasingly dif-
ficult to justify this policy and maintain his position.

4 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

The Indonesian government has appar-
ently decided for the present to rely on
negotiation and compromise in its ef-
forts to solve the problems of Sumatran
disaffection. President Sukarno has
taken advantage of Colonel Simbolon's
recent declaration of allegiance to the
president by instructing him to come to
Djakarta to make a "personal report."

In addition, the army chief of staff, General Nasution, plans
to use his personal prestige among the Sumatran by going
to Sumatra to confer with territorial and regimental com-
manders and has instructed all Sumatran officers to avoid
bloodshed "as much as possible and as long as possible."

Parliamentary fact-finding missions are
also being sent to each of the three Sumatran provinces. The
National Party, which heads the cabinet and which is generally
unpopular in Sumatra, is not represented on any of these dele-
gations, although the Communist Party has delegates on two.
The local reception accorded these parliamentary missions may
indicate to Sukarno how far he can go in accepting Communist
support for his policies.

4 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
7. HUNGARIAN DEFIANCE CONTINUES

Two months after the Soviet reinterven-
tion in Hungary on 4 November, the
Hungarian people remain openly hostile
to the Kadar regime. The American
legation in Budapest reports that an anti-
government protest occurred on 2 Jan-
uary when a large crowd of shoppers defied
Budapest police. Hungarian writers--who
spearheaded opposition to the regime be-
fore the revolution--are continuing open
defiance. Even the supposedly controlled
party press has charged that the "presence
of the Soviet army violates the national
pride of the Hungarian people!"

Factory workers' councils and certain
provincial revolutionary councils are resisting government
decrees and refusing to fire idled employees in industrial
plants. By the regime's own admission, on 3 January, coal
output at the leading Hungarian mine at Tatabanya has de-
clined, "as if somebody had ordered the miners to stop."

4 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
