[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. American Embassy comments on new Soviet Government (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. New anti-Yoshida party in Japan reportedly off to poor start (page 3).
3. USSR replacing looted Manchurian power plant (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Burmese Premier fears his government losing political support (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. New Communist proposal on German unification expected (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. American Embassy comments on new Soviet Government:

The American Embassy in Moscow believes that the ministerial reorganizations under which Malenkov and Beria are the sources of real power probably were used to displace men who were not their close supporters. It points out that the key to stability doubtless lies in the ability of Malenkov and Beria to work together.

The Embassy notes that these leaders now speak in their own right and that Malenkov's latest speeches differ from the one he gave at the 19th Congress. However, his professions of friendly intentions toward the West do not go beyond recent Peace Congress protestations.

The Embassy sees no concrete evidence of a departure from Stalin's world plans.

Comment: There are indications of collaboration at present between Malenkov and Beria, but the former appears to be the dominant figure. Malenkov built his power, as did Stalin, on the control and placement of party personnel, while Beria's influence stems from the police apparatus, which, like other government organizations, is closely controlled by the party.

Malenkov's two speeches since Stalin's death set forth the same attitude toward "peace" and coexistence as his earlier addresses, from 1947 through the 19th Congress speech.

FAR EAST

2. New anti-Yoshida party in Japan reportedly off to poor start:

Ambassador Murphy reports that the initial efforts of the anti-Yoshida forces to form a new conservative political party under Hatoyama are less promising than the leaders had anticipated. Of the Liberal Party dissidents, only 37 have joined the new party, while 34 have chosen to remain in the Yoshida camp.

The new party's intention to sponsor only 70 candidates in the April election apparently indicates that the leaders hope to obtain sufficient Progressive and Liberal support for Hatoyama to form a coalition government.

Comment: Ambassador Murphy believes that the Yoshida Liberals and the Socialists may each win approximately 150 of the 466 seats in the House of Representatives. Should this occur, no workable coalition could be formed without the support of Shigemitsu's Progressive Party.

[PAGE 04]
3. USSR replacing looted Manchurian power plant:

Radio Peiping announced on 13 March the completion of a new thermal power plant, built with Soviet equipment and reportedly the largest in Manchuria.

Comment: These are the first important new power plants to replace Manchurian equipment looted by the Soviet Army in 1945.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Burmese Premier fears his government losing political support:

Premier Nu told Ambassador Sebald that a serious political crisis threatens Burma's government as a result of the Chinese Nationalist troop issue. Nu said that he and his colleagues were being accused by important supporters of accepting "hush money" in the form of American aid for their acquiescence in the presence of Nationalist troops in Burma. The cabinet feels that drastic measures must be taken to refute such charges.

Comment: While opposition elements in Burma have been highly vocal in criticizing the government for its failure to solve the Nationalist problem and in linking the United States to such failure, this is the first evidence that the cabinet is under serious fire from its own supporters. Such a development would explain the urgency that the government attaches to solving this problem.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. New Communist proposal on German unification expected:

According to a usually reliable source, East German Premier Grotewohl has prepared a new offer for German unification. The East German legislature is scheduled to meet on 20 March to consider "new steps for the peaceful re-establishment of German unity."

American officials in Berlin believe that the East Germans will suggest some form of all-German talks. They state that in view of Malenkov's recent speeches, the possibility of new proposals for four-power talks cannot be discounted.

Comment: The East Germans recently invited the West German Socialist Party to send a commission to East Germany to cooperate with the Socialist Unity Party.
