[PAGE 01]
29 May 1961

Copy No. C 79

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
29 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

4. Zanzibar: Elections for Legislative Council to be held on 1 June. (Page ii)
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
Zanzibar: The Communist-infiltrated Zanzibar Nationalist party (ZNP) is given an even chance of winning the 1 June Legislative Council elections, which are expected to mark a major)

29 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
(step toward independence of Britain's Zanzibar protectorate. Informed observers agree that the elections--a rerun of elections held last January in which none of the three contending parties won a majority of seats--are a tossup between the Arab-dominated ZNP and the moderate Afro-Shirazi party (ASP). If victorious, the ZNP, which has opposed the establishment on Zanzibar of an American consulate and the US Project Mercury tracking station, might harass the operations of both installations and press for their early withdrawal. Backup, Page 6)

29 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Pro-Communist Party May Win Zanzibar Elections

(The Zanzibar Nationalist party (ZNP), led by Ali Muhsin and Abdul Rahman (Babu), its president and secretary general respectively, represents the economically dominant Arab community of about 45,000. Both leaders have visited Moscow and Peiping and have either countenanced or encouraged Sino-Soviet bloc infiltration of the party. Peiping has provided financial and organizational assistance to the ZNP, arranged free trips to the China mainland for high party officials, and assisted in preparing and disseminating propaganda. Soviet aid apparently has been limited to offers of scholarships to Lumumba University in Moscow through its embassy at Addis Ababa)

(The Afro-Shirazi party (ASP), poorly organized claims to represent the protectorate's 225,000 African inhabitants, composed principally of Bantu immigrants from the mainland and descendants of the earliest inhabitants of the islands--the Shirazis, who traced their origin to Persia. The alliance of these two groups suffered a setback in December 1959 when a group of Shirazis--largely from the nearby island of Pemba--left the party to form the Zanzibar and Pemba People's party (ZPPP).)

(The ASP won 10 of the 22 elective seats in the January elections, with nine seats going to the ZNP and three to the ZPPP. The latter, under pressure from each of the two major parties for support in forming a coalition government, split into two factions; one faction, including the two council members, supported the ZNP, while the other member headed a faction sympathetic to the ASP. A temporary solution to the resulting deadlock was reached when all parties agreed to serve under the civil secretary, acting as chief minister, for six months until new elections could be held. They also agreed to add a 23rd seat to the council in an effort to avoid another deadlock.)

(The ZPPP will probably again hold the balance of power. If Sheik Muhamed Shamte--president of the ZPPP and leader of the faction which supports the ZNP--is able to carry the few Pemba)

29 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 15]
(constituencies, a ZNP victory will result. The fact that the ZPPP and the ZNP are not opposing each other in any of the 23 constituencies and their release in early May of a joint statement announcing their opposition to Zanzibar's participation in an East African federation strongly suggest a coordinated effort to defeat the ASP.)

(Following the elections, a new constitution for Zanzibar will be implemented. If provides for an elected majority in the legislative council and a native chief minister to preside over the executive council. London probably will seek to avoid naming a date for the protectorate's independence, however, hoping instead to include Zanzibar in an East African federation arrangement.)

29 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 17]
TOP SECRET
