6. Comment on Egyptian proposals for solution of the Sudan issue:

The agreement concluded by General Nagib with the representatives of the pro-British Sudanese Independence Party on 29 October calls for substantial modification of the British-proposed draft constitution for the Sudan if Egypt is to cooperate in its future political development. The Egyptian proposals, particularly those relating to the authority of the Governor General and the assimilation of Sudanese into the administration, are designed to eliminate all British influence in the Sudan within three years.

The Egyptians have proposed that in the three years prior to Sudanese determination of their future political status, the Governor General will share constitutional authority with a specially constituted five-man commission composed of two Sudanese, a British, an Egyptian and an Indian or Pakistani member. The British Government, which has consistently opposed the interference of any international body in the daily administrative process, is likely to object to this commission. It may also object to Indian or Pakistani membership on grounds of anti-colonial bias.

General Nagib appears to be attempting to force Great Britain to prepare the way for a fully independent state or lay itself open to the charge that it is not acting in good faith in its insistence on Sudanese independence.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. France seen more favorable to EDC ratification:

Returning to Bonn after a week of consultations in Paris, French Deputy High Commissioner Berard informed American officials that he is "certain" France will ratify the EDC treaty before the end of February 1953. French opinion, he thinks, is becoming more convinced that a European Defense Community with German contingents is the lesser of two evils. As the result of a long conversation with Radical Socialist leader Herriot, Berard expressed the belief that the latter would not persist in the extreme position taken in his recent speech.

Comment: In contrast with such indications of a general improvement in the official French attitude toward EDC, there have been reports that the French Socialist Party, whose support is necessary for EDC ratification, may decide at its National Council meeting this month to oppose the treaty.
