WESTERN EUROPE

7. British and French oppose proposals for unconditional withdrawal from Austria:

Britain and France accept the American view that any proposal in the UN for the unconditional withdrawal of troops from Austria must be strongly opposed. The British urge efforts toward preventing such a resolution from being presented in the General Assembly. Should one be presented, they agree that it must be amended to require prior four-power agreement on simultaneous withdrawal.

Both London and Paris, however, object to the American view that withdrawal should be further conditioned on the relinquishment by all powers of claims to German assets in Austria.

Comment: The Austrian Government has stated that it will support the resolution calling for resumption of negotiations toward a state treaty, but the American Embassy in Vienna believes that the Austrians would support a simple evacuation proposal should one be made.

Four-power agreement for a simultaneous withdrawal would presumably include provision for a "waiting period" until Austrian security forces are established.

8. Letourneau warns of growing French opposition to Indochina war:

Minister Resident Jean Letourneau is discouraged by the growing opposition in the French National Assembly to the military effort in Indochina. He fears that there is strong sentiment for an armistice, and is not at all certain that the necessary 1953 budget will be approved. He admits that a desire to concentrate exclusively on the French position in Africa is gaining ground.

Comment: Last May Letourneau thought that the Assembly would be willing to shoulder the financial burden in Indochina for some time provided there was a steady return to France of French troops and officer cadres. His present sentiments tend to confirm Premier Pinay's recent warning that the government's most difficult task is to reassure parliament that the financial drain of the Indochina war will not now prevent France from competing successfully with Germany.
