CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
19 February 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Arctic activity: Recent developments in the western Soviet Arctic raise the possibility that a new series of nuclear tests is being prepared.
A broad area in the Barents Sea was to be closed between 15 February and 16 March. This closure involves the same general area which was closed during a series of nuclear tests last year, but a much smaller area in the Barents Sea is involved in the current closure. A BEAR turboprop heavy bomber recently flew from Kerch/Bagerovo (a nuclear energy associated installation) to Novaya Zemlya. In the past week, flights by five possible BADGERS from Kerch to Olenya have been noted. Olenya is the Kola Peninsula location which served as the base for some air activity associated with previous nuclear tests in the Novaya Zemlya area.
(See map at top of reverse page.)

Chinese Nationalist aircraft shot down: A Chinese Nationalist jet reconnaissance aircraft was apparently attacked and probably shot down in waters near Dairen by Communist fighters during a daylight mission. The Nationalist RB-57 was pursued by fighters for over an hour as it flew an erratic course over the Shantung Peninsula.
Radar tracking ceased near Dairen, indicating a successful attack had occurred. The Nationalist aircraft failed to land at a US base in South Korea as scheduled.
(See map at bottom of facing page.)

Indonesia: The Djakarta government, at least outwardly, is maintaining an uncompromising attitude toward the dissident movement and has declared all the rebel political organs illegal. Army Chief of Staff Nasution has formulated plans for military operations against Central Sumatra should President Sukarno decide to take this course of action. The military commander in North Celebes and his deputy, who declared their support for the rebel government on 17 February, have been dishonorably discharged from the army, and the navy chief of staff has declared ports in Central Sumatra and North Celebes to be closed areas.
(Page 4) (Map)

Cuba: The army has stepped up its campaign against rebel units in eastern Cuba following a new flare-up in rebel sabotage and terrorism. Disaffection is believed to be growing among the Cuban military, Batista's principal bulwark.
(See map.)

LATE ITEM

Communist China-North Korea: The announcement of Peiping's intention to withdraw all Chinese troops from North Korea by the end of 1958 paves the way for a Communist diplomatic and propaganda campaign presenting the United States as the major obstacle to Korean reunification. Such a campaign may be intended to develop a Far Eastern issue as a pretext for Chinese participation in summit talks. The campaign will probably include renewed bids for north-south negotiations. The troop withdrawal, the first stage of which is to be completed before 30 April, could serve to undercut arguments against Communist China's admission to the UN on the grounds of its aggressive posture in Korea.
