[PAGE 01]
2 October 1952
COPY 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Soviet aircraft penetrates deep into Japanese territory (page 3).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]2. Soviet bombers scheduled to move to Manchuria[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
3. Independent home guard reportedly formed in Indian Kashmir (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4.
5. France is considering alternate solution to Tunisian question (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Yugoslav trade with Soviet bloc (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Schuman's vulnerability on Tunisia stressed (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Soviet aircraft penetrates deep into Japanese territory:
Two aircraft, presumably Soviet, on 1 October overflew northeastern Hokkaido, one penetrating to a depth of 55 miles. This aircraft flew southward as far as Kushiro in the deepest overflight of Japanese territory yet noted. The other plane reached the vicinity of the radar site at Nemuro in a possible test of US tracking capabilities.

Comment: These overflights, together with those of 20 and 24 September, suggest initiation of a Soviet air reconnaissance program in the Hokkaido area.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]2. Soviet bombers scheduled to move to Manchuria:
Comment: This is the first evidence of the deployment of Russian-manned tactical aircraft other than fighters to this area, which is suitable for operations against UN targets in Korea, in particular naval units off the east coast.

The airfield at Tunhua may have been made available for the use of these aircraft by the transfer of a regiment of the 9th Chinese Air Division from this airfield[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

3. Independent home guard reportedly formed in Indian Kashmir:
At least one home guard battalion was formed in Indian-held Kashmir between May and August. The new guard is composed entirely of Kashmiri Hindus. It is said to be distinct from the Kashmir militia and the state police, and is not controlled by the Indian army.

Guard units operate independently along the cease-fire line between Indian-held and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. The guard apparently has intelligence contacts in Pakistani territory.

Comment: Since the Kashmir militia is now controlled by the Indian army, the organization of a home guard would appear to be an unpublicized attempt by Sheikh Abdullah, who favors the independence of Kashmir, to develop an indigenous armed force completely independent of Indian influence.
[PAGE 05]
5. France is considering alternate solution to Tunisian question:
President Auriol and Prime Minister Pinay are considering asking the Tunisian Government to present its case to the High Council of the French Union on condition that if an agreement is reached, Tunisia will request the Arab-Asian group to withdraw the case from the UN agenda.

The official added that a previous plan of Auriol's to settle the question was blocked by Foreign Minister Schuman on the advice of the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Senator Colonna of Tunisia.

Comment: Settlement in the High Council would be unlikely because French colonists in Tunisia will continue to exert pressure on Paris to make no concessions. It is difficult to envisage a Tunisian delegation which would be acceptable both to the colonists and to the nationalists.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]EASTERN EUROPE

6. Yugoslav trade with Soviet bloc:
Pyrite was being shipped on Yugoslav Danube barges to Germany, where it was to be transshipped by rail to Poland and Czechoslovakia. West German authorities, however, were refusing to supply the necessary freight cars[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 06]
Comment: A Yugoslav state-controlled firm has been selling lead to a Western intermediary for resale to Czechoslovakia, and that another Yugoslav firm purchased a considerable quantity of brown coal briquets from the Satellite area which was resold in West Germany at a large profit. In the latter case, the Yugoslavs paid for the coal with Western European goods purchased with dollars in Switzerland.

In addition to these specific instances of Yugoslav-Satellite trade there have been several reports during 1952 that Yugoslav trade representatives in Western Europe were willing to sell lead, pyrite, and other minerals to Soviet bloc purchasers through Western intermediaries, and an expansion of such trade. Available evidence indicates that the Yugoslav firms involved are aware of the ultimate purchasers' identities, and that they are negotiating these sales in spite of contrary instructions by the Belgrade government.
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

8. Schuman's vulnerability on Tunisia stressed:
Henri Teitgen, the Popular Republican leader in the French National Assembly, warns that unless Foreign Minister Schuman can demonstrate that the United States is solidly behind France in the UN on the Tunisian question, he will probably be forced out of office. Teitgen, who anticipates a foreign policy debate soon after the Assembly reconvenes on 7 October, states that without Schuman the French Government could probably not carry out his European integration policies.

Comment: In any parliamentary showdown on Schuman's Tunisian policy, his critics would probably be joined by opponents of European integration who are unwilling to tip their hand on that issue, and by deputies who prefer an oblique attack on Premier Pinay's economic policies.

Deputy Foreign Minister Maurice Schumann told Ambassador Austin in New York last week that Foreign Minister Schuman would probably have serious difficulties on the Tunisian question both at the cabinet meeting on 7 October and later before the National Assembly.
