Nepalese Prime Minister Plans Official Visits to India
And Communist China

Nepal's Prime Minister Koirala told a press conference on 29 November that he will visit Communist China in February or early March. Peiping had extended an invitation in September, and the Chinese ambassador to Nepal recently suggested that Koirala go to Peiping to work out final details of China's offer to expand its economic aid with a grant of $8,000,000 in cash. This grant, which would boost Chinese aid to Nepal to more than $20,000,000, apparently is designed to speed construction projects under Peiping's 1956 grant and to provide a timely demonstration of Chinese "good will" in dealing with neighboring states.

During his visit, Koirala probably will press for a joint declaration accepting the "existing" border between Nepal and Tibet. He apparently feels that such a commitment would stave off incidents like those which have occurred recently along the Indian-Chinese frontier. Peiping refused in September to agree to a declaration along these lines proposed by a visiting Nepalese delegation, and will almost certainly do so again. The Chinese, however, will want to reassure Katmandu that there will be no incursions and may agree to "negotiations" which Peiping will prolong and use for propaganda purposes without coming to a definitive settlement.

Koirala also announced on 29 November that in response to Prime Minister Nehru's invitation he will make a state visit to India late in January. The Nepalese leader apparently intends to reassure Nehru and to coordinate his government's views on the border problem in advance of his trip to Peiping, while at the same time maintaining an independent position with regard to the Sino-Indian dispute. In referring to Nehru's reaffirmation of 27 November, that any aggression against Nepal would be considered an attack on India, Koirala described this as an "expression of friendship," but commented that Katmandu "would decide if there were aggression." Koirala also denied rumors that an Indian Army division was being sent to Nepal to strengthen border defenses.
