[PAGE 01]
17 November 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. AMERICAN MISSION SEES NO MAJOR CRISIS IMMINENT IN BERLIN

3. MANY NATO MEMBERS PLAN FURTHER DEFENSE CUTBACKS

4. TURKS REDUCE FORCES ALONG SYRIAN BORDER

17 Nov 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
2. AMERICAN MISSION SEES NO MAJOR CRISIS
IMMINENT IN BERLIN

The American mission in Berlin believes the Russians will prevent the East German government from taking any action in Berlin which would precipitate a major crisis at this time.

Mission officials have the impression that the Russians in Berlin are going out of their way to be friendly. They see the possibility, however, that the Russians may renounce responsibility for police power with respect to the Western Allies in East Berlin and East Germany in an effort to push the two Germanies concept and compel the Allies to negotiate with East Germany.

The East German regime may tighten customs and police controls even further in an effort to reduce the flow of new currency to the West and to curtail the serious loss of manpower to the West. In order to make a formal show of its "sovereign" rights to do so, the regime might attempt to supervise the movement of Allied rail and highway traffic to Berlin. The mission believes, however, that East Germany's desire to reap the benefits of the new interzonal trade agreement which is to provide the East German economy with indispensable items may act as a deterrent to any substantial interference with West Berlin's communications lines.

17 Nov 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. MANY NATO MEMBERS PLAN FURTHER
DEFENSE CUTBACKS

The current annual review of NATO defense plans reveals a continuing trend toward cutbacks among those members defending the central European area. American Ambassador Burgess, permanent representative to the North Atlantic Council, believes that if this trend is not promptly arrested, it will do "great damage" to the prospects of maintaining adequate "shield" forces on the European continent.

Despite the wide expression of concern over recent Soviet developments, the need for greater scientific and technical cooperation within NATO, and the general need for greater unity in the alliance, members feel no obligation to maintain even their present efforts to support the "shield" forces. Some link continuation of present plans to receipt of new technical information from the United States, such as plans for nuclear submarines.

Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, and Norway all are planning reductions. Most cuts are keyed to defense budget ceilings--Belgium has operated under the same ceiling since 1952.

These countries are influenced by the known lags and cutbacks of the major European NATO members, whose plans are still to be formally examined. Germany is lagging in submitting details on long-range plans, which still call for fulfilling only about two thirds of the original 500,000-man goal for NATO-committed forces; Ambassador Houghton in Paris has pointed to a serious deterioration in the effectiveness of French army forces; and Britain is soon to make formal approaches for approval of a second reduction of its forces in Germany.

17 Nov 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
4. TURKS REDUCE FORCES ALONG SYRIAN BORDER

About one half of the Turkish troops along the Syrian border were ordered on 14 November to return to their normal stations, according to Ambassador Warren in Ankara. Deployments in August and September had brought the number of Turkish troops in the Syrian border area to 50,000. Reduction of this force by one half would still leave approximately twice as many troops as were there prior to August. The size of the remaining force indicates continued anxiety in Ankara over internal developments in Syria.

The Damascus government will probably continue to complain that the remaining Turkish military forces are menacing Syria and aggravating the situation in the Middle East.

17 Nov 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
