[PAGE 01]
19 August 1956

Copy No. 105

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

4. ARAB MINORITY OPPOSITION TO NASR

6. GROWING POLITICAL TENSION IN HONDURAS
(page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

19 Aug 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
4. ARAB MINORITY OPPOSITION TO NASR

Charles Malik, former Lebanese am-
bassador to Washington, expressed
opposition to Nasr's tactics in a conver-
sation with the American counselor of
embassy in Beirut on 14 August. Malik
insisted that Nasr does not represent
all Arabs and must not be permitted to
succeed. There were, he said, both
pro-Western and anti-Western Arabs and the West should
not be deluded by the seeming unanimity of the current
Arab clamor in favor of Nasr.

In Damascus, Kikran Jirajian, an Arme-
nian member of the Syrian parliament, voiced similar opinions
to an American embassy officer. He said Nasr was leading the
Arabs to ruin and made a plea for Western solidarity. Syrians
as a whole, he maintained, do not wish union with Egypt.

Comment
Malik as a Christian and Jirajian as an
Armenian have expressed sentiments
which are probably shared by some independent elements through-
out the Arab world. These elements lack leadership, and may
be expected to remain acquiescent while anti-Westernism domi-
nates the scene. The mass of the population, inspired by Arab
nationalism, is strongly behind Nasr.

19 Aug 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
6. GROWING POLITICAL TENSION IN HONDURAS

US chargé d'affaires Pool, following
a 17 August visit with the chief of
state, does not believe Lozano, who
suffered a stroke on 11 August, is
physically capable of providing the
strong government now needed by the
country. The decree under which
Lozano has been ruling makes no pro-
vision for a transfer of power.

Members of the Honduran army's new
Defense Co-ordinating Command proposed to Colonel Carac-
cioli, chief of the air force, on 14 August that they assume
control of the government, according to
the American army attaché. Caraccioli reportedly
had not given his answer by 16 August, but did discuss the
problem with former president Galvez, strongly urging him
to take control himself.

The army is in an excellent position to
assume power, but Galvez, who is now head of the supreme
court, would give the regime at least some semblance of
legality if he headed it and he would probably have the sup-
port of most key officers.

Foreign Minister Mendoza had told
Pool on 17 August that General Abraham Williams, unsuc-
cessful presidential candidate in 1954, is considering a des-
perate attempt to seize the presidency and is spreading a
story that Lozano is leaving the country on 21 August.

19 Aug 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 19 August)

A Jordanian army spokesman said an Israeli
soldier was killed in a border clash when an Israeli patrol pene-
trated about 100 yards inside Jordan in the Tulkarm area.

The UN secretary general has sent his second
message in two days to the Arab and Israeli governments urging
precautions against cease-fire violations in unusually strong terms.
At Hammarskjold's request the UN truce organization is preparing
a report on recent border incidents for presentation to the Security
Council.

The recent outbreak in Gaza is receiving wide
coverage in Egypt, second only to the Suez issue. Egyptian press
sources believe that Israel is attempting to take advantage of the
Suez crisis, but Cairo radio broadcasts in Hebrew charged "foreign
elements" were trying to create new trouble between Israel and the
Arab states and hinted that the British might be involved.

The American army attaché in Tel Aviv re-
ports that the Israeli radio blames Egypt for the bus ambush on
16 August. According to the American embassy in Tel Aviv, the
recent incidents suggest that Fedayeen terrorists are operating
from the Jordanian side of the Negev desert and that similar groups
are laying mines inside Israel from the Egyptian side of the desert.
The embassy reports that Tel Aviv still appears to be reluctant to
resume retaliatory action but that the government may be forced to
take some action owing to the increasing number of casualties.

The former Syrian chief of staff told the Amer-
ican army attaché in Beirut on 14 August that Lebanese commanding
general Chehab was "reaching the end of the rope" over the failure
of the West to supply military equipment and that Chehab might be
forced to purchase Czech arms despite his desire to avoid an Soviet
bloc arms deal.
