[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

13 February 1952
Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1.
2. Vietnamese Government reportedly bankrupt (page 3).
3. Chief of US military mission reviews Tonkin military situation
(page 4).
4. King of Thailand threatens abdication (page 4).

NEAR EAST- AFRICA

5. Existence of Egyptian Cabinet depends on solution to Anglo-Egyptian
dispute (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE

6.
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1.

2. Vietnamese Government reportedly bankrupt:

Vietnamese Premier Huu, at a cabinet
meeting announced
the bankruptcy of his government and its
consequent inability to meet civil and military
expenses for March 1952

Comment: Despite the urging of French
and American officials, the Vietnamese Government has never pre-
pared a budget, and accurate assessment of its fiscal status is
therefore impossible.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
3. Chief of US military mission reviews Tonkin military situation:

The Chief of the US military mission in
Indochina, General Brink, who has just
returned from Hanoi, estimates that the
"strictly military" situation in Tonkin is
not as alarming as has been pictured by
some observers. He states, however, that the political situation
and the loyalty of the population are uncertain and that this could
well neutralize the military effort.

General Brink believes that the Tonkin
delta can be defended, albeit with some difficulty. On the other
hand, he sees a growing threat to the main communication line
between Hanoi and Haiphong. In addition, French troop strength
is inadequate to meet any new Viet Minh attacks on the defense
perimeter and simultaneously to prevent infiltration of the delta.

4. King of Thailand threatens abdication:

The King of Thailand reportedly is threaten-
ing abdication in protest against the usur-
pation of his powers by the military clique
which controls the government. The Chief
of the Thai Air Force states that
Thailand would become a republic if the King does not accept the
1932 Constitution as amended.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
Comment: Other reports indicate that the
King is using the threat of abdication as a weapon in his controversy
with government leaders over his constitutional powers and probably
has no real intent of stepping down. Although veneration of the
monarchy is widespread in Thailand, no effectively organized force
has yet come forward to support the King in his struggle with the
military leaders.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Existence of Egyptian Cabinet depends on solution to Anglo-Egyptian
dispute:

Amr Pasha, recently Egypt's Ambassador
to London and now political adviser to King
Farouk, believes that the government of
Prime Minister Ali Maher will not last
long unless progress is made toward solution of the Anglo-Egyptian
dispute. He insists that discussions regarding the proposed Middle
East Command will be in vain if Great Britain fails to recognize
Farouk as King of the Sudan.

According to the American Ambassador in
Cairo, while Amr Pasha recognizes social reform as the only ade-
quate weapon against the spread of Communism in Egypt, he believes
that reform in Egypt will not be possible until a solution of the Anglo-
Egyptian problem is found.

Comment: there is no indication that Britain is prepared
to recognize the title recently assumed by King Farouk.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
