The Situation in Laos

Armed Forces Commander General Ouane flew to Luang Prabang on 15 October to begin preparations for what he claims will be a dual effort against the Pathet Lao and the forces of Captain Kong Le. Although Ouane appears to have made his decision to leave Vientiane independently, professedly out of concern that the Pathet were gaining too much ground, he intends to coordinate his plans--to date largely unformed--with General Phoumi in Savannakhet. Ouane's immediate intention is to form eight new battalions in the north to block any move on Luang Prabang by the Pathet Lao in Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces, areas in which he reports there are indications of a Pathet Lao build-up.

Regarding Kong Le, Ouane appears to have a somewhat vague concept of creating, through military and psychological pressure in concert with Phoumi, conditions whereby it will ultimately be possible to wrest control of Vientiane from Kong Le. One of the first steps in this campaign reportedly will be a declaration by the First Military Region, with headquarters at Luang Prabang, that it no longer supports the Souvanna Phouma government.

Ouane probably will need time to refine these plans and be ready for action. In the meantime, Kong Le may move to consolidate his hold on Vientiane and prevent members of Souvanna's cabinet from escaping to Luang Prabang or elsewhere. Kong Le's suspicions apparently have already been aroused by Ouane's departure.

Premier Souvanna Phouma, in a quick trip to Luang Prabang on 16 October, professed full approval of Ouane's plans, encouraging in particular a buildup in the First Military Region's capabilities against the Pathet Lao. He claimed that he must return to Vientiane to "reassure the diplomatic community," but that in the event the Pathet Lao did not back down from their excessive demands in the current negotiations, he would announce his resignation. Such a step would pave the way for the establishment in Luang Prabang either of a transitional military government or a new government of national union.
