[PAGE 01]
8 February 1960
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
8 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Chinese Communists send ships to bring back Overseas Chinese desiring to leave Indonesia. (1)

Chinese Communist observer's speech at Warsaw Pact conference reflects Peiping's continuing reservations about Khrushchev's policy of detente with the West. (2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Venezuela requests 8 February meeting of Organization of American States to consider Dominican activities in Caribbean. (3)

Latin American Communist leaders agree to avoid aggressive acts during President Eisenhower's visit but to make President feel "unwelcome" through other means. (4)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Indonesia: Peiping is following up its promise, made in a People's Daily editorial of 27 January, to send ships to Indonesia to bring back Overseas Chi- nese who want to leave as a result of anti-Chinese measures. Four chartered ships have left Canton for Djakarta, and addi- tional passenger vessels will be diverted from other runs to carry returnees as far as Hong Kong. Although only a few hundred Chinese had left Indonesia up to the end of January, a monthly exodus of several thousand is expected after com- pletion of transportation arrangements by late February. (Page 1)

Communist China - USSR: The speech to the Warsaw Pact conference by the senior Chinese Communist observer, Kang Sheng, reflects Peiping's continuing reservations about Khrushchev's policy of detente with the West. While express- ing perfunctory approval of "peaceful coexistence" as a basis for bloc foreign policy, Kang indicated doubt about the possi- bility of any real East-West understanding and said that the United States' actions "fully prove that its imperialist nature cannot be changed." He explicitly extended Peiping's 21 Jan- uary refusal to be bound by any international disarmament agreement to include "all other international agreements." The Chinese clearly desire participation in world councils, but it is unlikely that this statement is intended as a bid for Chinese attendance at the 10-nation disarmament conference in March or at the summit in May. In claiming that Chinese Communist armed forces are now "less than half their original size," Kang suggested that Peiping is not considering reductions of these forces.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Venezuela: The Venezuelan Government has requested an emergency meeting of the Organization of American States (OAS) on 8 February to consider Dominican activities in the Caribbean. This action is likely to encourage the al- ready strong opposition to Trujillo among the Dominican people. Venezuelan President Betancourt holds the Domin- ican dictator partly responsible for the plotting and terror- ism which recently has plagued the Venezuelan regime. Venezuelan charges against Trujillo at the OAS meeting are expected to include "incendiary" radio broadcasts, aid to conspirators, infiltration of "mercenaries" into Venezuela, and flagrant violation of human rights within the Dominican Republic.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Latin America: Twenty Communist leaders from Argen- tina, Chile, and Uruguay met in southern Chile on 26 January to discuss an instruction "from Europe" regarding President Eisenhower's approaching visit to South America. The leaders unanimously agreed that aggressive acts should be avoided but that "subtly" the President should be made to feel "unwelcome" through whatever means are available to the Communists and Peronistas. Publicly, the Communists are maintaining a pos- ture of "peace" toward the trip, but the various governments have information that the Communists are secretly encouraging agitation by other groups, and special security precautions are being taken[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]. (Page 2)

8 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping to Repatriate Overseas Chinese From Indonesia

Peiping is following up its promise, made in a People's Daily editorial of 27 January, to send ships to Indonesia to bring back Overseas Chinese who want to leave as a result of anti-Chinese measures. Four chartered ships--the Hein- rich Jessen, the Hoi Wong, the Taipochong, and the Fook On-- have left Canton for Djakarta, and additional passenger ves- sels will be diverted from other runs to carry returnees as far as Hong Kong. These arrangements are probably intended to demonstrate to Chinese residents throughout Southeast Asia that they will not be neglected by their motherland.

Although only a few hundred Chinese had left Indonesia up to the end of January, a monthly exodus of 10,000 to 12,000 is expected after completion of transportation arrangements by late February, according to the US Army attaché in Djakarta. Indonesian Army sources estimate that no more than 300,000 of Indonesia's 3,000,000 Chinese residents will want to return to Communist China. An Indonesian official has commented that even if a million were to return there would still be too many remaining.

The Chinese Communist Embassy in Djakarta is reported to have stated that the bulk of the returnees will be settled in Fukien Province. Other sources indicate that some will go to state farms on Hainan Island off the coast of Kwangtung Prov- ince. Chinese Communist authorities are apparently attempting to create a favorable impression on returnees by providing elab- orate facilities for their reception.

8 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Latin American Communists Confer Regarding President's Trip

Twenty Communist leaders from Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay met on 26 January at Puerto Varas in southern Chile to discuss an instruction received from Europe regarding Pres- ident Eisenhower's forthcoming trip to South America. The Argentine delegation was led by Rodolfo Ghioldi, who is one of the two main leaders of the Argentine Communist party and in a position to state party policy.

The leaders reportedly decided unanimously that: (1) open aggressive acts against the President should be avoided, (2) the President should "subtly" be made to feel unwelcome through any means available to the Communists and Peronistas, and (3) in Argentina any "unpleasantness" should be postponed un- til after he has left the city of Buenos Aires. Point three pre- sumably refers to the President's visit to Bariloche, which is in Argentina's southern lake region about 90 miles east of Puerto Varas and 1,000 miles southwest of Buenos Aires.

The reported decisions are in line with other information, although point three is not confirmed. The Communist parties in these countries and Brazil have all publicly emphasized their peaceful intentions regarding the visit--"if it is made in the spirit of Camp David." At the same time, the security forces in Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay have reports that the Communists plan to try to provoke agitation by other groups. A "riotous outburst" in Buenos Aires on 5 February by a "Communist-front organization" is viewed by the press as a possible dress rehearsal for Commu- nist demonstrations during the Eisenhower visit.

Few plans have been reported other than for sign painting and propaganda leaflets, but the Uruguayan Communist party is said to be planning mass worker rallies to shout insults at Pres- ident Eisenhower. The Peronistas in Argentina reportedly intend

8 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 08]
to be on the alert against troublemakers who might exploit their plans for a peaceful demonstration featuring "Peron- Ike" signs.

concerned not over local agitation but over the large number of Cubans now in Rio de Janeiro. The police in all four countries are taking strict security precautions.

8 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 10]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
8 February 1960
