[PAGE 01]
14 December 1955

Copy No. 103

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. THE SOVIET-INDIAN DECLARATION AND TRADE AGREEMENT (page 3).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 6)
[PAGE 03]
1. THE SOVIET-INDIAN DECLARATION AND TRADE
AGREEMENT

The Soviet-Indian declaration, issued
in New Delhi on 13 December at the end
of the Bulganin and Khrushchev visit,
was made use of by Moscow to place Nehru on record once
more as agreeing with Moscow on a number of points with
reference to international affairs. The familiar "five prin-
ciples" are reaffirmed and UN membership and possession
of Taiwan are urged for Communist China. The absence of
anticolonial statements probably is the result of the restrain-
ing influence of Prime Minister Nehru. Some reports had
indicated that the Soviet leaders were pressing to include
statements on such issues as Goa and Kashmir.

The declaration takes cognizance of a
number of international events since the issuance of the
Bulganin-Nehru declaration in Moscow last June. It con-
demns the establishment of military blocs--a point not in-
cluded in the June statement and apparently aimed primarily
at the Baghdad pact. The talks between the United States
and Communist China in Geneva are favorably noted and hope
is expressed that talks on broader subjects will be held at a
higher level.

Along with the communiqué, a new trade
agreement was announced committing Moscow to supply India
with 1,000,000 tons of steel over the next three years. Mos-
cow's intention to alleviate the severe Indian steel shortage at
the expense of Soviet domestic steel requirements underlines
the Kremlin's desire for India's good will.

The USSR also agreed to sell India oil,
mining and other equipment and to increase Soviet purchases
of raw materials and manufactured goods. The oil and mining
equipment purchases are probably the result of negotiations
prior to the visit.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 13 December)

No significant military activity has been
reported, and there are no indications of imminent Arab
retaliation for the Israeli raid against Syria on 11 Decem-
ber. Syria has formally requested a meeting of the UN
Security Council to hear complaints on the incident. Pop-
ular demonstrations have occurred in Syria protesting the
Israeli action and the "lenience of the West." No official
statement has yet been made in either Damascus or Cairo.

The American chargé in Tel Aviv suggests
that Israel may have wanted to test the new Syro-Egyptian
military pact, either to prove to Syria and the other Arab
states that the Egyptians cannot be relied on for assistance,
or to provoke Egyptian forces into overreaching themselves
in the south.

UN truce chief General Burns, who con-
ferred with Israeli prime minister Ben-Gurion on 11 Decem-
ber, thinks the Israelis will not wait indefinitely for agree-
ment on the UN proposals for the El Auja demilitarized zone
and believes that they may soon engage in some new act of
retaliation.
[PAGE 07]
