*Turkey: High-level personnel changes now occurring within the ruling Committee for National Union (CNU) and the Turkish armed forces are apparently part of a power struggle within the CNU over the role that body should play in the future and over the timing of a return to civil government. The CNU is the leading body of the military regime which ousted the Menderes government in May 1960. The changes have reportedly involved the ouster and subsequent reinstatement of the chief of the air force, Lt. Gen. Irfan Tansel, and the resignation of General Madanoglu, one of the leading members of the CNU, from his post as troop commander of the Ankara garrison. Several other top-level military changes are also apparently being made.

General Tansel, in a possible overstatement of his case, claims to have the support of the commanders of the ground and naval forces and the gendarmerie, as well as support from the younger members of the CNU. He is apparently opposed by senior officers on the CNU. He told the US air attaché on 10 June that his group was in control and that he would direct Turkey "on the Western road to democracy." The CNU, following a meeting attended by the General Staff chief, issued a statement on 11 June playing down the significance of the personnel changes and declaring its determination to hold "democratic and honest elections" before 29 October, as previously announced.

The situation remains confused and a general interservice struggle for power could develop.

In the event of a showdown, the navy and gendarmerie would support the army.

Admitting the possibility of a major clash between elements of the army and air force, believe it is too soon for allegiances to have crystallized to a point where it can be assumed that either the air force or army would act as a unified service. Tansel's control of the air force, however, is probably firm as a result of major changes which he has made in his staff officers.

According to Tansel, some members of the CNU wanted to perpetuate strong military influence in the regime, even after

12 June 61 DAILY BRIEF
