FAR EAST

3. Rhee rejects Japanese bid for resumption of talks:
South Korean foreign minister Pyun informed an American embassy official on 18 December that the draft Japanese statement delivered three days before on the resumption of talks to settle outstanding differences with South Korea was not acceptable to President Rhee. Alleging that Japan wants the United States to intervene in order to "lure South Korea into a trap," Pyun stated that his country could not agree to resume the talks unless Japan apologizes for remarks made by Japanese representative Kubota in previous sessions.

The embassy comments that there is no longer any doubt that Rhee is uninterested in seeking a settlement with Japan without a total acceptance of his demands.

Comment: The proposed Japanese statement, which dissociates the government from Kubota's remarks, is about as far as the Yoshida government can go because of legal and domestic political considerations.

Failure of Rhee to renew the talks will create more agitation in Japan for resorting to force to protect Japanese fishing vessels.

4. Chinese reportedly suggest means of resuming Korean talks:
The two Chinese Communist representatives at the Korean talks sought out Indian officials there on 15 December in an apparent attempt to explore American intentions and means for resuming the talks. The senior Chinese, asserting that Ambassador Dean had charged the Peiping regime with being a Soviet "stooge," which he regarded as a far worse insult than the Communist charge of American "perfidy," intimated that the Communists would withdraw its accusation if the United States would also retract. The Chinese did not raise with the Indians any of the substantive matters in the suspended talks.

Comment: Peiping has not repeated its "perfidy" charge since 15 December and daily has reiterated that the talks should be resumed. On 16 December, however, Peiping radio stated that the American proposal of 8 December remained "on every fundamental question . . . utterly unacceptable."
