5. Indian official at Panmunjom preparing biased report on prisoner issue:
A draft report on the Korean prisoner impasse, prepared by Indian political adviser Haksar for submission to the UN General Assembly, is termed "impossible, red-colored, and catastrophic," by the Swiss and Swedish delegates to the Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission. The report was so strongly biased against the UN Command that the Swiss and Swedes refused to use it even as the basis for discussion in subcommittee.

The two officials believe the NNRC will never agree to a single report. Since the Poles and Czechs also were critical of Haksar's draft, they thought it likely that three separate reports would be submitted to the UN General Assembly.

Comment: General Thimayya, who has been generally sympathetic to the UN viewpoint on the prisoner issue, presumably will modify the Indian version before final action is taken by the NNRC. Most Indian officials, however, still persist in their belief that the prisoners were thoroughly indoctrinated by the UN Command prior to their turnover, and that American agents among them are preventing them from returning to the northern side.

6. Thimayya plans to release Korean prisoners after 22 January:
General Thimayya's plan for the release of the Korean prisoners after 22 January, if the two sides do not agree otherwise, has been approved by Prime Minister Nehru, according to the Swiss and Swedish representatives to the Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission.

Thimayya, who believes that the authority of the Indian custodial forces expires on that date, plans to ask both sides to take back custody of the prisoners. If the Communists refuse, he intends to turn the pro-Communist prisoners loose.

The Swedish representative indicated that Thimayya would probably arrange for "orderly opportunities" for the anti-Communist prisoners to be released and be received by the UN Command in a phased process.

Comment: Krishna Menon, Indian representative at the UN, is attempting to have the General Assembly reconvened in early January to discuss the prisoner issue. The Indian foreign secretary told Ambassador Allen on 18 December that India is still uncertain whether the final decision should be made by the UN or the NNRC.

The position of the Indian government on the prisoner release question, which reportedly is to be considered when Krishna Menon returns from London, may be announced by Nehru in his scheduled policy speech to parliament on 23 December.
