[PAGE 01]
3 December 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Copy No. 57

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1.

SOVIET UNION
2. Possible large-scale movements of TU-4's to Soviet Far East (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Japanese Government facing precarious parliamentary situation (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. Defense Ministry official believed behind Indonesian Army split (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Greek Communist Party meets in Rumania (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. Soviet troop rotation in East Germany apparently ended (page 6).
7. Soviet authorities in Berlin demand "release" of defector (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

SOVIET UNION

2. Possible large-scale movements of TU-4's to Soviet Far East:
At least 37 aircraft, 26 of which have been associated with Soviet Long Range Air Forces based in the European USSR, appeared to be en route to the Soviet Far East between 11 and 26 November. These planes, possibly including improved TU-4 medium bombers, may be destined for the Third Long Range Air Army.

Comment: The Third Long Range Air Army received its first TU-4's in late 1951, and is now believed to have 170 of an authorized strength of 220. Although only one medium bomber corps has been identified since October 1951,

[PAGE 04]
The build-up of Soviet capabilities for long-range operations in this area has been accompanied by a general increase of bomber strength in the Far East, including progressive conversion of Soviet light bomber units to jets and the movement of additional jet light bombers to Manchuria, apparently for transfer to the Chinese.

FAR EAST

3. Japanese Government facing precarious parliamentary situation:
Ambassador Murphy, in commenting on the forced resignation last week of Ikeda, Minister of International Trade and Industry, warns that the Western powers must exercise utmost caution to avoid jeopardizing the position of the pro-Western Yoshida regime. Although he believes the fall of the cabinet is not necessarily imminent, he advises that the situation could easily become critical.

Murphy also reports that if a planned Rightist Socialist Party motion of no-confidence in Foreign Minister Okazaki is passed, it will almost certainly result in the resignation of the cabinet. He doubts, however, that the other opposition parties will support the motion.

Comment: The vote of no-confidence in Ikeda was made possible by the abstention of part of the Hatoyama faction of the Liberal Party. It is unlikely, with unity of both the government and party involved, that the Okazaki motion will be successful. The demonstrated bargaining position of the Hatoyama faction, however, may now force Yoshida to compromise with the group or dissolve the government and call for new elections.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Defense Ministry official believed behind Indonesian Army split:
Colonel Sungkono, an adviser in the Indonesian Defense Ministry, is responsible for the army coups in South Sumatra, East Java, and East Indonesia. Sungkono reportedly is planning to instigate an uprising calculated to put himself in power. All the rebellious commanders have at one time served under him.

Sungkono, although not a Communist, is being used to carry out a Communist plan to divide the army.

Comment: Sungkono has a reputation as an intriguer and troublemaker. There is no other indication, however, that the army split was inspired by him or has worked to his advantage.

There is no conclusive evidence to implicate the Communists in the developments within the army since 17 October.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Greek Communist Party meets in Rumania:
The Greek Communist Radio in Bucharest announced on 28 November that the Central Committee of the Greek Communist Party held its third plenary session in November. The meeting eulogized the 19th Communist Party Congress in Moscow, discussed the Greek party's role in forming a "pan-democratic" front in Greece, and considered organizational matters.

Former Greek Politburo-member Ioannides was also read out of the party with no explanation.

[PAGE 06]
Comment:
A large number of visas for Rumania have been issued to Greeks living in the Satellite countries in recent months. Probably many of them attended this meeting.

There is no indication that Ioannides' expulsion was caused by a disagreement over party doctrine. There had been a dispute over the tactics to be used in the recent elections, however, and Ioannides' expulsion, as well as the discussion of a "pan-democratic" front, may presage a new Communist line in Greece.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Soviet troop rotation in East Germany apparently ended:
Trains used in the 1952 Soviet troop rotation program are reportedly being dismantled, indicating the completion of the program for this year. Present evidence shows that the program has resulted in an increase of approximately 30,000 Soviet troops in East Germany.

Comment: This increase would bring the total strength of the Soviet ground forces in East Germany to approximately 415,000.

To date there have been no indications of the arrival or activation of new units in East Germany. It is believed that the present increase in the troop strength will be used to fill out Soviet line units, the majority of which are below their authorized strength.

7. Soviet authorities in Berlin demand "release" of defector:
The Soviet authorities in Berlin have sent a strong letter to General Mathewson protesting against "the forcible detention"

[PAGE 07]
of a Soviet soldier who defected on 28 November and demanding that he be returned immediately.

The Soviet authorities are insisting on the soldier's "release" as a condition for return of two American military police who are being held in the Soviet Zone.

Comment: Soviet defectors in Berlin are very infrequent. The strong reaction to the recent defection suggests that Moscow may retaliate against the US defector program by refusing to release Allied personnel who frequently stray into the Soviet Zone by mistake.
