I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bloc May Renew Bid for Balkan Summit Conference

Recent events suggest that bloc leaders are planning to renew their bid for a summit conference of the Balkan-Adriatic countries to consider the Soviet scheme for a "zone of peace" in which atomic and rocket weapons would be prohibited. Such a move may have figured in Khrushchev's unannounced visit to Bucharest from 19 to 25 October and the recent approach of the Soviet ambassador in Belgrade to Yugoslav President Tito. The Roumanian and Bulgarian ambassadors in Belgrade reportedly also have talked with Tito recently.

The day after Khrushchev's return to Moscow, Bucharest radio renewed the 1957 Rumanian appeal for a Balkan conference. Bloc propaganda is continuing to refer to "favorable conditions for inter-Balkan collaboration" and has recalled the earlier Rumanian "initiative" for a conference and Khrushchev's proposal for an atom-free zone. There has been only mild propaganda reaction, however, to reports that Turkey will soon agree to the establishment of NATO missile bases on its territory, in contrast to the flood of sharp statements, notes, and speeches that followed reports in April and May of NATO plans for missile bases in Italy and Greece. On 30 October, TASS reported without comment that "detailed agreement" had been reached "between the United States and Turkey on erection of a 'rocket base'."

Early last summer Moscow formally proposed a Balkan-Adriatic "zone of peace" to include the Balkan satellites, Yugoslavia, Greece, Turkey, and Italy. According to the plan, the United States, Britain, and France would join the USSR in "guaranteeing the security and independence of the countries in the zone." Rumania on two previous occasions has taken the lead in introducing proposals for a Balkan conference and would be the logical choice for renewing the offer.

While bloc leaders probably would expect nonbloc countries to reject this bid for a conference, they may think that renewal of such an overture, coming just before an official Turkish announcement on missile bases, would serve to "justify" countermeasures such as establishing Soviet missile bases in the Balkans.

31 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
