[PAGE 01]
9 November 1951
Copy No. 47
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

USSR
3. USSR protests border violation by US plane in Far East (page 4).

FAR EAST
4. De Lattre and MacDonald alarmed over Burmese situation (page 4).
5. Japanese Overseas Agency to open in Formosa (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. France attempts to stop attacks on US in Morocco (page 7).
10. Dutch lack of equipment may delay fulfillment of armed forces commitment (page 8).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
[PAGE 04]
USSR

3. USSR protests border violation by US plane in Far East:
Deputy Foreign Minister Gromyko on 7 November protested to the US Charge in Moscow concerning an alleged air violation of the USSR's border by a US plane in the area of Cape Ostrovnaya east of Vladivostok. The US Charge maintained that inasmuch as all US planes in the area were under the United Nations Command, he could not accept the note as a protest but only as a statement of fact for information of the US Government.

Comment: The Soviet note gave the violation generally the same treatment as the April 1950 Baltic plane incident, particularly in stating that "the Soviet airplanes were forced to open return fire, after which the American airplane went off in the direction of the sea and disappeared." All Soviet ships en route to Vladivostok on 6 November, the day of the incident, were ordered to proceed as close to the beach as possible in the area of Ostrovnaya and Valentina Bay, suggesting possible search or salvage operations.

FAR EAST

4. De Lattre and MacDonald alarmed over Burmese situation:
General de Lattre told the US Consul in Hanoi that he is seriously worried over the menace to Burma. He believed that Burma is threatened more by internal pressures than by a Chinese Communist invasion. He partially blamed Nehru's "antics" toward the West for Burma's weakness and criticized Britain's negative attitude toward both Nehru and Burma.
[PAGE 05]
Meanwhile, the British Commissioner General for Southeast Asia, Malcolm MacDonald, in reviewing the politico-military situation in the Far East for a group of US Congressmen visiting Singapore, stated that Burma is the weakest spot in Southeast Asia and that the government needs outside aid to prevent collapse as a result of undermining tactics by the Communists.

Comment: De Lattre and MacDonald are now meeting in Indochina to discuss the problem posed by Burma.

5. Japanese Overseas Agency to open in Formosa:
The Japanese Overseas Agency in Taipei is expected to open with the arrival, in late November, of the chief, Kimura Shiroshichi.

Comment: Plans for the establishment of this agency, to be concerned primarily with matters of trade, were under way prior to the peace treaty conference; the Japanese Government, however, deliberately delayed opening the agency until the treaty was signed for fear of jeopardizing acceptance of the treaty by countries recognizing Communist China.

Premier Yoshida has repeatedly stated that the establishment of the agency has no political implications. In an attempt to emphasize this, Yoshida asserted that Japan would be equally willing to establish such an agency in Shanghai; he intimated, however, that he would reject a reciprocal opening of any similar agency in Japan by the Chinese Communists.

NEAR EAST
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

9. France attempts to stop attacks on US in Morocco:
The US Embassy in Paris has found the French Foreign Office "highly embarrassed" by recent anti-American outbursts of the Resident General in Morocco. He has been instructed to cease making exaggerated statements unfriendly to United States representatives and to keep the Moroccan press in line.

Comment: The French-language press in Morocco has been conducting an intensive campaign to discredit American
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]diplomatic representatives there. Remarks critical of their conduct, made by the Resident General at a private gathering, have received wide circulation, as have his threats to ask for the recall of the American Consul at Rabat. In line with the Foreign Office's directive, the attacks against the US can be expected to decrease[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

10. Dutch lack of equipment may delay fulfillment of armed forces commitment:
The Dutch Government has expressed concern that it may not be able to deliver the two divisions and the corps troops promised for the SHAPE maneuvers in September 1952. Because of the delays in the receipt of US military equipment, the Dutch Defense Ministry will apparently either have to get higher delivery rates or else slow down the conscription program. The government, feeling that the September deadline is the "moment of greatest danger," is adamant in demanding that any Dutch force which participates in the maneuvers be fully equipped for combat.

Comment: Since spring, Dutch military leaders have stated that failure to receive US military equipment on schedule could lead to a temporary set-back in the Dutch defense effort.

Insistence on fully equipped troops represents a shift in Dutch policy toward military preparedness and was probably taken to improve the serious morale problem of the armed forces.
