Japanese Electorate Returns Conservatives

As a result of the election on 20 November, Japanese Prime Minister Ikeda's Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) has halted a steady decline since 1952 in the conservative representation in the lower, more powerful house of the parliament, winning 296 seats as compared with 287 in 1958. With 96 percent of the popular vote counted, however, the party has failed to increase its popular vote over 1958.

Results of the election, which was marked by the lowest percentage of voter participation (73.5 percent) since 1947, reflect traditional voting patterns, satisfaction with present economic prosperity, and the improved efficiency of party organization rather than a mandate for Japan's pro-Western alignment. However, Toshio Tanaka, Socialist Diet member present during the demonstration against American presidential press secretary Hagerty last June, and Tokutaro Kitamura, a pro-Peiping conservative, were both defeated.

Prospects for a moderate opposition party in the near future dimmed as the representation of the moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP), running in its first national election since it split from the Japanese Socialist party last January, fell from 40 to 17. Ikeda, who in an unprecedented move before the election had urged voters to support the DSP as a responsible opposition, interpreted the unexpectedly severe setback as a mandate for a polarized political system. DSP leaders, whose party now is threatened with extinction, admitted they had suffered a serious defeat and called a policy meeting for 25 November to discuss the party's future.

There was an increase, however, in the percentage of the popular vote received by the three opposition parties which opposed the US-Japanese security treaty. The radical Socialists gained at the DSP's expense, winning 145 seats as compared with the 122 they held at the dissolution of the last Diet, and the total Socialist vote increased slightly over 1958. The Communists, with 2.9 percent of the popular vote, won their largest vote since 1949 and increased their parliamentary representation from one to three.
