Prominent Japanese Politicians Plan Visits to Communist China

The visits which several prominent Japanese politicians have
arranged to make to Communist China during the next two months
probably are designed to weaken Prime Minister Kishi's position
as well as explore the possibilities for improving trade and other
relations between Tokyo and Peiping. All the invited men are
members of factions in the government party which are opposed
to Prime Minister Kishi and which received only a few posts in
the recent cabinet and party reshuffle. Each undoubtedly hopes
his discussions with Communist Chinese leaders may find a pos-
sible basis for the restoration of trade relations that he could ex-
ploit on his return to Japan.

The question of relations with mainland China, while now
relatively quiescent, is a potentially important issue in domestic
politics since most Japanese believe they would benefit econom-
ically and culturally from closer relations with Peiping.

Former Prime Minister Tanzan Ishibashi intends to visit
Communist China next month at the invitation of Premier Chou
En-lai, and former Minister of Education Kenzo Matsumura is
expected to follow with a trip in October. Influential Liberal-
Democratic party leader Ichiro Kono has announced he will go
to Moscow in October and may also visit Peiping. Factional
leader Takeo Miki may also have been invited.

While Ishibashi and Matsumura are unlikely to accede to Pei-
ping's extreme demands, Kishi and some of his close supporters
have indicated concern over the trips. The visits are also likely
to stir up new demands in Japan for a relaxation of Kishi's firm
policy toward Peiping.

Peiping has thus far failed to soften its demands for political
concessions and a reorientation of Japan's foreign policy as the
price for resuming trade. Nevertheless, Chinese Communist hos-
tility has been directed primarily at Kishi, and the American Em-
bassy in Tokyo believes Kishi will be in "real trouble" if the vis-
itors return with an offer from Peiping to end the trade embargo.

31 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
