III. THE WEST

Repercussions of Gaillard's Fall

The French National Assembly has resumed its recess to campaign in the local elections scheduled for 20 and 27 April. President Coty is continuing his consultations but is not expected to name his first candidate for premier until Monday to avoid the possibility of having his choice influence Sunday's first-round vote. He may then choose a center candidate such as ex-Premier Pleven in hopes of hastening the necessary compromises between the non-Communist left and right.

The return of General De Gaulle is again being urged by his most ardent supporters but there seems to be no major increase in this pressure. Should ex-Gaullist Soustelle be named as a candidate, however, he might use his investiture attempt to rally support for the general. New Assembly elections have been urged by the conservative National Association of Small Businessmen, but such a move would encounter heavy opposition among the deputies many of whom insist on a prior change in the electoral law.

To allay the impatience of extremists in Tunisia, President Bourguiba will apparently make some early move to raise again charges of French aggression at the UN. Any serious new incidents would almost certainly force him to take immediate action, possibly including steps against French troops. The possibility of such incidents has alarmed British Foreign Office officials. They fear that the present caretaker status of the Gaillard government will give Defense Minister Chaban-Delmas a freer hand and make him increasingly willing to accede to military and rightist pressure. Chaban-Delmas indicated to American officials just before Gaillard's fall that France was about to implement an "eye for an eye" military policy against rebel raids from Tunisia.

In Algeria, there is evidence that some French army officers have again been concerting plans with European civilian extremists aimed at overthrowing the local regime. It is improbable, however, that essential military support for such an operation would be forthcoming.

18 Apr 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
