three premiers, however, contributed little or nothing. The conference ended in a generally friendly atmosphere, although Nehru appeared somewhat disappointed with the results and Kotelawala of Ceylon indicated that the meeting only "made the best of a bad job."

Comment: The most important result of this meeting was the invitation to Communist China to attend the Asian-African conference scheduled to be held in Indonesia next April. Unless other countries, particularly those friendly to the West, are represented by dynamic personalities bearing concrete proposals, Peiping is likely to steal the show.

3. Yugoslav- USSR trade talks reported having difficulties:

The trade talks in Moscow between representatives of the USSR and Yugoslavia are not going well, according to Yugoslav counselor of state Kopcok.

He told the American embassy that this was no surprise, as it was clear from the beginning that the USSR would insist on certain strategic materials, and that, in the face of repeated Soviet demands for copper, the Yugoslav delegation had been advised by its government that "not one gram" would be made available.

The Yugoslav government considers Soviet attempts to dislodge Belgrade from its earlier position on strategic goods as politically motivated, and not related to economic considerations.

Comment: Kopcok's statements probably represent in part an attempt to allay any suspicions regarding Yugoslavia's Western alignment. It is quite possible that Moscow has attempted for political reasons to take advantage of the critical Yugoslav economic situation to force Belgrade to abandon its policy of co-operation with Western strategic export controls. Belgrade, however, has in general complied with Western export controls.

If satisfactory terms can be negotiated, the Yugoslavs are undoubtedly willing to conclude a one-year government trade agreement substantially in excess of the 1 October arrangement, which called for a total exchange of $5,000,000 during the last three months of 1954.
