[PAGE 01]
30 March 1961
Copy No. C 77

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

DIA and DOS have no objection to declassification and release

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
30 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Congo: Tshombe's forces move against Manono.
(Page ii)

4. Somali Republic:

5. North Vietnam: Morocco becomes fourth African nation to recognize Hanoi. (Page iii)

6. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page iii)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
30 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page
[PAGE 07]
Congo: According to the UN representative in Elisabethville, the movement of Tshombe's forces against Manono has begun. The Katanga forces, which number about 1,000, apparently plan to make a gradual advance on the town from the three centers of Mitwaba, Kongolo, and Piana Mwanga; according to reports of Swedish UN patrols, the troops advancing from Mitwaba may already have progressed halfway to Manono without encountering serious opposition. The UN official said that the size of the advancing force would make it impossible for the small Nigerian unit at Manono to interpose itself effectively. (Backup, Page 4) (Map)

Somali Republic - USSR:

30 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  Page ii
[PAGE 08]
Although moderate government leaders have often stated a preference for Western aid, they feel pressed by a small but vocal Communist-influenced opposition party which would exploit the issue in a constitutional referendum set for 20 June.
(Backup, Page 6)

North Vietnam - Morocco: North Vietnam's campaign to gain wider international acceptance moved another step forward with the announcement on 27 March that Morocco had agreed to establish diplomatic relations and exchange ambassadors. The agreement caps a five-day visit to Rabat by North Vietnam's foreign minister, who has been touring Africa for the past month. Morocco is the fourth African nation to recognize the Vietnamese Communist regime in the past year, following Guinea, Mali, and Senegal.
(Backup, Page 7)

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee the United States Intelligence Board concludes that:

A. and B. No change from last week.

SOUTH VIETNAM

There are continuing indications that Viet Cong (Communist) guerrilla groups in South Vietnam will probably engage in a vigorous extensive campaign of sabotage and political terrorism in connection with and prior to the

30 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  Page iii
[PAGE 09]
South Vietnamese presidential elections scheduled for 9 April.

D. CONGO

Although conditions in the Congo remain unsettled, there are no new developments affording increased opportunities for exploitation by the Communist Bloc.

30 Mar 61  DAILY BRIEF  Page iv
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
Situation in the Congo

The UN is taking no military action to meet the threat to Manono, according to a 28 March report from the American army attaché in Leopoldville. General McKeown, the UN military commander, has been in Elisabethville attempting to persuade Tshombe to call off the offensive, but the Katanga government has given no indication that it will yield to UN pressure.

The Belgian consul general in Elisabethville told the American consul on 28 March that between 85 and 90 Belgians now serving with Tshombe's forces would leave by mid-April. This total includes both military technicians under contract to the Katanga government and volunteers recruited for the white legion. About 240 Belgians were serving with the Katanga military in January, and the number may have increased since then. The consul general feared that small numbers of white volunteers might still be coming into Katanga. He hinted that Brussels might have to withdraw more Belgians as a result of international pressure, but he implied that the Belgian Foreign Ministry has little control over the Ministry of African Affairs, which apparently is continuing its assistance to Tshombe.

30 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
Soviet Mission Visits Somali Republic

Since the Somali Republic became independent last July, the Soviet Union has established a large embassy in Mogadiscio, and advance parties have arrived from Prague and Peking to establish embassies. Albania, Bulgaria, and Hungary arranged last year to set up diplomatic missions, but these have not yet arrived.

Abdirascid's government, which has been in power since the territory became independent, believes it must demonstrate substantial progress in economic development in order to win a clear-cut victory in the June referendum. The referendum is being held to approve or reject the draft constitution, which provides for national elections every five years. If approved, the referendum will in effect prolong the tenure of the present government for that period. The leftist Great Somali League (GSL), which has received financial support from Communist countries, almost certainly would seize on the government's refusal to accept Soviet aid as an important issue in its expected vigorous campaign to defeat the referendum.

30 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
[PAGE 16]
North Vietnam and Morocco Establish Diplomatic Relations

North Vietnam and the four African nations with which it has succeeded in establishing relations have French as a common language, and each had experienced French political domination. In the joint communiqué issued in Rabat, as in similar communiqués throughout the foreign minister's tour, this kinship was stressed.

In his audience with King Hassan II on 24 March, Foreign Minister Ung Van Khiem extended an invitation from Ho Chi Minh to visit North Vietnam. He also assured the Moroccans of support for their claim to Mauritania and in turn received assurances of Moroccan support for North Vietnam's efforts to reunify Vietnam "peacefully."

Morocco established diplomatic relations with South Vietnam last year, and Ambassador Buu Hoi took up residence in Rabat in mid-December. While the North Vietnamese are less sensitive than the Chinese Communists about the diplomatic complexities of such a situation, they probably hope that Saigon's ambassador can be removed. Replying to a reporter's question during his Rabat visit, Khiem pointed out that in the case of Mali, the South Vietnamese representative had been ousted soon after the arrival of Hanoi's envoy. Actually, Mali's action at that time resulted primarily from the prior presentation by Saigon's chargé of a formal note explaining South Vietnam's likely reaction in the event Mali recognized Hanoi. This was interpreted by Mali as an ultimatum and an inadmissible interference in its "internal affairs."

North Vietnam already has resident ambassadors in Guinea and Mali. Foreign Minister Ung Van Khiem's delegation has recently concluded an economic and cultural agreement in Conakry and a cultural pact in Bamako.

30 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7
[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 18]
TOP SECRET
