[PAGE 01]
14 July 1960  
Copy No. C 70

CENTRAL  
INTELLIGENCE  
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  
14 July 1960  
DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Republic of the Congo: The situation in Leopoldville Province--the scene of sporadic fighting between Belgian paratroops and mutinous units of the Force Publique--appears critical. The American Embassy reports that an
[PAGE 05]
imminent food shortage in Leopoldville, together with the failure of many Congolese to receive salaries from employers who have fled, could lead to civilian rioting. Belgian reinforcements totaling about 350 paratroops occupied Leopoldville on 13 July, after other Belgian troops had been repulsed by mutineers at the port of Matadi the previous day.

Premier Lumumba has renewed demands for the removal of Belgian forces, apparently on the assumption that a UN police force will ultimately be dispatched to restore order. In Katanga Province, provincial premier Moise Tshombé has hedged on his 11 July announcement of an "independent" Katanga, and in the absence of Belgian recognition may be prepared to "rejoin" the Congo if guaranteed a sufficient measure of internal autonomy.

*Moscow's statement of 13 July accusing the five Western powers of seeking to "liquidate" the new Congo state through direct military action and under cover of the United Nations is apparently designed to encourage Lumumba to resist any outside intervention, as well as further the Soviet pose as the protector of the newly independent African states.

India: The response among India's 2,000,000 government workers to the 12 July strike call by socialist and Communist labor leaders continues spotty, but incidents of violence and sabotage are reported increasing. Non-strikers, supervisors, and army reservists are maintaining most of the essential services in such seriously affected areas as Bombay and Calcutta. [The unions are reported planning for a long siege, and] they may be aided by a 24-hour sympathy strike threatened by Communist and socialist unions in nongovernment fields. Their capability to hold out is limited, however, especially in the face of an apparently unyielding attitude on the part of the government.

Somali Republic: The selection of Abdirascid Ali Scermarche as premier-designate of the newly independent Somali Republic appears to reflect tribal realignments and to have ended the political stalemate. Each of the main regions--former British Somaliland and the Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia--now has received a major political office in the government. [The premier-designate, reportedly a devout Moslem opposed

14 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
(to Communist penetration, will probably favor pro-Western policies and seek to delay Somali acceptance of recent Soviet offers of diplomatic representation and economic assistance.

III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

With respect to the question of Sino-Soviet bloc intentions to initiate hostilities, the Watch Committee Conclusions remain negative.

14 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    Page iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Somali Political Stalemate Eases

The selection of Abdirascid Ali Scermarche as premier-designate of the newly independent Somali Republic appears to reflect tribal realignments and to have ended the political stalemate there. The National Assembly is expected to give him a vote of confidence when he presents his government within the next 30 days, as required by the constitution.

The new state is composed of the former British protectorate of Somaliland and the former Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia. Since the nation achieved independence on 1 July, there has been tension between political leaders of the two areas--including threats of secession--over issues such as distribution of the top political posts and the early integration of the British-trained security force from Somaliland into the republic's army. Disagreements have been heightened by tribal animosities.

Abdirascid, who is considered pro-Western and is reportedly a devout Moslem opposed to Communist penetration, is expected to delay any acceptance of recent Soviet offers to exchange diplomatic representatives and to furnish economic assistance. However, he is relatively inexperienced; he did not hold a ministerial position in the previous government; and his inflexibility in dealing with politicians may create early difficulties for him in view of Somalia's reputation for personal politics and former Premier of Somalia Abdullah Issa's expected efforts to regain power.

14 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT  
The Vice President  
Executive Offices of the White House  
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs  
Scientific Adviser to the President  
Director of the Budget  
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization  
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination  
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities  
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy  
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department  
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State  
The Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration  
The Counselor  
Director, International Cooperation Administration  
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense  
The Secretary of Defense  
The Deputy Secretary of Defense  
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs  
The Secretary of the Army  
The Secretary of the Navy  
The Secretary of the Air Force  
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff  
The Director, The Joint Staff  
Chief of Staff, United States Army  
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy  
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force  
Commandant, United States Marine Corps  
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations  
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff  
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army  
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy  
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force  
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe  
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce  
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation  
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission  
The Chairman

National Security Agency  
The Director

National Indications Center  
The Director
[PAGE 12]
