[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

15 September 1957

Copy No. 136

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. SHAH OF IRAN SEEKS BACKING FOR STRONG RESPONSE TO USSR

3. TOP YUGOSLAV LEADERSHIP MAY BE DIVIDED OVER RAPPROCHEMENT WITH USSR

4. INDONESIAN ROUND-TABLE CONFERENCE ENDS
(page 7)

5. GREEK FOREIGN MINISTER PROPOSES COMMONWEALTH STATUS FOR CYPRUS

7. NEW CURB SLOWS DECLINE IN INDIAN FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
2. SHAH OF IRAN SEEKS BACKING FOR STRONG
RESPONSE TO USSR

The Shah of Iran was greatly disturbed
by Soviet Marshal Vershinen's recent
threatening remarks in the Soviet press
in which Iran was included among those
countries where alleged American bases
could be knocked out by medium-range
weapons. The Shah indicated to Ambas-
sador Chapin on 12 September that he is
ready to issue a sharp rejoinder if assured "concrete military
backing" from the United States. He further indicated he might
be prepared to allow American bases in Iran if his analysis of
Soviet reasoning leads to a re-evaluation of Iranian defense
policy. The Shah said he might even request intermediate range
ballistic missile installations.

While he stated Iran would not withdraw from
the Baghdad pact if increased American military aid were not
forthcoming, the Shah said he would be forced to re-deploy Iran-
ian military forces on the basis of Iran's own defense interests.

The Shah probably is genuinely concerned
over Soviet intentions regarding Iran, but is also trying to ex-
ploit the tension in the Middle East to obtain substantially in-
creased American military aid.

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5
[PAGE 07]
3. TOP YUGOSLAV LEADERSHIP MAY BE DIVIDED OVER
RAPPROCHEMENT WITH USSR

the Yugoslav
Communist party is moving toward a
crisis over the extent and direction of improvement in Yugo-
slav-Soviet relations. even prior to the
Hungarian revolution, Vice President Kardelj, backed by
the Slovene and part of the Croat central committees, was
opposed to the extent of rapprochement.

Comment
Kardelj, the party's leading theoretician,
has been Yugoslavia's most outspoken critic
of the Kremlin and may be more suspicious of the present
Soviet leaders and their objectives than Tito. Differences
among Yugoslav leaders over the long-term effects of a grow-
ing rapprochement between Belgrade and Moscow would ex-
plain the recent postponement of the Yugoslav's seventh party
congress from November to next April.

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6
[PAGE 08]
4. INDONESIAN ROUND-TABLE CONFERENCE ENDS

The Indonesian national round-table con-
ference concluded on 15 September and
appears to have succeeded in arresting at
least temporarily the trend toward national
fragmentation. The final resolution ap-
proved the recommendations formulated
by the various subcommittees, welcomed
the Sukarno-Hatta statement of willingness
to cooperate, and stated that "normal re-
lations between the central government and
the regions have been restored on the basis of the constitution
and existing law, as is appropriate in a constitutional state."

Premier Djuanda announced that the confer-
ence's decisions would become the "guiding principles" for the
government. He also stated that a joint committee representing
both the government and the regions would be established to deal
with all future problems.

The measure of the conference's success re-
mains to be determined. It is still by no means certain that
Djakarta will be able, even if willing, to meet the financial and
political demands of the regions. In addition, there are no indi-
cations of progress toward meeting regional demands for the re-
moval of Chief of Staff Nasution and for the reduction of Commu-
nist power and influence.

All available information strongly suggests,
moreover, that Sukarno and Hatta are as far apart as ever despite
their platitudinous statement agreeing to cooperate. Although
the conference has made Sukarno
aware of the magnitude of regional discontent, there is little reason
to believe he is prepared to make any significant concessions on
such demands of Hatta and the regional leaders as revising his con-
cept of "guided democracy," repudiating his Communist support,
or giving Hatta a position of real leadership in the government.

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7
[PAGE 09]
5. GREEK FOREIGN MINISTER PROPOSES COMMONWEALTH
STATUS FOR CYPRUS

Greek Foreign Minister Averoff suggested
to NATO Secretary General Spaak on 11 Sep-
tember as a possible solution of the Cyprus
dispute that the island become an independent
member of the British Commonwealth for 20 years, after which
time its status might be reconsidered. This plan has some chance
of being accepted, although the Turks would probably resist it as
merely a first step toward enosis. Athens may be proposing this
solution to avoid a UN resolution that might preclude eventual
union of the island with Greece.

Athens now feels the Cyprus dispute has
weakened the eastern flank of NATO's defenses and sees the
need of improving relations with Britain and Turkey. The Greek
government may also fear an adverse effect on its domestic sup-
port unless some progress is made toward a settlement of the
Cyprus dilemma during the forthcoming session of the UN Gen-
eral Assembly.

Implementation of the commonwealth proposal
would offer a chance for passions to cool, permit British reten-
tion of base rights, and allow the British to keep the pro-Commu-
nist elements on the island under control.

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
7. NEW CURB SLOWS DECLINE IN INDIAN FOREIGN
EXCHANGE RESERVES

The latest figures of the Reserve Bank
of India suggest that the measures
adopted by the Indian government to
halt the decline of its foreign exchange
reserves are beginning to take effect. These reserves,
which declined by approximately $18,000,000 a week from
the beginning of the current fiscal year in April to mid-
August, declined by an average of only $8,225,000 a week
during the past four weeks, and now stand at the equiva-
lent of $792,500,000.

Beginning late in 1956, the Indian govern-
ment adopted a policy of placing increasing restrictions on
nonessential foreign exchange expenditures which culminated
in a complete ban on the licensing of consumer goods imports
during the third quarter of 1957. While the large backlog of
such goods already contracted for prevented these measures
from taking immediate effect, they should be able to hold the
rate of decline near that of the past four weeks for the next
few months.

This slowdown in the rate of decline will,
if continued, enable the government to postpone until early
1958 asking parliament to lower the required reserve level be-
low $630,000,000. India, however, will still seek large-scale
foreign loans for the estimated $1,billion it needs for essen-
tial imports to fulfill the hard core of the Second Five-Year
Plan (1956-61).

15 Sept 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 10
