De Gaulle's Referendum Set for Early January

A French Foreign Ministry official told the US Embassy in Paris on 17 November that the referendum on De Gaulle's plan to establish separate and provisional government institutions for Algeria will take place early in January. The director of the French Information Service in Algiers stated the same day that a minimum of six weeks must elapse between the actual announcement of a referendum and the day of voting. According to the constitution, the referendum must be called while parliament is in session; the current session ends on 16 December. An announcement therefore is probably imminent, although as of 17 November the text of the referendum proposals was reportedly not ready.

De Gaulle's rapid moves toward a separate Algerian administration have provoked sharp hostility from the proponents of a French Algeria as well as criticism from the left and center for his apparent bypassing of the Algerian rebels. A spokesman for the French Algeria Front says his organization will use illegal means if necessary to oppose the referendum. Security forces in Algeria are being augmented, and French officials there are trying to convince the embittered European settlers that any change in Algerian institutions is provisional. They insist that the future status of Algeria will be decided not by the January voting but by a later referendum on "self-determination." De Gaulle's present moves apparently do not include negotiations with the Algerian rebels, and French officials have stressed that the army will remain in Algeria pending self-determination. De Gaulle's aim is to drive a wedge between the rebellious settlers and the army.

The current trial of the January insurrectionists and the second attempt by opponents of the government to pass a censure motion on the nuclear striking force bill will provide a complex of issues around which the opposition to De Gaulle can rally. The censure motion, which is expected to come to a vote on 22 November, will afford rightists another opportunity to join forces with elements opposed to De Gaulle on other issues. De Gaulle has threatened to dissolve the National Assembly in the event the bill is defeated.
