[PAGE 01]
18 April 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

USSR/Cuba: A Soviet government statement on 18 April said that continuation of the invasion of Cuba "may have the gravest consequences for world peace." The statement declared that the USSR "reserves the right to take all measures, with all states, to render the necessary assistance to the Republic of Cuba if the armed interference in the affairs of the Cuban peoples is not stopped." The Soviet government expressed the hope that the US government would understand that the invasion of Cuba could "endanger the peaceful life of the population of the United States itself." The statement demanded immediate consideration of the Cuban situation by the UN General Assembly.

[PAGE 04]
18 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Angola: American consul sees possibility of "chaos worse than Belgian Congo." (Page iii)

4. Communist China: Peiping may increase trade with Japan. (Page iii)

5. India: Differences among Communist leaders remain following 7-16 April party congress. (Page iii)

6. Israel: Arabs object to military parade in Jerusalem. (Page iv)

[PAGE 05]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Angola: The American consul in Luanda reports that rebel terrorism and governmental counteraction have resulted in the death of hundreds of whites and thousands of Africans in the past month. He feels that despite Portugal's determination to restore order, it will be impossible to return to the status quo ante. He believes that Angolan Africans now would not be satisfied even with drastic reforms and that there is a possibility of a complete breakdown of law and order, leading ultimately to "chaos worse than the Belgian Congo."

Communist China - Japan: There are signs of a thaw in Sino-Japanese economic relations, obstructed since 1958 by Peiping's strict insistence upon prior political concessions from Japan. Actuated by a combination of economic difficulties at home and trade problems with the rest of the bloc, the authorities in Peiping now appear prepared to open the way for some recovery in Sino-Japanese trade, which dropped from $140,000,000 in 1957 to $23,000,000 in 1960. Publicly, however, Peiping still insists that any "large-scale" trade depends on Tokyo's meeting three conditions--that Japan stop being "hostile" toward Communist China, stop associating itself with the promotion of a "two Chinas scheme," and stop obstructing the normalization of relations between the Japanese and China.

India: Indian Communist leaders made little progress in mending their differences during the party's congress from 7 to 16 April. Preliminary reports indicate that the congress adopted a moderate compromise resolution on the "present political situation" after postponing once again a decision on the party's future tactical "program"--a move reportedly recommended by top Soviet representative M. A. Suslov. Both actions constituted a setback for the extremist faction and indicate that Indian Communists will continue to be guided by the "peaceful, parliamentary" policy adopted in 1958. The moderate rightist group consolidated its control by re-electing General Secretary Ajoy Ghosh despite his poor health.

18 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Israel-Jordan: Israel has refused to abandon its plans to hold the state's 13th anniversary military parade in Jerusalem on 20 April despite a ruling by the UN Security Council that the parade, and a rehearsal that took place on 17 March, are in violation of the 1949 Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement. The Israelis have changed the intended route of the parade in order to avoid approaching the armistice line which bisects the city, but they remain adamant about including tanks and other heavy equipment in the procession contrary to armistice restrictions. The Israelis have consistently refused to accept the UN's authority on their side of the Israeli-Arab armistice lines. The parade plans have again fanned Arab--particularly Jordanian--resentment toward Israel.

18 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 08]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Communist China Encourages Some Increase in Sino-Japanese Trade

Taking the initiative in recent weeks, Peiping has offered Japan 60,000 tons of coking coal highly desired by the Japanese steel industry. For the first time since 1958 it has invited Japanese firms to send representatives to the annual spring trade fair in Canton. It has increased to over 70 the number of Japanese firms which are designated as "friendly" by the Chinese Communists and with which they will therefore do business. This is more than quadruple the number designated at the first of the year. In response to these moves, the Japanese have eliminated the requirement that this trade be conducted on a straight barter basis and eased clearing account procedures.

Conciliatory Chinese moves have been accompanied by continued reminders of the need for some initiative from Japan toward a political accommodation. Peiping hopes the bait of substantial trade will keep alive pressure in Japan on the Ikeda government to meet the Chinese conditions.

Within Japan, press and business circles have welcomed the moves by both governments and have renewed suggestions for a government-to-government trade agreement--which Peiping says can be signed only if Tokyo meets its political demands. Skepticism about Peiping's intentions and tactics remains. Japanese business elements recognize that the government is not likely to make any move toward Communist China until after the prime minister's visit to the United States in June.

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]
Indian Communist Party Congress Fails to Repair Rift

The main stumbling block to agreement on the CPI's future tactics continued to be the degree of support which Indian Communists should give Prime Minister Nehru and certain "progressive" policies of his Congress party government. Several days of bitter debate on this basic issue failed to resolve the split between the moderates, who line up with Moscow in favor of exploiting Nehru's prestige domestically and internationally, and the leftist extremists, who echo Peiping's line that Nehru has sold out to the "reactionaries" and must be actively opposed.

The question of the party's long-range program was turned over to the newly elected National Council, in effect shelving the problem for the time being. Press reports indicate that the council comprises 56 "right-wing" representatives, 36 "leftists," and 18 who take a middle-of-the-road position.

The congress was confronted with three draft resolutions on the current political situation, reflecting the views of the rival factions. Prolonged discussion and maneuvering produced a compromise in which the moderate-backed "official" draft, drawn up during the executive meetings in February, was accepted with some concessions in emphasis to the left-wing dissidents. The amended resolution probably will reiterate much of the double talk characteristic of the February declaration.

A striking omission in the discussions and statements of the congress was any reference to the Sino-Indian border dispute, suggesting that antagonism between the "nationalist" and pro-Chinese "internationalist" factions is still too strong to be smoothed over in a compromise resolution. In addition, Soviet delegate Suslov reportedly had exerted pressure to prevent discussion of this issue.

While the party's official tactics for the national elections next February remain to be worked out, Ajoy Ghosh's closing address to the conference on 16 April indicates the line the CPI is likely to take under moderate leadership. Ghosh called on

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 11]
"progressive forces" in all parties, including the ruling Congress party, to form a common front to work for the progress of India. A report issued by the party secretariat, while promising a "big political battle" against the government's "anti-people" policies, also pointed out that most of the CPI's "potential allies" were inside the Congress party and should be drawn into "mass action."

Suslov's presence and his apparent role in the decisions of the congress point up Moscow's continued predominant influence in Indian Communist party affairs. Chinese suspicions of the Soviet Union's "soft" policy in regard to countries such as India may well be re-fired by the moderation of the program which was adopted at a congress which Moscow apparently went to some lengths to control. In any event, the results of the congress will hardly be looked upon with favor in Peiping.

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 12]
Israeli Military Parade in Jerusalem

The Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement signed on 3 April 1949 specifically excluded armored vehicles from a ten-kilometer (6.2 miles) strip on either side of the armistice demarcation line--which includes the divided city of Jerusalem. The Israelis have announced that their parade will include over 300 pieces of ordnance, headed by 14 recently delivered British Centurion tanks and including 18 Sherman tanks, 26 French AMX light tanks, heavy and light artillery including French SS-10 guided antitank missiles, and American 106-mm. jeep-mounted recoilless guns. Some of these units are already in Jerusalem. The column also will include motorized infantry and a marching contingent of 4,000 men and women from the Israeli armed services. There will be no air force overflights because of the closeness of the border.

In recent years Israel has held its anniversary parade alternately in Tel Aviv, Haifa, and Jerusalem on the Jewish calendar date which corresponds to 14 May 1948, when Israel attained its independence. This year the Israelis attempted to forestall the furor that arose in connection with the 1958 parade in Jerusalem by apprising the UN Truce Supervision Organization, and through it the Jordanians, of their plans, stressing that the heavy equipment to be shown is only for ceremonial purposes. The Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) subsequently condemned the Israelis for using tanks and heavy artillery in the 17 March rehearsal.

A Baghdad newspaper reported on 14 April that the Arab states might hold a joint military parade in the Arab sector of Jerusalem, with Jordan providing the major force and smaller contingents representing other Arab armies. The Jordanian foreign minister has since said that his government has definitely decided not to hold a "retaliatory" parade. However, he pointed out that failure to do anything would be interpreted both in Jordan and elsewhere in the Arab world either as weakness or as yielding to pressure from the United States.

On 15 April Jordan submitted a new complaint to the MAC regarding the Israeli heavy equipment which already is in

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 13]
Jerusalem for the parade. The MAC indicated it would first consider a prior Israeli complaint on alleged Jordanian violations. The Israeli press, meanwhile, has been criticizing the UN Truce Supervision Organization for making an "issue" of the parade. A Foreign Ministry spokesman has said publicly that Israel will cancel its parade if Jordan will implement those clauses of the armistice agreement dealing with free Israeli access to the Wailing Wall and the Mount Scopus enclave.

The UN partition of Palestine on 29 November 1947 provided for putting the city of Jerusalem and its environs under direct international administration. The ensuing Arab-Israeli war prevented the carrying out of this resolution, but the General Assembly reaffirmed its recommendation on 9 December 1949. In accordance with these acts, the United States does not recognize Israel's claim to Jerusalem as the Israeli capital.

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8

[PAGE 14]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 16]
TOP SECRET
