[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
3 October 1952
Copy No. 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
EASTERN EUROPE
3. Plan to assassinate Tito while in England reported (page 4).
WESTERN EUROPE
4. Unusual number of MIG-15 crates observed at Austrian airfield (page 4).
5. Policy differences seen developing among Western powers on Austrian treaty (page 5).
6. New nationalistic bloc in French National Assembly reported (page 6).
LATIN AMERICA
7. Argentine student strike may be exploited by army (page 6).
8. New disturbances break out in Venezuela (page 7).
****
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE
3. Plan to assassinate Tito while in England reported:
A Soviet-inspired attempt to assassinate Marshal Tito allegedly will be made by a Croat group during his forthcoming visit to England.
Comment: This report has no confirmation. There is no doubt, however, that Croatian exiles are foremost among the many who would be involved in an assassination attempt. Tito accepted the British invitation eagerly, but British Foreign Secretary Eden has announced that the visit will not take place until after the coronation of Queen Elizabeth next June.

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Unusual number of MIG-15 crates observed at Austrian airfield:
On 24 September, 40 MIG-15's were observed in various stages of assembly at Wiener Neustadt airfield south of Vienna in the Soviet Zone of Austria. In addition possibly as many as 100 MIG-15 shipping crates were noted dispersed about the field.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The presence of this unusually large number of aircraft and crates could indicate that additional units are in the process of being activated.
This concentration of equipment may also indicate that Wiener Neustadt airfield is being used as a center for the collection and dispersal of Soviet aircraft in Austria.

5. Policy differences seen developing among Western powers on Austrian treaty:
The American Ambassador in Vienna reports that Foreign Minister Gruber, the French, and to a lesser extent the British representative, are prepared to accept the old draft treaty for Austria on the assumption that the United States will "shoulder the financial burden."
While all participants agree that the abbreviated treaty has "pushed the Russians toward acceptance of the longer draft," Foreign Minister Gruber and the French are anxious for a conference in which the Russians could state their terms.
Comment: Under the terms of the original draft treaty, the Russians would relinquish claims to German assets in eastern Austria in return for Austrian payment of $150,000,000. The British and French Governments insisted at the time the abbreviated draft was introduced that it should not preclude a return to the old draft. The Austrian Foreign Ministry also appears to be in process of amending its earlier views that concessions previously made to the Soviet Union are no longer acceptable.

[PAGE 06]
6. New nationalistic bloc in French National Assembly reported:
The American Consul in Strasbourg reports that Gilbert Grandval, the French Ambassador to the Saar, is believed to have ambitions of displacing De Gaulle in a future organization of members of the wartime resistance. Grandval reportedly has strong connections in De Gaulle's Rally of the French People and is associated with Popular Republican Georges Bidault and Socialist Robert Lacoste in leading a new bloc which now controls 140 deputies in the National Assembly.
The strategy of this bloc reportedly is to promote a multipartisan movement against Premier Pinay in two or three months.
Comment: Although no other reports of such a bloc have been received, the information is consistent with the known aspirations of many centrist and leftist deputies reacting against the return to power of many of France's prewar statesmen. These deputies can be expected to make a strong bid this fall to overthrow Pinay, by exploiting the opposition to EDC as well as the government's price and budgetary policies.

LATIN AMERICA
7. Argentine student strike may be exploited by army:
A strike of 1200 Buenos Aires engineering students which began on 30 September reportedly is spreading to other university schools in the cities of Buenos Aires, Eva Peron, Cordoba, and Rosario.

[PAGE 07]
Some observers think that if the unrest should spread, the army, which is closely observing student moves, may use the student strikes as a springboard for a "now-or-never jump."
Comment: Peron's reported reneging on a promise to reestablish the prestige of the armed forces has increased the volume of rumors concerning a possible revolt, but no concrete plans or leaders have been reported. The government is maintaining strict security measures.

8. New disturbances break out in Venezuela:
disorders which broke out at an army barracks in Maturin, near the eastern oilfields, on 1 October were quickly "smothered," apparently by federal police.
On the same date some workers at a nearby oilfield failed to report for work, but no connection is known to exist between this and the military uprising. There is some fear of a general strike, although conditions at other eastern oilfields are normal.
Comment: Further outbreaks can be expected between now and the 30 November constituent elections. Embassy interviews last week with prominent officials and private citizens suggest that junior military officers and aroused civilians, rather than the outlawed Democratic Action Party alone, may now be attempting to force changes in government policy or in the government itself.
