Turkish and Soviet Premiers to Exchange Visits

Simultaneous announcements in Ankara and Moscow on 12 April that Premier Menderes would visit Moscow in July and Premier Khrushchev would make a return visit to Turkey at a later date mark the successful conclusion of persistent Soviet attempts since early 1960 for a high-level exchange of visits. Turkish officials had been reluctant to accept the Soviet suggestion, fearing its effect on some of Turkey's allies—particularly Iran. There have been indications for some time, however, that officials in Ankara have resented what they consider criticism from some NATO allies that Turkey has been provocative toward the USSR in an era marked by growing contacts between East and West. The proposed exchange is regarded as an attempt by Turkey to keep pace with other Western states in their efforts to bring about some relaxation of tensions. Turkish officials have stressed, however, that the decision to accept the Soviet proposal does not represent any change in Ankara's firm anti-Communist foreign policy and that no significant results are anticipated as a result of the visits.

Reaction to the announcement within Turkey is expected to be generally favorable, as the exchange will tend to be interpreted as recognition of Turkey's international standing. Ingrained distrust of the USSR among the Turkish people, combined with political maneuvering in preparation for possible elections later this year, however, may arouse some internal criticism of the move.

Officials in Greece have already indicated fear that the announcement will cause difficulties for the Karamanlis government, which has consistently refused similar Soviet requests for a high-level exchange of visits. Opposition parties within Greece and bloc representatives in Athens can be expected to exploit Turkey's acceptance of the proposed visits in urging improved relations between Greece and the Soviet bloc. Similarly, Iran, which has had severely strained relations with the USSR during the past year, will be under increased pressure to improve relations with Moscow.
