integration in any field unless the US constantly participated as the "honest broker." The Dutch Minister remains "very skeptical" of the Army's success and the sincerity of present German cooperation.

Comment: The views of the Italian representative go beyond those expressed to date by the Italian Government. The Netherlands is not represented at the European Army Conference, and its opposition stems from dislike and distrust of French leadership on the continent and, to a lesser extent, the fear of a rebirth of German power.

The French have recently shown new enthusiasm for their original proposal for a European Army, which was designed to avoid the re-establishment of a German national army and particularly of the German General Staff. The Germans appear willing to accept the European Army idea, once German conditions -- chiefly in regard to size of units -- are met. The Italians support the French proposal in principle, only if the implementation of the European force does not delay Western defense.

The UK remains cool to the European Army concept, but probably will accept a compromise of the proposals recently made at the Petersburg and Paris talks. In the event of UK approval and adherence to the concept of a European Army, as well as more evident US interest to counterbalance France and Germany, the Dutch will be more ready to participate in the discussions for organizing the Army.

General Eisenhower believes that the solution of the problem of European defense is impossible until the German problem is solved, and states that the time has come to press for immediate action.

3. Opposition to admission of Greece and Turkey in NATO continues:

In the NATO deputies' discussion of 16 July, the Netherlands and Portugal supported the Norwegian position against the admission of Greece and Turkey to NATO. The Netherlands pointed out that to admit Greece and Turkey would be to lose the homogeneity of the present regional group in NATO and to change it into a purely military alliance.
