[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
8 November 1952
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Control of new Presidium by former Politburo members indicated (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Opposition party leaders offer to support Magsaysay for Philippine presidency (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
4. Ratification of Sino-Ceylonese trade agreement is delayed (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6. Arab League postpones decision to break Arab-German commercial relations (page 5).

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Control of new Presidium by former Politburo members indicated:

Portraits of the former Politburo members who are now in the Presidium are decorating Moscow buildings in honor of the 35th Anniversary of the October revolution. There are no pictures of other members of the new Presidium, nor of A. A. Andreyev, Politburo member who was not elected to the Presidium, and A. N. Kosygin, former full member of the Politburo who was reduced to candidate in the Presidium.

Comment: The display this year of pictures of former Politburo members supports the belief that the responsibility for policy decisions will continue to rest on the "Politburo" within the framework of the new Presidium.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Opposition party leaders offer to support Magsaysay for Philippine presidency:

Philippine Defense Secretary Magsaysay is reliably reported to have met with leading members of the opposition Nacionalista Party who have promised to support him should he agree to seek the presidency on their ticket.

The American Embassy in Manila observes that if Magsaysay should agree, President Quirino would almost certainly learn of it and dismiss him from the cabinet. His career would then be at the mercy of the opposition party leaders, who could easily repudiate any agreement they had made.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Ratification of Sino-Ceylonese trade agreement is delayed:

Ceylonese cabinet action on ratification of the five-year rice-rubber trade agreement with China is likely to be deferred until after the Commonwealth Prime Ministers meeting which begins in London in late November, according to Ceylonese officials.

Five of the 14 cabinet ministers now oppose ratification and the Prime Minister is wavering. The American Embassy in Colombo reports, however, that the cabinet members who oppose ratification feel they could not explain to the public any rejection of the agreement.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
Comment: The weight of evidence still favors eventual ratification. Commonwealth nations are unlikely to apply pressure on Ceylon during the London meeting, where the matter probably will not officially arise.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Arab League postpones decision to break Arab-German commercial relations:

The Arab League has postponed a decision to break off commercial relations with Bonn over the Israeli-German reparations agreement and has turned the question over to a sub-committee.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
General Nagib told Ambassador Caffery that the majority of League delegates had asked for a cessation of commercial relations with West Germany but that he had suggested postponing a decision until he could consult his ministers of finance and commerce. He added that he is in a "difficult position" and hopes avoid any drastic action.

Comment: Nagib's "difficult position" probably stems from the fact that his present moderation contrasts sharply with his original summoning of the Arab League to discuss a rupture of Arab-West German relations.

The League has apparently been sobered by the financial and commercial consequences of an Arab-German rupture and thus may avoid a break in relations.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
