[PAGE 01]
SEC I INIFCFRMATION
8 November 1952
Copy No. 3-5<¢>
CURB ENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
S U M M A R Y

SOVIET UNION
Control of new Presidium by former Politburo members indicated
(page 3)-

FAR EAST
More IL-28 jet bombers arrive in Manchuria (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
Opposition party leaders offer to support Magsaysay for Philippine
presidency (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
Ratification of Sino-Ceylonese trade agreement is delayed (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
Arab League postpones decision to break Arab-German commercial
relations (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Control of new Presidium by former Politburo members indicated:
Portraits of the former Politburo members who are now in the Presidium are decorating
Moscow buildings in honor of the 35th
Anniversary of the October revolution.
There are no pictures of other members of the new Presidium, nor
of A. A. Andreyev, Politburo member who was not elected to the
Presidium, and A. N. Kosygin, former full member of the Politburo
who was reduced to candidate in the Presidium.

Comment: The display this year of pictures
of former Politburo members supports the belief that the responsibility
for policy decisions will continue to rest on the "Politburo" within the
framework of the new Presidium.

FAR EAST

2. More IL-28 jet bombers arrive in Manchuria:
Twelve Soviet IL-28 twin-jet bombers arrived at Tsitsihar in Manchuria on 7
November. These aircraft probably
flew from Chita as did the 19 IL-28's
which arrived at Manchurian airfields
during the past two weeks.

Comment: The total of 31 planes approximates the authorized strength of a Chinese light bomber regiment.
The return of accompanying transports to Chita, apparently shuttling
pilots subsequent to each previous group flight to Manchuria, suggests
that this is a ferrying operation.
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Opposition party leaders offer to support Magsaysay for Philippine
presidency:
Philippine Defense Secretary Magsaysay
is reliably reported to have met with leading
members of the opposition Nacionalista Party
who have promised to support him should
he agree to seek the presidency on their ticket.

The American Embassy in Manila observes
that if Magsaysay should agree, President Quirino would almost
certainly learn of it and dismiss him from the cabinet. His career
would then be at the mercy of the opposition party leaders, who could
easily repudiate any agreement they had made.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Ratification of Sino-Ceylonese trade agreement is delayed:
Ceylonese cabinet action on ratification of
the five-year rice-rubber trade agreement
with China is likely to be deferred until
after the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
meeting which begins in London in late November, according to
Ceylonese officials.

Five of the 14 cabinet ministers now oppose
ratification and the Prime Minister is wavering. The American
Embassy in Colombo reports, however, that the cabinet members
who oppose ratification feel they could not explain to the public any
rejection of the agreement.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: The weight of evidence still
favors eventual ratification. Commonwealth nations are unlikely to
apply pressure on Ceylon during the London meeting, where the matter
probably will not officially arise.

NEAR EAST-AFRICA

5. American promoters renew letter of credit for purchase of Iranian oil:

6. Arab League postpones decision to break Arab-German commercial
relations:
The Arab League has postponed a decision
to break off commercial relations with
Bonn over the Israeli-German reparations
agreement and has turned the question over
to a sub-committee.
[PAGE 06]
General Nagib told Ambassador Caffery
that the majority of League delegates had asked for a cessation of
commercial relations with West Germany but that he had suggested
postponing a decision until he could consult his ministers of finance
and commerce. He added that he is in a "difficult position" and
hopes to avoid any drastic action.

Comment: Nagib's "difficult position"
probably stems from the fact that his present moderation contrasts
sharply with his original summoning of the Arab League to discuss a
rupture of Arab-West German relations.

The League has apparently been sobered
by the financial and commercial consequences of an Arab-German
rupture and thus may avoid a break in relations.
[PAGE 07]
LATIN AMERICA
