[PAGE 01]
12 August 1951
Copy No. 6/-4 '? 
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. General Eisenhower would serve as "European Defense Minister"
to speed integration (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on a possible crisis in the Indian Congress Party
(page 5).
5. Ceylon's government fears internal repercussions over rubber
shipments to China (page 6).

NEAR EAST
6. Arab states continue intrigue against integrity of Jordan (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. French pose condition to acceptance of Greece and Turkey in NATO
(page 8).
10. Need for Berlin airlift appears to have been exaggerated (page 9).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. General Eisenhower would serve as "European Defense Minister"
to speed integration:

US Minister Julius Holmes in London
reports a conversation with General
Eisenhower as follows:

"He said that no time should be lost in
concluding arrangements which would allow a start on German
forces. He felt that the European army presented the only feasible
means of bringing them into Western defense. He believes that
the greatest element of delay will be the agreements and arrange-
ments necessary for a European Defense Minister to function. He
is prepared, if he can get satisfactory commitments from the five
governments involved, principally France and Germany, to under-
take on a temporary basis the functions of European Defense Minister
in order to get the practical businesss of the recruiting, training
and formation of the force started.

"He made it clear that he would do
this on a personal basis and not as Supreme Allied Commander
Europe and that it would naturally have to be for a limited period."

Comment: The concept of a "European
Defense Minister," member of no government, arose during the
Paris talks on creation of a European army.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Comment on a possible crisis in the Indian Congress Party:

Prime Minister Nehru's letter to the
President of the Indian Congress Party, requesting his relief
from membership in two top policy-making committees of the
Congress Party, may reflect Nehru's desire to emphasize for-
mally that he is above party politics.

On the other hand, Nehru has been
increasingly subjected to dictation from Congress President
Tandon and the rightist party majority since September 1950.
His position may now have become so intolerable that he has
taken the first step toward eventual resignation from the party.
In any case, it appears that Nehru is about to lose whatever
power he has held in the Congress Party leadership.

Should Nehru resign, he may be
expected to assume the leadership of a new "Peasants, Workers,
Peoples Party" movement, which has been gaining strength in
India since the fall of 1950. Nehru's great popular appeal should
give this movement a fighting chance to defeat the Congress Party
in the forthcoming national elections.

Faced with such a possibility, the
rightist Congress group, which now controls the Government
of India, may move to prevent the holding of national elections
in January 1952. These elections have already been postponed
twice, and further delay would raise an immediate outcry from
all non-Congress groups. Nevertheless, the Congress rightists,
in cooperation with militantly nationalist organizations, such as
the Hindu Mahasabha, probably could assume dictatorial powers
and continue to rule with police and military support.

[PAGE 06]
5. Ceylon's government fears internal repercussions over rubber
shipments to China:

The Prime Minister of Ceylon has told
US Embassy officials that his United
National Party, which controls the
present government, cannot risk
"political suicide" by preventing shipments of rubber from Ceylon
to China. He has stated repeatedly that increasingly successful
Communist efforts to develop trade in rubber with Ceylon are
unfortunate, but nothing now can be done about it. The impli-
cation is that Ceylon will not certify under the Kem amendment nor
request that an exception be made in its case, despite the fore-
knowledge that this failure might prejudice the granting of Point
IV and other assistance.

Comment: There is a possibility that
the United National Party would lose control of the government
if it reversed its widely publicized policy of permitting rubber
exports to all destinations. There is also a possibility, however,
that by conveying the impression that they cannot reverse this
stand, the Ceylonese are hoping to obtain a US contract for a
large part of Ceylon's annual rubber output.

NEAR EAST

6. Arab states continue intrigue against integrity of Jordan:

The Iraqi Minister is flagrantly con-
tinuing the campaign for a union of
Jordan and Iraq which was renewed
by the Iraqi Prime Minister and the
Regent at the time of Abdullah's funeral. It is widely rumored
that the Egyptian Legation is agitating for the independence of
the western part of Jordan (formerly Arab Palestine) under a
mandate of the Arab League. The Saudi Arabian Legation is
believed to favor partitioning the country in cooperation with Syria.

[PAGE 07]
The US Minister feels that although
there is no evidence of Jordanian acceptance of these maneuvers,
they cannot but disturb the internal political situation and the pre-
carious equilibrium that has existed in the Near East since 1948.

Comment: The desires of Iraq in this matter
are well known. Egypt, which continues to be interested in the Arab
Palestine Government of the former Mufti would presumably wish to
create an independent Arab Palestine.

The possible role of Ibn Saud is less
clear. Recently, he stated in a note to the US Government that "any
attempt to change the present situation in the Middle East will not
be agreeable to him" and that it is "unjust" to deprive Abdullah's
sons of their rights.

[PAGE 08]
WESTERN EUROPE

9. French pose condition to acceptance of Greece and Turkey in NATO:

France will oppose full NATO membership
for Greece and Turkey unless they are
directly subordinated to the three-power
NATO Standing Group, French official in London. The French reject the idea of a separate
command body composed of the present Standing Group members
and Turkey.

The US Nato Deputy suspects that the
French have long wanted to extend the Standing Group's authority
beyond the NATO area. In his view, the French fear that a further
diminution of France's authority within the Standing Group would
relegate France to a minor European role while UK and US interests
would be predominant in the Middle Eastern theater as well as in
Europe.

[PAGE 09]
Comment: France has consistently pushed the alternate idea of a regional Mediterranean pact
embracing Greece and Turkey. The French have been reluctant
to include Greece and Turkey in NATO, partly because they felt
that growing Western European integration would be hindered, but
even more because they have been increasingly jealous of American
and British influence in the Eastern Mediterranean.

The three-power Standing Group is the
executive arm of the NATO military committee, and as such has
direct control of all NATO forces. The French fear that any change
which detracted from the authority of the Standing Group might
prejudice their efforts to obtain a greater voice in Eastern Mediter-
ranean matters.

10. Need for Berlin airlift appears to have been exaggerated:

In a sharply worded letter to Mayor
Reuter, the Allied Commandants
protest that, although they acceded to
West Berlin's appeal for aircraft to
move goods held up by new Soviet export restrictions, it now appears
that the volume of the backlogged shipments has been overestimated
and the need for an airlift exaggerated.

The airlift has been arranged on the
basis of information that 10,000 to 12,000 tons of goods were back-
logged. However, in a 3 August meeting between Allied and West
Berlin authorities to consider expanding the airlift capacity, it
developed that the West Berlin Senate was having difficulty finding
sufficient backlogged cargo to fill the limited number of aircraft
being used, and that in fact only 300 tons were available for loading
within the next three days.
