[PAGE 01]
2 December 1959
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
2 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev's speech in Hungary. (1)
Mao may be holding another meeting of top party leaders. (2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iranian ambassador requests meeting with Khrushchev to urge reconsideration of Tehran's proposal to ban missile bases. (3)
Pakistani President Ayub wants frequent meetings of Moslem CENTO members. (4)
India strengthening its northern frontier. (5)

III. THE WEST
UK to lift ban on Communist-front party on Cyprus. (6)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
2 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: In his speech to the Hungarian party congress on 1 December, Khrushchev maintained the moderate and flexible line which has characterized his foreign policy pronouncements since his visit to the US. He denied "fabrications" in the Western press that the USSR no longer desires an early summit meeting. He repeated the warning contained in the TASS statement of 18 November that Moscow will sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany if the West refuses to conclude a treaty with both German states, but avoided any suggestion that such unilateral action is imminent. This speech, like his last two foreign policy speeches, contained evidence that Khrushchev is concerned over Peiping's challenge to Moscow's ideological primacy and hegemony in the Communist world and the Chinese Communists' apparent misgivings regarding his peaceful coexistence line.
(Page 1)

Communist China: The absence from Peiping of several key officials suggests that a meeting of top party leaders is in progress or may be imminent. Mao Tse-tung and his first deputy, Liu Shao-chi, have been away from the capital since late October and may have been joined in November by Premier Chou En-lai and other politburo members. The US Consulate General in Hong Kong believes that plans for a new "leap forward" in 1960 and the disposition of "rightist" critics of the regime would be likely topics for discussion.
(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran-USSR: The Iranian ambassador in Moscow has requested another meeting with Khrushchev "as soon as possible"
[PAGE 05]
to ask reconsideration of Tehran's proposal on foreign missile bases in Iran. He hopes to persuade the Soviet premier to accept Tehran's offer which would keep foreign medium- and long-range missile bases off Iranian soil. The Soviet draft by contrast provides for the prohibition of all foreign military bases. The ambassador also requested instructions from Tehran in anticipation of a Soviet demand that "short-range missiles" be included. Moscow has consistently taken the position that any protocol with Iran should specifically provide for the exclusion of all foreign military bases, a demand that the Shah has repeatedly rejected.

Pakistan-CENTO: Pakistani President Ayub apparently intends to broaden the range of relationships between the regional members of CENTO. According to a Pakistani official, Ayub, as a result of his talks with the Shah and Turkish Prime Minister Menderes in mid-November, wants a meeting of Moslem CENTO members every three months, thus excluding Britain and US observers. The next meeting is scheduled for February, in Pakistan.
(Page 4)

India: Indian communications of 19 and 20 November provide firm evidence that the government is strengthening its northern frontier. Border outposts in the northeastern frontier region of Assam State now number 86, including 24 new ones. Army reserves have also been increased in northern areas of West Bengal State, directly south of Sikkim.
(Page 5) (Map)

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: London's decision to lift within the week the ban against AKEL, the Communist-front party on Cyprus, enhances the prospect of a strong Communist bid for increased power

2 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's Speech in Budapest

In his speech at the Hungarian party congress on 1 December, Khrushchev reaffirmed the moderate and flexible line on negotiations and coexistence which has characterized his pronouncements on foreign policy since his visit to the United States. He denied "fabrications" in the Western press that the USSR no longer desires an early summit meeting and said the Soviet Government is ready to attend such a meeting "at a time and place that would be acceptable to all the participants."

Although Khrushchev contended there is no reason why a summit conference could not be held prior to his visit to France beginning on 15 March, he said President de Gaulle's desire to have an exchange of views with him prior to a conference is "not unreasonable." The Soviet premier's caution in avoiding criticism of De Gaulle's position on the timing of a summit meeting, coupled with other recent efforts to appear responsive to French views, reflects Moscow's hope that De Gaulle's bid to enhance France's international prestige can be exploited to divide the Western allies and weaken their position at a summit meeting.

In contrast to this generous treatment of De Gaulle, Khrushchev directed a harsh attack against Chancellor Adenauer as the "most active" opponent of an improvement in East-West relations. He repeated the warning contained in the TASS statement of 18 November that Moscow will conclude a separate peace treaty with East Germany if the West refuses to sign a treaty with both German states. However, he avoided any suggestion that such unilateral Soviet action is imminent or linked to the outcome of a summit meeting.

Khrushchev's speech, like his last two foreign policy statements on 31 October and 14 November, contained evidence
[PAGE 08]
that he is concerned over Peiping's challenge to Moscow's ideological primacy and hegemony in the Communist world and the Chinese Communists' apparent misgivings regarding his peaceful coexistence strategy. In an effort to restore bloc discipline and unity behind Moscow's lead, Khrushchev invoked the "immutable principles of proletarian internationalism" as the "irrevocable law of the international Communist movement."

He charged that the "enemy" is seeking to provoke quarrels among the socialist countries and warned that if the leaders of any bloc country become "conceited," this "can only play into the hands of the enemy." In a further typically oblique criticism of Peiping's policies, Khrushchev said, "We must not fall behind or go too far ahead; we must, figuratively speaking, synchronize our watches"--a reminder of his dictum at the Soviet 21st party congress that all socialist countries will "more or less simultaneously reach the highest phase of Communist society."

Khrushchev avoided any reference to the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Hungary, but Hungarian party chief Kadar in his speech on 30 November echoed the standard Soviet position that Soviet troops would be removed only in connection with an East-West agreement on a "mutual withdrawal of forces stationed in foreign countries."
[PAGE 09]
Chinese Leaders May Be Meeting in Secret Session

The absence from Peiping of many of Communist China's top leaders suggests that a high-level party meeting is in progress or will soon be held. Mao Tse-tung and his first deputy, Liu Shao-chi, have been away from the capital since last October, and Premier Chou En-lai and other politburo members are thought to have left Peiping in November. Mao's tours in the past often foreshadowed conclaves of regional and national leaders.

A high-level party meeting at this time would probably be concerned with an evaluation of developments following Peiping's admission of serious economic shortcomings last summer. Plans for a new "leap forward" in 1960 and the disposition of "right opportunist" critics of the regime are likely agenda topics. The absence of the foreign minister from Peiping suggests that foreign policy may also come up for consideration, e.g., Peiping's deteriorating relations with India and Indonesia, Sino-Soviet relations, and the Taiwan and Laotian situations.

The pattern of Chinese Communist conferences in recent years suggests that a national party conclave can be expected before the end of the year. The meeting may take the form of a central committee plenum, although a session of the party congress--which last met in May 1958 and is supposed to hold annual sessions--is also a possibility.
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Pakistani President Trying to Strengthen CENTO

Pakistani President Ayub, who is taking an increasingly active part in foreign affairs, is moving to strengthen the alliance between the regional members of CENTO--Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey. Furthermore, since his talk with Nehru in September, some progress has been made in settling border and financial disputes with India. Ayub is apparently motivated in part by a desire to strengthen his personal prestige and popularity.

As a result of talks with the Shah and Turkish Prime Minister Menderes in Tehran in mid-November, Ayub believes that there should be frequent high-level meetings of the regional members of CENTO, excluding Britain and US observers, according to a Pakistani Embassy official in Tehran. The next meeting is to be in February, in Pakistan.

According to the same Pakistani official, it was agreed during Ayub's visit to Tehran that Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey must continually seek to reassure Afghanistan of their friendship and their sincere desire for better relations, and that Qasim offered the only prospect for a properly oriented government in Iraq. He also said all three countries agreed that no new proposals for US aid should be broached during President Eisenhower's trip, but regional planning and a supreme command for CENTO should be brought up.
[PAGE 11]
Srinagar recognized by the U.S. Government.
Road constructed by Chinese in 1957
Boundary shown on Indian maps
(Status in dispute)
Boundary shown on recent Chinese Communist maps
Boundaries are not necessarily those recognized by the U.S. Government.

Location of last two clashes
Selected road
Selected trail

0 MILES 200

UNCLASSIFIED
[PAGE 12]
India Strengthens Border Defenses

Firm evidence on the steps being taken by the Indian Government to strengthen its northern frontier defenses.

The army operational headquarters at Jorhat in Assam State reported on 19 November that it had ordered "an increase in the average personnel strength of Indian border outposts in the three frontier divisions--Kameng, Subansiri, and Siang--from eight to twelve with immediate effect."

The deputy inspector general of West Bengal's Intelligence Bureau stated that there now are a total of 86 border outposts in the four Tibetan frontier divisions of the Northeast Frontier Agency (NEFA), including 24 new ones. The northern border of NEFA is approximately 500 miles long.

Army reserves in Kalimpong and Lebong also had been increased recently by 600 and 500 men respectively.

Defenses in northeastern India have been further strengthened by the recent transfer of an infantry division from Punjab State to Assam. This will bring ground force strength in this region to about 50,000 troops, comprising the equivalent of two army divisions and 14 battalions of local security forces. Army commands had been ordered to recall all reserves to their units gradually for training. There are about 50,000 of these reserves with 10 to 18 years of active service.
[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

Proscription of Communist-front Party on Cyprus to End

London's decision to end the state of emergency on Cyprus soon, thus removing the four-year ban on the Communist-front party AKEL, enhances the prospect of a strong bid by the party for increased power and influence. Archbishop Makarios, despite the prospect of AKEL opposition to his candidacy for the presidency in the 13 December election, has endorsed London's plan. AKEL claims 7,000 members and has many times that number under its general influence. After it failed to get a firm commitment from Makarios for seven of the 35 Greek Cypriot seats in the new Cypriot House of Representatives, it swung its support to the dissident nationalist candidate John Clerides.

Makarios has tried to promote a working relationship with AKEL in order to maintain at least the facade of Greek Cypriot unity. Formation of the basically rightist opposition party, the Democratic Union, has shattered that illusion. The opposition opened its campaign by viciously attacking the London-Zurich agreements which form the basis for the Cyprus settlement as a "victory for the Turks" and the authorization for "three armies to act as our prison wardens." Makarios, who remains confident of political victory, has the support of all influential newspapers on Cyprus except the Communist mouthpiece.

AKEL probably views the current campaign and approaching election as a prime opportunity to encourage the split in the Greek Cypriot community. The greatest threat from AKEL may not emerge until the second election, to be held within five years. By that time, as a result of Greek factionalism, AKEL may have become the strongest political force on the island.
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 15]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
