The Souvanna government and the Communist-dominated Pathet Lao issued a joint communiqué on 17 November which expressed substantial agreement on major points at issue between the sides. The two parties agreed to a cease-fire in all areas loyal to the Souvanna government and to early formation of a coalition government to include the Pathet Lao's political front, the Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS). It was agreed that the government would accept aid from Communist China and North Vietnam and send a delegation to these countries to negotiate for economic and cultural ties.

The communiqué indicates Souvanna's acceptance of the Pathet Lao's major demands in the negotiations in Vientiane which began on 11 October. His sweeping concessions appear to constitute an effort to gain assistance--in the form of bloc aid and diplomatic support--to fend off efforts to unseat him. By reason of his agreement to accept aid from them, Communist China and North Vietnam now are in a position to assist Souvanna legally in his struggle against the rightist forces of General Phoumi centered in Luang Prabang and Savannakhet.

The opening of the Laotian-Chinese border should not in itself facilitate appreciable Chinese overland logistic support to combatants in Laos. The boundary is in rugged, mountainous terrain, and only one major pack trail crosses the frontier. The main avenues of aid to Pathet Lao forces have been from North Vietnam. However, the agreement will permit Peiping, if it should so choose, to supply Souvanna and the Pathet Lao directly by air to Vientiane.

Souvanna, immediately following announcement of the accord, left Vientiane for Sam Neua, presumably for follow-up talks with his half-brother Prince Souphanouvong, chief of the NLHS.

The Souvanna-Pathet accord might finally impel the King to act. There is some possibility that Souvanna's apparent capitulation to the Pathet Lao might cause the monarch to soften his scruples against unconstitutional action sufficiently to suspend the National Assembly and form a new anti-Communist government in Luang Prabang.
