Prime Minister Bandaranaike Moves to End Ceylon's Cabinet Crisis

Prime Minister Bandaranaike on 15 May moved to end his cabinet crisis, which began on 6 May when 10 moderate ministers threatened to resign if extreme leftist Agriculture Minister Gunawardena were not fired. He announced on that date that he personally will administer the system of agricultural cooperatives and food distribution through which Gunawardena had been accused of spreading Marxism and increasing his own power. Gunawardena, who will remain in the cabinet, will deal only with matters involving agricultural production.

The moderate cabinet group, hesitant to force the fall of the government and thus precipitate new national elections, reportedly has accepted Bandaranaike's compromise proposal. Gunawardena is expected to announce on 19 May whether or not he will accept this blow to his prestige and remain in the government. Meanwhile, he apparently is attempting to put pressure on Bandaranaike by indicating the parliamentary strength he could withdraw from the government coalition.

members of Bandaranaike's Sri Lanka Freedom party who sympathize with Gunawardena contains their threat to resign if Bandaranaike stands firm in his decision.

Should Gunawardena and his followers leave the government, Bandaranaike's 56-member coalition would lose its majority in the 101-man parliament. However, Bandaranaike's prospects of replacing possible defectors with conservative opposition elements who do not wish new elections are better than Gunawardena's chances of rallying enough leftist support to bring down the government. It seems likely, therefore, that Gunawardena would prefer to retain his privileged position within the government rather than to lose virtually all his influence by resigning. Senanayake seemed agreeable to joint operations against the leftists although he felt it premature to discuss a specific election agreement.

While Governor General Goonetilleke has indicated that both he and the prime minister would prefer that Gunawardena resign,
18 May 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
