[PAGE 01]
6 December 1953

Copy No. 84

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 72
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 20/2/79 REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA, NAVY and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Peiping emphasizing construction in Hainan area (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Comment on the resumption of Iranian-British diplomatic relations (page 4).

LATIN AMERICA

4. Comment on arrest of Cuban ex-president Prio (page 4).

* * * *

- 2 -

6 Dec 53

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Peiping emphasizing construction in Hainan area:

Photographs of Hainan and the neighboring
Leichou Peninsula taken by the US Navy
during the summer disclose four major
construction projects. In addition to the
previously reported major jet airfield at Suichi, two ports on
opposite sides of the Hainan Strait and a new highway running north-
south through the middle of the island are being built.

Comment: These are the first important
new projects undertaken in this area since it fell to the Communists
in early 1950. The migration of labor, reportedly numbering over
100,000, from northern to southern Kwangtung reported by many
sources early this year was evidently for the purpose of working
on these four projects.

- 3 -

6 Dec 53

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Comment on the resumption of Iranian-British diplomatic relations:

The resumption of diplomatic relations
between Iran and Britain, while it opens the way for direct discussion
of the oil dispute, does not assure an early settlement. London, which
has pressed for re-establishment of relations, believes that the oil
negotiations can now be carried on more easily, although it has not re-
vealed a willingness to make major concessions. Prime Minister
Zahedi has insisted that he cannot make early or extensive compro-
mises which might be interpreted by his opponents as yielding further
to British pressure.

Despite threats of local politicians and the
Tudeh, and probable anti-British and anti-American agitation, there
is no indication that Zahedi's action will immediately affect the
stability of his regime. If a settlement acceptable to the Iranian
public is not reached, or if significant progress toward agreement
is not demonstrated within several months, Zahedi's position may
be threatened by increasing ultranationalist and Tudeh emphasis
on the theme that he has "betrayed" Iranian interests.

On 4 December Ambassador Henderson in
Tehran commented that there is grave danger that the resumption
of relations at this time might result in uprisings and assassinations.

LATIN AMERICA

4. Comment on arrest of Cuban ex-president Prio:

The arrest on 4 December of former presi-
dent Prio in Miami on charges of conspiring to violate the United
States Neutrality Act will probably prevent an immediate uprising
in Cuba by the Prio forces.

- 4 -

6 Dec 53

[PAGE 05]
American embassy officials are concerned
over the increasing number of rumors of an uprising scheduled for
this month. According to the American air attache in Havana, several
thousand armed civilians in Cuba and two aircraft in Guatemala are
available to Prio. He added, however, that the Cuban military was
confident of its ability to handle any rebellion.

- 5 -

6 Dec 53
