[PAGE 01]
24 November 1959
Copy No. C 65
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]
STAT
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 November 1959
DAILY BRIEF
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Hammarskjold-Laos: UN Secretary General Hammar-
skjold's recent talks with Laotian officials suggest that he
still favors some type of negotiated settlement or at least
some gesture by Vientiane toward the Communist bloc which
would emphasize Laotian neutrality. According to Laotian
Prime Minister Phoui, Hammarskjold specifically mentioned
Laotian acceptance of mediation by India, indefinite postpone-
ment of the impending trials of pro-Communist leaders, and
willingness to accept economic assistance from all UN members.
British policy makers also continue to believe that nego-
tiations between the Communist bloc and Laos could lead toward
a settlement of the dissident problem in Laos.)
(Page 2)
[PAGE 04]
Indonesia - Communist China: President Sukarno told the
Chinese Communist ambassador on 20 November that Indonesia
will implement the ban on alien retailers in rural areas whether
the Chinese like it or not, according to Foreign Minister Suban-
drio. Sukarno stated he would listen to no further objections at
this time on this subject. Referring to the Chinese Embassy of-
ficial who has been particularly active in trying to obstruct the
Indonesian decree, Subandrio told the American ambassador
that Indonesia planned to find a way to get rid of him without
declaring him persona non grata.)
(Page 3)
24 Nov 59      DAILY BRIEF      ii
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA
Hammarskjold's Plans for Laos

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold's recent talks with
Laotian officials suggest that he still favors some type of
negotiated settlement or at least some gesture by Vientiane
toward the Communist bloc which would emphasize Laotian
neutrality. According to Laotian Prime Minister Phoui,
Hammarskjold would devise an over-all economic develop-
ment plan to be financed by contributions from "any or all
UN members." Phoui fears that this would involve Laotian
acceptance of economic assistance from the Soviet bloc and
open the country to Communist agents.

Hammarskjold also brought up the question of reactivat-
ing the International Control Commission but, in the face of
continued opposition from Phoui, asked why Laos could not at
least accept mediation by India. The secretary general dwelt
constantly on the impending trials of pro-Communist leaders
and urged the Laotian Government to postpone the trials in-
definitely in order to maintain maximum sympathy of friendly
nations.

British policy makers also continue to incline toward ne-
gotiations between the Communist bloc and Laos as a means
to settlement, despite their desire for Western unity and their
recent rejection of the Soviet proposal for an international con-
ference. Foreign Secretary Lloyd has reiterated in Parlia-
ment his government's desire for a neutral Laos. The govern-
ment's rejection of an international conference may be subjected
to a more searching Labor attack in Parliament.
24 Nov 59      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 2
[PAGE 07]
Indonesian President Rejects Further Chinese
Communist Protests

President Sukarno underscored Indonesia's firmness in its
recent relations with Peiping when he told the Chinese Commu-
nist ambassador on 20 November that, despite Peiping's objec-
tions, Djakarta will implement its decree banning alien retail-
ers in rural areas. Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio, who
described the interview to the American ambassador, said Su-
karno had not given an inch and had been even tougher than he,
Subandrio, had been.

Sukarno told the Chinese ambassador he would listen to no
further objections to the Indonesian ban at this time but would
consider complaints after a lapse of four months. When the am-
bassador accused Sukarno of playing into the hands of Western
imperialists, the President told him he needed no advice on this
subject. He said that Indonesians, when accused by foreigners
of making mistakes, were likely to re-examine their actions
but were capable of "coming back hard" if no fault were found
and the critic persisted.

Sukarno refused to lift restrictions on the movements of
Chinese Embassy personnel but agreed to release a Chinese
consul general placed under house arrest by the Indonesian
Army for obstructing the decree in West Java. Subandrio said
the government would find a way to ease him out of the country
without declaring him persona non grata.

The Indonesian Communist party, which has been placed in
an embarrassing position by Peiping's pressure on the Indonesian
Government for repeal of the decree, has charged that the Indo-
nesian Army is responsible for the Sino-Indonesian tension. A
party statement of 21 November accused the West Java army
command of implementing the decree in a manner which opposed
the spirit of the Sino-Indonesian joint communique of early Octo-
ber, issued when Subandrio visited Peiping. This criticism of
the army may provoke further army measures to limit Commu-
nist party activity.
24 Nov 59      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 3
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
