[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

22 June 1957

Copy No.

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SYRIAN SITUATION

3. TURKISH NATIONAL ELECTIONS TO BE ADVANCED
TO FALL

4. POLISH-EAST GERMAN COMMUNIQUES
(page 6).

5. BOURGES-MAUNOURY FACING CONFIDENCE VOTE
[PAGE 04]
1. THE SYRIAN SITUATION

Rumors persist in Syria that the
army might attempt to seize power.

informed the American military at-
tache that the period of greatest
danger will be after the departure of
President Quwatli for Switzerland,
sometime within the next week. The
recent attempt to assassinate Col.
Mustafa Hamdun, one of Col. Sarraj's strongest military
supporters, has increased tension. The arrest of two Com-
munists on the spot as suspects indicates that the attack may
have been planned by the Communists to precipitate a move
against the right by the ultranationalist leftists in the army.
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. TURKISH NATIONAL ELECTIONS TO BE
ADVANCED TO FALL

Turkish national elections will prob-
ably be held this fall instead of next
spring, the secretary general of the
Turkish Foreign Ministry told Amer-
ican officials in Ankara on 20 June.

Comment
This information gives substance to
persistent rumors that the Turkish
elections were to be advanced. Prime Minister Menderes
is concerned over the inroads the opposition parties, es-
pecially the Freedom Party, have made in the provinces,
the traditional stronghold of the incumbent Democratic
Party. Menderes also probably believes the advantages
he would enjoy this fall may be diminished by next spring,
largely as the result of increased inflation and shortages
of essential imports.
[PAGE 07]
4. POLISH-EAST GERMAN COMMUNIQUES

Emphasis on unity and solidarity char-
acterizes the bland communiques released
following three days of talks between Po-
lish and East German party and govern-
ment leaders in East Berlin. The commu-
niques try to make it appear that harmonious relations exist
between the two parties which have been at odds since Gomulka
came to power in Poland last October.

The fact, however, that there are still un-
resolved differences between the Poles and East Germans is
emphatically pointed up by the omission of the usual Satellite
reference to the leading role of the Soviet Union among Commu-
nist states and the failure to endorse the Soviet position on the
Hungarian revolution. Moreover, the communiques took spe-
cial cognizance of Communist China's contribution to bloc-wide
socialist development.

Although affirming that the "basic principles
of socialist construction are common to all countries," the par-
communique evidences some flexibility on the part of both the
Poles and East Germans, stating that "these principles should
be applied in a creative manner, taking into account the histor-
ically formed conditions in each country. . . ." This statement,
while stopping somewhat short of the Polish separate roads to
socialism thesis, goes further than the East Germans have been
willing to go in the past. At the same time, all Communist and
workers' parties were exhorted to watch over their "ideological
purity" and "determinedly combat distortions, both revisionist
and dogmatic."

The communiques contained the usual Soviet
bloc position on German reunification and the threat of German
militarism, and reasserted the permanency of the Oder-Neisse
frontier. They also called for an understanding with all states
bordering the Baltic to make it "a sea of peace," suggesting a
revival of earlier Communist proposals for a conference of
Baltic powers.
[PAGE 08]
5. BOURGES-MAUNOURY FACING CONFIDENCE VOTE

Premier Bourges-Maunoury has been
authorized by the cabinet to make his
fiscal program a confidence measure in
the vote expected on 24 June. The main
threat to the program lies in the as yet
unresolved conflict on fiscal policy between the Socialists
and moderate right. Popular Republican support for the gov-
ernment is anticipated since this group has been promised
assembly consideration of the European integration treaties
on 2 July.

The American embassy in Paris estimates
that the assembly's desire to pass the government's fiscal and
integration programs will save the cabinet. However, the gov-
ernment survived the procedural vote on the assembly agenda
only by accepting Communist support, an indication that its
position is "extremely precarious."
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
