Approved For Release 2003/02/27 : CIA-RDP79T00975A004700490001-6

Indonesia: Foreign Minister Subandrio has told the American ambassador that Indonesia will have to review its foreign policy in view of Chinese Communist threats and abuse during his recent trip to Peiping. Subandrio, who was outraged and terrified by Peiping's attitude, added, however, that China was a "big powerful neighbor"; he did not see how at present Indonesia could abandon its independent foreign policy, but adjustments in degree and attitude would certainly be made. Subandrio claimed he has the support of President Sukarno, who has been reported shocked over the Chinese attitude. Subandrio pleaded for US support and backing during the coming years. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: London officials believe the suspended work of the commission charged with drawing up a constitution for the Cypriot Republic will be renewed shortly, but all indications point to an atmosphere in which negotiations will be difficult. Communal relations on Cyprus remain strained despite the action of Archbishop Makarios and Turkish Cypriot leader Kucuk in issuing a joint appeal to their followers for the surrender of illegally held arms.

LATE ITEM

*Sino-Indian Border Dispute: A Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry statement of 26 October stiffly insists responsibility for the latest clash with Indian troops in Ladakh rests with the Indians, but the statement concludes on a moderate note. Apparently concerned about the effect of the incident on Indian official and public opinion, Peiping expresses the hope that New Delhi will "refrain from any words and deeds further harming relations between the two countries." As a demonstration of their "traditional friendship," the Chinese offer to release Indian personnel captured in the incident. In words similar to those recently used by Mao Tse-tung in conversation with Indian Communists, the statement restates Peiping's willingness to negotiate the border dispute in a "favorable atmosphere."

27 Oct 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

Approved For Release 2003/02/27 : CIA-RDP79T00975A004700490001-6
