[PAGE 01]
6 July 1960
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
6 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR launches test vehicle from Tyura Tam to Pacific impact area.

USSR makes second offer of economic assistance to provisional government of Turkey.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Cyprus--Last obstacle to independence in August appears removed.

Ghana and Communist China agree to exchange of diplomatic representation.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
6 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: On 5 July at about 1156 EDT (1556 GMT), the USSR launched a vehicle from Tyura Tam to the previously designated Pacific impact area. A TASS announcement stated that this is the first in a series of such tests to be conducted between now and 31 July. Preliminary analysis confirms the general success of the launching as announced by TASS.

USSR-Turkey: Moscow is attempting to capitalize on Turkey's economic plight in an effort to improve relations and possibly to strengthen any elements in the provisional government which favor a policy of neutralism. Khrushchev sent a letter on 2 July to General Gursel offering economic aid, according to Foreign Minister Sarper, who pleaded with Ambassador Warren that the US do all it can to help expedite the release of counterpart funds and give some indication of the level of next year's assistance. Sarper said the government would like to reject the offer but claimed there is "heavy pressure" from Moscow to accept. In June, Ankara turned down a Soviet offer of funds, industrial plants, and technical assistance.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Cyprus: The last obstacle preventing Cypriot independence in August appears to have been removed with an agreement between Archbishop Makarios and Turkish Cypriot leader Kuchuk resolving a dispute over the composition of the future Cypriot civil service. This followed the announcement on 1 July that "full agreement" had been reached between British and Cypriot negotiators on all outstanding issues. Within the Turkish Cypriot
[PAGE 05]
community, however, there are indications of growing dissatisfaction among more militant members with Kuchuk's moderate leadership. Among the Greek Cypriots, the large Communist-led party can be expected to increase agitation for eventual removal of the British military bases on the island.

Ghana - Communist China: The announcement, in a joint communique released on 5 July, that Ghana and Communist China will exchange ambassadors appears to have been deliberately timed to coincide with the inauguration of Ghana's new republican constitution. Nkrumah's regime has maintained since Ghana became independent in 1957 that it "inherited" Britain's recognition of Communist China; it is believed to have decided some time ago to establish formal relations with Peiping at an opportune time.

The Chinese probably believe the diplomatic exchange will encourage other emergent African republics to follow suit and may have chosen to press the matter with Accra now in hopes of influencing the Congo, which is uncommitted to either China. Peiping, which is in active competition with Taipei for recognition in tropical Africa, already has an embassy in Guinea.

6 July 60    DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
Khrushchev Again Offers Economic Aid to Turkey

The USSR is attempting to take advantage of Ankara's current economic plight to promote friendly relations with the provisional Turkish government and possibly to strengthen the hand of any elements in the new regime which are inclined toward a policy of neutralism. On 2 July Soviet Ambassador Ryzhov delivered a letter from Khrushchev to General Gursel offering economic aid, according to Foreign Minister Sarper, who talked with Ambassador Warren the same day.

The offer--described by Sarper as "you say how much"--probably repeats in large part an offer made by Ryzhov in mid June to provide Turkey with funds, technical assistance, and industrial plants. Gursel rejected this overture, as he did an invitation in an earlier letter from Khrushchev urging Gursel to carry out the exchange of visits which had been agreed to by Menderes prior to the coup.

Sarper told Ambassador Warren that the Turkish Government--including the Committee of National Unity, General Gursel, and the cabinet--wished to refuse Khrushchev's latest overture as it had the earlier one, but claimed that there is "heavy pressure" from Moscow to accept and that Ankara's financial situation is "desperate." Sarper noted that he disliked discussing American assistance in the context of Moscow's overture, but pleaded that it is imperative that the "United States do as much as possible as quickly as possible." He also detailed a number of measures ordered by the Turkish Government which will conserve foreign exchange.
[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
  Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
  Scientific Adviser to the President
  Director of the Budget
  Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
  Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
  Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
  Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
  Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
  Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
  The Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
  The Counselor
  Director, International Cooperation Administration
  The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
  The Secretary of Defense
  The Deputy Secretary of Defense
  Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
  The Secretary of the Army
  The Secretary of the Navy
  The Secretary of the Air Force
  The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
  The Director, The Joint Staff
  Chief of Staff, United States Army
  Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
  Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
  Commandant, United States Marine Corps
  Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
  Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
  Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
  Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
  Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
  Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
  Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
  The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
  The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
  The Chairman
National Security Agency
  The Director
National Indications Center
  The Director
[PAGE 08]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
6 July 1960
