WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans seek to abolish labor units supporting Allied forces:

The West German delegation at the European Defense Treaty discussions in Paris insists on the adoption of a proviso which would eliminate the German Labor Service units now serving with the American and British occupying forces. To date only the Netherlands delegation has opposed this proposal, which the Germans declare must be accepted to secure ratification of the treaty by their parliament. The loss of these support units would handicap American military operations in Germany.

Comment: German Labor Service units relieve approximately 85,000 American and British soldiers from troop support functions. The existence of these units has been repeatedly denounced by the Social Democrats, who charge, among other things, that they are paramilitary in character and represent Allied attempts "to secure remilitarization through the back door" without parliamentary sanction. Chancellor Adenauer fears that these allegations will adversely affect the issue of treaty ratification. The Labor Service is unpopular in West Germany because it is financed by occupation costs and is symbolic of the unequal status of an occupied country.

5. Sweden refuses to withdraw its resolution on German elections:

A Swedish substitute resolution is still delaying adoption of the tripartite Western UN resolution calling for an investigation to determine whether free elections could be held in East and West Germany. The American delegation estimates that Sweden, in an attempt to maintain its neutrality on the German question, will refuse to yield to pressure to withdraw its resolution. The US delegates feel, however, that the Swedish resolution will not attract many votes.

Comment: The Swedish resolution is completely unacceptable to the Allies because it eliminates the whole idea of a UN preliminary investigation of electoral conditions, and would instead return the whole German unity question to the level of four-power negotiations, which
