2. KHRUSHCHEV'S REPORT TO THE 20TH PARTY CONGRESS

The range of topics covered in Khrushchev's report to the 20th Party Congress and his confident manner of treating them, as well as the appointment of large numbers of his protégés to the guiding organs of the congress, are indicative of his dominant position as "first among equals" in the party presidium.

In the section of his report devoted to international affairs, Khrushchev set forth in clear and forthright terms the doctrinal foundation of the major lines of Soviet policy which have been developing over the past year. With the exception of his endorsement of a ban on thermonuclear weapons tests, the first by a top-level Soviet leader, Khrushchev's report contained no new proposals on specific East-West questions. The importance of his speech lies rather in the strong impetus it was intended to provide to two of the major aims of current Soviet policy: pursuit of diplomatic and economic intervention in the Middle East and South Asia and the development of new relationships with the international Socialist movement.

Khrushchev devoted special attention to Soviet relations with the Afro-Asian states and included "peace-loving" non-Communist states of this area along with the Sino-Soviet bloc in a vast "zone of peace" which now and in the future will play a decisive role in world affairs.

The Soviet party chief introduced major doctrinal revisions on such basic questions as the inevitability of war and the transition to socialism. He asserted that the "Marxist-Leninist precept that wars are inevitable" is now outmoded, and denied that the only road to socialism was through civil war and revolution, asserting that it is possible "to go over to socialism by using parliamentary means." His modification of these doctrines was intended to have a strong effect on Socialists and other "patriotic forces" in the non-Communist world in what promises to be a major effort to establish and exploit popular fronts.

The fact that Khrushchev was the one to make these changes in doctrine will probably add to his stature as a leader in the Communist world.
