1. MOLOTOV SAYS DISARMAMENT PROGRESS DEPENDS ON
US AGREEMENT TO BAN NUCLEAR WEAPONS

In a conversation with the chairman of
the Canadian UN delegation on 22 Sep-
tember, Molotov reiterated that progress
on disarmament cannot be made if the
Americans refuse to agree to the aban-
donment of nuclear weapons. When the Canadian represent-
ative referred to the difficulties of control over nuclear
weapons, Molotov said indirect control is possible through
control of the "instruments of delivery." He agreed that
100-percent control would not be possible but argued that
"controls are never 100 percent. We must trust one another."

Molotov avoided a direct reply to a ques-
tion whether the USSR would accept President Eisenhower's
blueprint and aerial inspection proposals, saying that "we
are studying many proposals and they all have good features."

Soviet deputy foreign minister Kuznetsov
professed surprise at the Canadian attitude on controls, say-
ing, "You want all the details. We would prefer to set up
a general plan and then work out the details." The Canadian
representative believes the Soviet delegates have no inten-
tion of answering detailed questions on control.

Comment

Molotov's remarks parallel Bulganin's
letter to the President in seeking to focus
the disarmament debate on the absence of an Ameri-
can commitment regarding the ultimate prohibition of nu-
clear weapons and the reduction of armaments. Soviet
spokesmen are insisting that it is essential to establish a
"legal basis" for the proscription of atomic weapons.

The Soviet representative on the UN
Disarmament Subcommittee has so far refused to elaborate
on the functions of the international control agency proposed
in the 10 May plan. Molotov's reference to control of the
instruments of delivery suggests that in any detailed dis-
cussion of the control question, the USSR will maintain that
"control posts" in ports, railroad junctions, highways and
airfields would provide adequate safeguards against a sur-
prise attack. This would obviate any need for aerial photog-
raphy and for according international inspectors access to
industries and installations engaged in nuclear activities.
(SECRET)
