The Situation in the Congo

As the UN Security Council prepares to consider the Congo crisis again on 8 August, tension has once more risen sharply in the Congo amidst signs pointing toward an early showdown between Premier Lumumba--who is due back in Leopoldville on 8 August--and Congolese political elements opposed to him and his concept of a highly centralized Congo state. President Kasavubu's Abako party, which is dominant in the lower Congo region, revived publicly on 7 August its earlier demands for "independence" within a loosely-joined Congo confederation and adopted a formal expression of no confidence in Lumumba.

Kasavubu's failure to dissociate himself from his party's action suggests he may be behind it and perhaps also working with leaders of other parties to undermine and possibly oust Lumumba. Earlier Kasavubu and Lumumba were bitter rivals for the premiership of the first Congolese government. Premier Tshombe of separatist Katanga Province indicated on 7 August that he was engaged in "negotiations" with other confederation-minded Congolese leaders, including "some" from the lower Congo and also Equator Province.

Time appears to be working against Lumumba's opponents. There is increasing evidence that Lumumba is proceeding rapidly to reorganize the disintegrated Force Publique as part of his personal political organization. This presumably accounts in part for the lack of interest and evasiveness of Lumumba-appointed Congolese officers toward UN suggestions for the organization of a national army.

In Katanga, Tshombe is endeavouring to strengthen his bargaining position in any future negotiations with the central government and to counteract charges that he is merely a Belgian puppet. Tshombe declared on 6 August that his government did not intend to preserve an exclusive role for Belgians in the exploitation of Katanga's great mineral wealth and that Belgian troops would leave the province as soon as the new Katanga forces are strong enough to maintain security. Belgium, apparently encouraged by indications that wide Katanga support for Tshombe is facilitating a rapid buildup of the new force toward a 3,000- man goal, has offered to make

8 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
