[PAGE 01]
23 August 1960

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 46
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO:
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH:
DATE: JUN 1980 REVIEWER:

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
West Germany: Following conversations with Chancellor Adenauer and Foreign Minister Brentano, West German Ambassador to Moscow Hans Kroll feels it now is virtually certain that no Bundestag meeting will be held in Berlin before November. In a radio speech on 21 August, West Berlin Mayor Brandt again demanded such a meeting be held despite Soviet threats to sign a separate East German peace treaty. Although Brandt claimed British support for his position, the British Government has recently indicated opposition to the holding of the Bundestag meeting in Berlin in the near future on grounds that this might provoke the USSR.

23 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Laos: Premier Souvanna Phouma, Lao Army commander General Ouane, a representative of rebel Captain Kong Le, and the United Nations deputy representative in Laos arrived in Savannakhet on 23 August to attempt to reach a settlement with General Phoumi, leader of the countercoup group. They presumably will stress the danger that rebel paratroop Captain Kong Le, whose troops control the Vientiane area, will join forces with the pro-Communist Pathet Lao dissidents if Phoumi persists in attempting to nullify the coup. The degree of present collusion between Kong Le and the Pathet Lao is unclear, but General Ouane has stated that talks have been held and that the "Pathets would attack Phoumi's forces for us" in any move against Vientiane, There are indications that General Phoumi hopes to set up a rival government at his headquarters in Savannakhet, where nearly a quorum of National Assembly deputies thus far have rallied.

23 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
Situation in Laos

Premier Souvanna Phouma, accompanied by Lao army commander General Ouane, a representative of rebel paratroop Captain Kong Le, and the United Nations deputy representative in Laos, flew from Vientiane to Savannakhet on 23 August for negotiations with General Phoumi, leader of the countercoup movement. Presumably, the delegation will stress the danger that rebel paratroop Captain Kong Le, whose troops firmly control the Vientiane area, will join forces with the pro-Communist Pathet Lao dissidents if Phoumi persists in attempting to nullify the 9 August coup and succeeding developments.

The high-level composition of this delegation should facilitate the task of reaching a compromise settlement of differences. However, Phoumi may still question the extent of Souvanna's real authority, and may have in mind the creation of a rival government to challenge the Souvanna regime, which he considers illegal. The gravitation of Lao VIPs to Savannakhet continues. Prince Boun Oum Na Champassak, inspector general of the kingdom, arrived on 21 August via Thailand after flight from Vientiane. Leaflets dropped in Vientiane on 22 August requested pro-Phoumi deputies to re-form the National Assembly at Savannakhet. The arrival of three more deputies reported en route from Vientiane would bring the unofficial count of deputies at Savannakhet to 25, or five short of a quorum.

The bulk of the 800 battle-hardened troops of Kong Le's 2nd Paratroop Battalion reportedly have set up a defense perimeter several miles outside Vientiane, and Pathet Lao elements apparently are also in blocking position astride road and river approaches to the capital.

23 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 14]
Ouane told the American army attaché in Vientiane on 22 August that "the Pathet Lao would attack Phoumi's forces for us" if an attack were made on Vientiane.

The degree of present collusion between Kong Le and the Pathet Lao is unclear. General Ouane confirms that talks have been held but states that no liaison exists.

Estimates of Pathet Lao strength in the Vientiane vicinity vary from several hundred to 2,000; the lower figure is believed more accurate.

23 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
