Gno Chinese Communist military intrusions into Indian territory since 26 August.)

(In an apparently conciliatory move toward Nepal, Peiping has invited representatives to Lhasa to discuss continuance of traditional trade. Peiping appears anxious to minimize the seriousness of the frontier situation. The staff of a Hong Kong newspaper reportedly has been told that publication of any stories on India's northeast frontier must await a formal statement from Peiping; tension over Sikkim and Bhutan was an "unfortunate mix-up" and not a prelude to hostilities.)

The bloc's first extensive comment on the situation is a Prague broadcast of 4 September which denies Indian charges of Chinese "territorial expansionism" and states that Premier Chou En-lai views negotiations as the "only means" for solving border questions.

(The Indian Parliament on 4 September turned down a resolution suggesting that India raise the Tibetan issue in the United Nations. The Dalai Lama, who is still seeking a sponsor, has indicated that he will go to New York personally to plead his cause if necessary. Although the Dalai Lama cannot officially present a case in the UN, he probably could get an unofficial hearing as a world religious leader.)

Japan: (Ambassador MacArthur reports that Prime Minister Kishi is clearly worried over the proposed trip to Peiping by former Prime Minister Ishibashi--particularly its effect on Japanese policy toward Communist China. Since the visit is primarily to "make headlines," Kishi is virtually certain that Ishibashi, on his return, will make harmful proposals urging closer economic and cultural ties with Peiping. He also fears that Ishibashi, who is in bad health, will be easily)

UAR-USSR: The controlled UAR press and radio have accused Pravda and Moscow radio of a "flagrant intervention" in the internal affairs of the UAR. These charges stem from recent Moscow rebroadcasts of anti-UAR articles in the Iraqi Communist press. Damascus radio threatened to retaliate by republishing Khrushchev's "eloquent and fluent admissions of crimes committed against humanity" during the Stalin regime--apparently a
