[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

5 February 1960

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Warsaw Pact Meeting: The declaration adopted on 4 February by the Warsaw Pact members meeting in Moscow suggests that the main purpose of the meeting was to provide a demonstration of Bloc solidarity and support for the USSR's positions on questions that Khrushchev has proposed for discussion at the summit conference in May. The generally moderate declaration hailed Moscow's decision to reduce its forces but stopped short of announcing any reductions in Eastern European satellite forces or in Soviet forces stationed in these countries. A summary of the communique issued simultaneously hinted at further moves in this direction, however, by stating that the Pact members had "co-ordinated their future actions" toward "consolidating the relaxation of international tensions." Khrushchev's speech to the conference, which has not yet been published, may provide more specific indications of Bloc initiatives prior to the summit meeting.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-USSR: Soviet President Voroshilov's 18-day visit to India--from 20 January to 5 February--has had little impact. His party of about 70, including First Deputy Premier Kozlov, First Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov, and Presidium member Mme. Furtseva, made an extensive tour of the country. Indian officials and the press went through the motions of welcome and entertainment but without enthusiasm. To Indian officials, the forthcoming visit of Khrushchev and the possibility that he will contribute to settling the Sino-Indian border dispute has greater significance.

[PAGE 04]
Burma: Tomorrow's parliamentary elections will return Burma from military to civil control. Informed observers expect victory for the party headed by former Premier U Nu. The present premier, General Ne Win, will resume his position as military commander in chief.

Western relations with the strictly neutralist U Nu might be more difficult than those existing with General Ne Win.

5 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Burmese Parliamentary Election Prospects

Burmese voters go to the polls on 6 February to select a new civilian government to succeed the incumbent military regime of Premier Ne Win. The army, which assumed power in October 1958 because the government had disintegrated following a split in the ruling Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL), is voluntarily relinquishing office to the politicians. Active army personnel are not standing for office.

The two major parties in the election are the "Clean" AFPFL under former Premier U Nu and the "Stable" AFPFL headed by his former deputies, Ba Swe and Kyaw Nyein. Informed opinion predicts that the "Clean" party will carry a majority of the 250 constituencies. In the absence of major policy issues, the personality of U Nu is expected to be the determining factor. Independents and candidates of the Communist-dominated National United Front and various ethnic minority parties are expected to win relatively few seats.

A Nu victory may create some difficulties in Western relations with Burma. Under Ne Win's regime there has been a slight swing toward the West, but U Nu is a strict neutralist. He has bitterly accused the West, and the United States in particular, of financing his opposition.

5 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
