Laos: Members of the Souvanna Phouma delegation in Geneva in the past few days have made several contacts with members of the royal government delegation. These approaches parallel recent indications of some friction in Xieng Khouang between the Kong Le and the Pathet Lao forces.

During the 31 May session of the newly established military subcommittee at Namone, the Pathet Lao seized the initiative by presenting several proposals for cease-fire ground rules, all of which were directed at activities of the royal government. One of these rules would require that government planes not violate territory held by the Pathet Lao or the Souvanna group. This would prevent support flights to the government's Meo units at Pa Dong. Political talks on 31 May were largely devoted to a reiteration of the long-established positions of the Pathet Lao and the Souvanna group on the policies to be pursued by a coalition government.

The Communists continued shelling of Meo outpost positions around Pa Dong on the night of 30-31 May.

Plans for a new attack on Pa Dong would be drawn up after the receipt of "sufficient" supplies of ammunition. Elsewhere in the country, scattered ambush actions were reported.

Bloc airlift operations into Laos were scheduled through 1 June.
(Backup, Page 1) (Map)

(The Watch Committee at its meeting on 31 May reached the following conclusion concerning Laos:

Communist forces in Laos will continue their efforts to reduce the Meo guerrilla bases in Xieng Khouang Province, particularly Ban Pa Dong, where there are further indications of Communist preparations for intensified attacks. The Communists are refusing both at Geneva and in the talks at Ban Namone to agree to effective procedures for inspection by the International Control Commission, while they press for the formation of a Communist-dominated coalition government. The Communists have continued to improve their military position for a possible resumption of full-scale hostilities if negotiations should collapse.)

1 June 61
DAILY BRIEF ii
