Recent reports have emphasized King Farouk's impatience over Ali Maher's unwillingness to prosecute Wafd members who were derelict in their duty or who were implicated in the Cairo riots of 26 January. The King also wished for speedy opening of talks with Britain.

Hilali Pasha, a respected lawyer and politician, and a friend of the West, is noted for his opposition to corruption within the government. He has strongly opposed some of the top Wafd leaders at whose instigation he was expelled from the party in November 1951. Hence, there is little chance that the Wafd would fully cooperate with him. A suspension of Parliament, if resorted to, might lend a calmer atmosphere for negotiations with the British but would in no way remove or lessen the opposition.

On 28 February Hilali Pasha, in setting forth his views on the situation to an American Embassy official, emphasized that the elimination of corruption and prosecution of guilty Wafd leaders must precede a solution of the Anglo-Egyptian problem. His statements on the minimum Egyptian requirements for a solution, however, differed in no way from those voiced by his predecessor. He insisted on evacuation of the Canal zone and recognition of the Sudan formula, and stated that even under Middle-East Command proposals the presence of foreign troops on Egyptian soil would not be acceptable. Hilali, however, believes that the employment of foreign technicians in the Canal zone could be continued.

While the new Prime Minister may be expected to make strenuous efforts to maintain a stable pro-Western regime, his continuation in power will depend on a settlement with Britain acceptable to the Egyptian public.

LATIN AMERICA

9. Possible coup d'etat in Bolivia:

A faction of the Bolivian General Staff, led by the head of Army Intelligence, is planning a coup which will have army support and may occur shortly, according to a reliable source. The plans call for the establishment of a mixed junta of military and civilian ministers, and possibly with Hernan Siles Zuazo as president. General Torres Ortiz, Chief of the General Staff is not involved.

Comment: Hernan Siles Zuazo, was the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement's candidate for Vice President in the May 1951 elections.
