[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

9 February 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET BLOC FOLLOWS UP DIPLOMATIC AND ECO-
NOMIC OVERTURES TO BRAZIL

3. VIET MINH CONCLUDES BARTER AGREEMENT WITH
JAPANESE FIRM

4. PEIPING OFFERS ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO NEPAL

5. COMMENT ON GRANT OF SELF-GOVERNMENT TO
MALAYA

6. PRIME MINISTER OUTLINES INDEPENDENT FOREIGN
POLICY FOR JORDAN

8. DOMESTIC POLITICS PROMPTS AUSTRIAN EXPULSION
OF WFTU

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. SOVIET BLOC FOLLOWS UP DIPLOMATIC AND
ECONOMIC OVERTURES TO BRAZIL

On 30 January the Polish ambassador
in London invited the Brazilian ambas-
sador to lunch with a Soviet colleague
who wished to "clear up any misunder-
standings that might have existed in
the past," according to an official in the Brazilian Foreign
Ministry.

The same official reports that the Bul-
garians have requested negotiations to conclude a trade
agreement and that Czechoslovakia and Poland have men-
tioned a desire to increase substantially the present volume
of trade with Brazil.

The American embassy in Rio de Janeiro
reports that Brazil intends to revise present trade agree-
ments with Czechoslovakia, Poland and Yugoslavia with
respect to applicable exchange rates, which have remained
far below the level prevailing for major foreign currencies
and have given these countries discriminatory import ad-
vantages.

Comment

The Soviet bloc is moving quickly to sup-
port the overture made by Soviet premier
Bulganin for expanded diplomatic and economic relations
with Latin America.

The Brazilian government may feel that
the present Soviet bloc campaign provides a convenient op-
portunity to press for a revision in Brazil's favor of the pres-
ent trade agreements with certain East European countries.

In his news conference of 7 February,
newly inaugurated President Kubitschek stated that Brazil
"will probably enter into trade relations with the Soviet
Union," but added that diplomatic ties will depend upon Con-
gress and would constitute "a step which I will not be the one
to initiate." (Concurred in by ORR)

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. VIET MINH CONCLUDES BARTER AGREEMENT WITH
JAPANESE FIRM

A Japanese news agency reported on
2 February that Meiwa Sangyo, a
Mitsubishi subsidiary, had recently
concluded a barter agreement with the Viet Minh to im-
port 250,000 tons of anthracite. This is the most impor-
tant trade agreement yet concluded by the Viet Minh with
a non-Communist country and establishes Japan as its
major non-Communist trading partner.

The agreement reportedly provides for
Japanese exports to the Viet Minh of such commodities as
dust coal, coal pitch, briquettes and gas coke. The Viet
Minh does not have the facilities for manufacturing these
items.

Mitsubishi is influential in the forma-
tion of Japanese economic policy, and formal approval of
the transaction by Tokyo seems likely. A number of other
Japanese firms are negotiating with the Viet Minh.

Through this agreement, the Viet Minh
will acquire badly needed commodities of high volume and
low value which are uneconomical for the Sino-Soviet bloc
to ship to North Vietnam. At the same time, the Viet Minh
has taken a major step to re-establish the export market
for its coal.

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. PEIPING OFFERS ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO NEPAL

Peiping's recent offer of economic
assistance to Nepal within eight days
of Prime Minister Prasad's announce-
ment that the Nepalese government would welcome aid
from all friendly countries shows that Communist China
is prepared to move energetically into an area previously
considered almost exclusively under India's influence. In
the event of a rejection, China may hope that Indian-Nepalese
relations would be irritated, since it might appear to the peo-
ple of Nepal that India had blocked Nepalese hopes.

India, which will probably control the
nature of Nepal's reply to China, tacitly approved the estab-
lishment of Sino-Nepalese relations last August and would
find it difficult to urge Nepal to refuse all Chinese assistance.
New Delhi, however, is aware of the security problems which
would arise through such aid.

For prestige purposes, India also strongly
desires to appear responsible for the majority of economic de-
velopment work in Nepal. India, therefore, will probably ad-
vise Nepal to accept some Chinese assistance but to restrict
its nature and size as well as the location of specific projects.

Last November, New Delhi officials
stressed to the American embassy that both India and the
United States should plan their aid programs so as to keep
China's influence in Nepal at a minimum and strengthen Nepal
to resist pressure from the north.

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. COMMENT ON GRANT OF SELF-GOVERNMENT
TO MALAYA

The successful outcome of the London
talks on self-government for Malaya
has undercut to a considerable extent
the demands of Communist and Com-
munist-front groups. Chief Minister Rahman had prom-
ised last July that his administration would attain self-
government in two years, but he has now virtually achieved
it in seven months.

The 8 February agreement grants a high
degree of self-government which will be expanded during
the next 18 months and is planned to culminate in independ-
ence by approximately August 1957. The agreement satis-
fies an important Rahman objective by providing for a large
measure of Malayan control over the security forces.

Rahman plans to use his London victory
as the basis of an appeal for popular support in the fight
against the Communists. He hopes to succeed, where the
British failed, in enlisting the sympathies of Malaya's large
Chinese population against the Malayan Communist Party,
whose membership is 95 percent Chinese.

Rahman is likely to be able to counter
the appeal of a budding pro-Communist Malay organization,
but there is little possibility that he will achieve any notable
success with the Chinese population. The combination of
Communist coercion and the politico-emotional appeal of
Communist China will probably continue to work effectively
against him.

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. PRIME MINISTER OUTLINES INDEPENDENT FOREIGN
POLICY FOR JORDAN

Prime Minister Samir Rifai has told
Ambassador Mallory that since Jordan
has become a member of the United
Nations, it now has a new basis for a
policy of independence. Rifai said that
while he personally was convinced of the necessity of Anglo-
Jordanian friendship and saw many desirable features in
the Baghdad pact, he felt the best course for Jordan is to
remain neutral.

Comment

Rifai's reference to Jordan's newly ac-
quired UN membership suggests that he
and other Jordanians regard this step as a symbol of their
emergence from British tutelage and their entrance into
the company of the Asian-African "neutralist" bloc. Such
a change in the psychology of Jordan's leaders would rein-
force their reluctance to offend domestic opinion by taking
pro-Western positions on important issues.

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
8. DOMESTIC POLITICS PROMPTS AUSTRIAN EXPULSION
OF WFTU

American officials in Vienna regard the
expulsion of the Communist World Fed-
eration of Trade Unions from Austria
as a thrust by the Socialist Party in its
struggle with the People's Party, its coali-
tion partner. Socialist minister of interior Oscar Helmer
told American officials he took the action without consulting
Chancellor Raab of the People's Party. According to Helmer,
Raab is furious over the move, but is unable to criticize it
publicly.

Comment

The two parties have been quarreling
over the date of the next parliamentary
elections. The People's Party wants elections deferred,
probably until fall, to give Raab an opportunity to make an
appeal in Moscow for concessions with regard to the eco-
nomic obligations imposed upon Austria by the state treaty.
The Socialists, who are agitating for spring elections, are
fearful of the prestige which would accrue to the People's
Party if such a trip were successful. Helmer's action in
ousting the WFTU appears to have been taken to obstruct
Raab's plans.

The fact that the WFTU has directed that
its correspondence be sent to Rome suggests that the Com-
munists will seek to locate there or elsewhere in Western
Europe rather than in Prague, as some reports have indicated.

9 Feb 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
