[PAGE 01]
27 January 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
27 January 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CONTENTS

4. Attempts to evacuate Europeans from the eastern Congo continue. (Page ii)

6. El Salvador: Military and police units reinforced in capital. (Page iii)

7. East Germany to reduce its dependence on imports from the West by 1962. (Page iii)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
*Congo: Efforts are continuing to evacuate Europeans from the eastern Congo, although many Europeans have been turned back from the Ruanda-Urundi border by pro-Lumumba Congolese troops. The UN command in Leopoldville has stated that force will be used to free whites from danger, but UN officials reportedly are hesitant to intervene in most cases for fear of reprisals against other Europeans.

27 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
*El Salvador: Army and police units have been reinforced in the capital to deal with the disorders which followed the successful military coup of 25 January. Colonel Anibal Portillo, apparent initiator of the coup and real leader of the new conservatively oriented military-civilian junta, declared in an address late on 25 January that the coup took place to eliminate two serious dangers to Salvadoran democracy: the Communists and ex-President Osorio. Osorio, who engineered the 26 October coup, was sent into exile early on 26 January. Portillo and another member of the new junta, Dr. Rodriguez Porth, emphasized that elections are to be held "as soon as possible," presumably for a legislature--a first step in the restoration of constitutional government. The American Embassy believes the elections may be held in May.

*East Germany: The Ulbricht regime has reportedly adopted, as a major goal, policies designed to reduce its dependence on imports from the West by 1962.
any attempt to procure Western goods when substitutes are available in the USSR or another satellite would be regarded as a breach of top-level long-range party decisions. Such a re-orientation of trade would require the adoption of bloc standards and specifications in many East German plants--a difficult, costly, and time-consuming process since much East German equipment conforms to Western standards. Talks on "the further expansion of economic and trade relations" between the USSR and East Germany are now in progress in Moscow. East German vulnerability to Western economic pressures was one important factor in East Germany's willingness to renew the Interzonal Trade Agreement last month.

27 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]
SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE
REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Estimate of the World Situation: Sino-Soviet Progress and Policies; Political, Social, and International Attitudes of Underdeveloped Nations; Problems of the Western Alliances; and Political and Military Aspects of the Evolving Strategic Situation. U.S.I.B. NIE 1-61. 17 January 1961

27 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 09]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
Military and Police Units in Salvador Capital Reinforced

Army and police units concentrated in the capital city during the day and evening of 25 January, following the overthrow of the three-month-old government early that morning. Mobs in front of the presidential palace who were shouting against the military and calling for a general strike to protest the coup were dispersed by early evening. However, sporadic shooting continued in the city and vandalism, including the firing and overturning of automobiles and buses, has taken place. There is still no reason to doubt the capability of the armed forces to restore order. However, their sensitivity to public opinion might lead them to seek accommodation with the mob leaders if the disorders, which are probably Communist led, continue for several days and cause much bloodshed.

The new five-man junta is conservative in orientation and is led by former army chief of staff Col. Anibal Portillo and Lt. Col. Julio Rivera, commandant of the military school. These officers named three civilians to the junta: Dr. Jose Antonio Rodriguez Porth, a lawyer and former dean of the law school at the National University; Dr. Jose Enrique Valiente, a prominent physician and former vice dean of the medical school; and Dr. Feliciano Avelar, a conservative lawyer. All five junta members are believed friendly to the United States. A cabinet was also named early on 26 January.

Colonel Portillo, apparent instigator of the coup, addressed the nation on the evening of 25 January. He said the coup was against Osorio as well as against the Communists and spoke of both as equal dangers which had threatened Salvadoran democracy. He reiterated the promise stated earlier in the day on the official radio that it was the desire of the military that El Salvador "return as soon as possible to constitutionality." Dr. Rodriguez Porth also spoke along similar lines. He promised the "fullest guarantees" of free elections and said that

27 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 17]
coup was directed against the extreme right as well as against the extreme left. He said,"We have no political obligations to any party" and no member of the new junta intends to be a candidate in the forthcoming elections. The American Embassy understands that congressional elections may be announced for May.

At midday, on 26 January it was announced on the official radio that former President Osorio had been exiled. Also exiled were two of the three civilian members of the deposed junta. The third, Fabio Castillo, is apparently still in hiding.

27 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 19]
TOP SECRET
