Moscow Seeking Free-World Tankers

The Soviet Union has launched a major program to procure large, modern tankers in the free world to boost the carrying capacity of its tanker fleet and to lessen its dependence on chartered Western vessels. It is negotiating with the Netherlands, Italy, and Japan for the purchase of nearly 20 vessels--some already launched--with tonnages ranging from 25,000 to 48,000 dead-weight tons each. As all but two Soviet-owned tankers now carrying oil exports fall in the 11,000-ton class or smaller, these acquisitions would increase significantly the USSR's ability to transport its own petroleum.

The first tanker purchased from the Netherlands under this program already is en route to the Black Sea to load petroleum for Cuba. This 25,000-ton vessel was originally contracted for by Greek owners, but was sold to the USSR prior to delivery--apparently for cash. Four more Dutch tankers of this class are to be delivered to the USSR during the next two years.

In Japan, the Soviet Union has recently purchased a 39,000-ton tanker and is said to have closed a deal for another vessel of this size. In addition, Moscow has opened negotiations for several Japanese tankers of more than 30,000 tons each. In line with Soviet efforts to acquire larger vessels, Japan was asked to increase from 20,000 to 35,000 tons the size of the five tankers the USSR plans to buy under the terms of the Soviet-Japanese trade pact.

Moscow is offering large quantities of wheat in exchange for Italian ships. The USSR wants to purchase immediately two tankers of 47,700 tons each launched earlier this year for the Italian state fuels agency (ENI) and to contract for the construction of four or five 35,000-ton tankers. For six weeks Soviet representatives have been pressing for an agreement on the two ENI tankers, but no decision has yet been made by the Italian Government.

The USSR's petroleum commitments to Cuba, which have required substantial readjustments in the employment of Soviet tankers

31 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
