[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

12 May 1959

Copy No. C 62

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
12 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Qatar: The five-day strike last week of Qatar Oil Company workers in the British-protected Persian Gulf sheikdom of Qatar reflected carefully guarded preparation, in the view of the American Consulate General in Dhahran. Local sheiks and British political officials apparently were reluctant to use strong measures against the strike, which ended with the government largely accepting the workers' demands. The authorities are still unable to identify the strike leaders, and further unrest seems likely.
[PAGE 05]
Burma-USSR: Soviet prestige in Burma, damaged by the recent furor over an attempt by the Soviet military attache to defect, faces another setback in the upcoming libel trial of a TASS representative in Rangoon. The suit, filed by an influential Burmese editor, is receiving wide publicity. The Soviet Embassy, which thus far has shielded the TASS representative, has attempted to quash the case.

12 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Qatar Oil Workers Strike

A five-day strike last week by workers of the Qatar Petroleum Company (QPC), an affiliate of Iraq Petroleum Company, demonstrated careful preparation, in the view of the American Consulate General in Dhahran. British and local government officials in this small British-protected state on the Persian Gulf are concerned over the effectiveness of the strike organization which immobilized almost the entire sheikdom. Thus far the government and QPC have been unable to identify strike leaders.

About half the QPC workers are Qataris; most of the rest are Indians and Pakistanis. In the early stages of the strike only the Qataris participated, but they soon forced the Indian and Pakistani workers to join. By late in the week the strike had spread to government offices.

Support for the strike apparently stems from widespread dissatisfaction with the extravagances of the ruling family, although Arab resentment of the superior pay and status granted more highly skilled Indian and Pakistani workers was probably also a factor. The workers formulated specific demands only when the government began to react.

The strikers have returned to work, but the issue is not yet settled. Sheik Ahmad, son of the Ruler, publicly has given in to most of the strikers' demands, but the QPC is unwilling to settle on this basis. Qatar itself is relatively unimportant in Middle East oil production, but the example could be contagious.

12 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 08]
Turkish Defense Minister Fears Further Repression of Opposition

Turkish Defense Minister Etem Menderes--no relative of Prime Minister Adnan Menderes--considers that the prime minister is falling more under the influence of government leaders who favor stronger repressive measures against the Republican People's party (RPP), the principal opposition party. The defense minister, who is highly respected by the armed services, fears army intervention if more extensive restrictions are put on the freedoms of press and opposition.

Early this month the government used army and police in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent opposition leader Ismet Inonu's followers from gathering to greet him during his tour of the Aegean region. Inonu, whose popularity has increased as a result of the incidents, says he will continue to travel around the country, thus intensifying the pressure on the government to take further repressive measures against him.

12 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Soviet Prestige in Burma May Be Further Damaged by Libel Suit

Soviet prestige in Burma, damaged by the furor over the Soviet military attache's recent attempt to defect, faces another setback in the coming libel trial of a TASS representative in Rangoon. The suit was filed by U Law Yone, the editor of the influential Rangoon Nation, who had been accused by the TASS representative of receiving $34,000 from the American Embassy.

After the TASS representative failed to appear in court on 8 May, a second warrant was issued, even though Soviet Ambassador Shiborin had intervened with the Burmese foreign minister in an effort to have the case quashed. The police have been unable to locate the defendant to serve either warrant, which will almost certainly lead the Burmese public to presume that he is hiding in the Soviet Embassy.

Whatever course the embassy takes, it seems certain to suffer further embarrassment. Flight from Burma by the TASS representative, who has no diplomatic status, would invite strong censure; should he face trial, he is likely to be convicted.

12 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
