[PAGE 01]
NOT RELEASABLE TO
FOREIGN NATIONALS

CONTINUED CONTROL

1 July 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

1 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Berlin: The acting Soviet military commandant in Berlin took the position on 26 June that Allied personnel travel- ing on the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn are under East German jurisdiction after they pass the Soviet checkpoint. Replying to the US commandant's protest against three recent attempts by the East German police to control the movement of American officers on the autobahn, the Soviet official said that the inci- dents occurred "in places which are outside our sphere of in- fluence;" and therefore "should be settled with the proper au- thorities of the German Democratic Republic." This latest Soviet formulation is part of a long-term effort to erode West- ern access rights and to establish precedents for further asser- tions of East German authority.

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel: The current cabinet "crisis" is the result of pre- election maneuvering by minority parties in Prime Minister Ben-Gurion's coalition cabinet. Members of these parties have seized on an emotionally charged issue--the character of Israel's relations with West Germany which in this case in- volves an arms sale--to try to dissociate themselves from the policies of the prime minister's predominant Mapai party. The minority parties, in this way, hope to gain favorable positions for the parliamentary elections scheduled in November. Ben- Gurion, in another of his efforts to enforce full cabinet disci- pline, apparently intends to oust the minority critics from the government and to preside over a caretaker cabinet until the elections.

1 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
VI. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions are to be used in context with all SNIEs relevant to the Berlin situation.

1. (a) Soviet diplomatic notes, Soviet and East German propaganda, and statements by East German leaders and officials have been generally mild and re- strained and do not appear to foreshadow a serious ef- fort to interfere with the West German presidential elections. Protest demonstrations and minor harass- ments are still a possibility.

(b) While there are no reliable indications of a bloc intent to deny Allied or West German access to West Berlin, or to seal off West Berlin in the imme- diate future, such action could be taken with little or no warning.

2. Soviet diplomatic activity relating to the re- sumption of East-West negotiations at Geneva continues to aim at weakening the Western position with a combi- nation of professed willingness to reach agreement and threats of crisis and possible war if no agreement is reached.

3. During the recess of the foreign ministers' con- ference, ending 13 July, the USSR will not conclude a separate peace treaty with the GDR or turn over access controls to the East Germans. The Soviet Union will continue to use threats of such action as a form of pressure on the West; nevertheless, so long as the USSR estimates that there are any prospects for a summit conference, it probably will not take such action. The

1 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
actual physical transfer of controls could be accom- plished with little or no warning.

4. The West Berlin economy has thus far in 1959 been characterized by record high levels in production. Morale in West Berlin continues high.

5. There have been no significant changes in Soviet capabilities to respond to possible Western actions in the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade.

6. There were no major intelligence indications of Western allied diplomatic intentions, apart from infor- mation obtained through official contacts with US repre- sentatives.

1 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 09]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
