[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. Bao Dai considering removal of Vietnamese Premier:

Bao Dai told American officials on 20 May that Premier Tran Van Huu had incurred the enmity of the French and therefore "mustgo." He has been unable, however, to decide on a successor. The time was coming, Bao Dai said, when he must preside personally over a "government of national union," but he refused to do so now on the ground that French control, a condition he considers necessary at the present time, would prevent any government from being popular.

Comment: Since both Bao Dai and the French are opposed to Huu's continuance in office, his removal appears certain. Despite pressure from his Vietnamese advisers and the French to assume the premiership, Bao Dai has consistently demurred. Interior Minister Tam, a vigorous administrator with a reputation for brutality, thus emerges as the outstanding candidate for this position.

[PAGE 05]
6. French troop issue complicates Allied-German negotiations:

High Commissioner McCloy warns that the question of retention by the French forces in Germany of the same privileges and immunities as American and British forces will have to be solved by the Foreign Ministers. German negotiators, he says, insist that French forces should be restricted to the same privileges as other European Defense Community nations.

McCloy believes that enough progress has been made on all other issues to enable the Foreign Ministers to sign the contractual agreement on 26 May, as scheduled.

Comment: Up to now, the French Government had tacitly agreed that the immunities of its troops from civil authority would be derived from an EDC troop status convention. On 21 May, however, the French cabinet indicated that it wanted French troops to share all the privileges and immunities still retained by the American and British forces.

[PAGE 06]
7. Belgian businessmen resent small share in Moscow conference "gains":

As a result of the large orders reportedly secured by Western participants in the Moscow Economic Conference, important Belgian industrialists, including representatives of the Belgian Textile Federation, have complained to their government about official antagonism toward the conference, according to a Foreign Office spokesman. He implied that a clearer public understanding of the American position on East-West trade is necessary to avoid embarrassment to the West if, as he has heard, the Russians are now calling for an economic conference on the governmental level.

Comment: Certain French, Dutch and West German businessmen are also inclined to feel that they did not do as well at the conference as their neighbors. In their efforts to play on such international jealousies the Russians may find the depressed textile industry a particularly vulnerable spot.

Although Soviet propaganda has mentioned the need for a governmental economic conference, Moscow has not taken any steps to call one.
