[PAGE 01]
25 July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. TASS correspondent again comments on US-Soviet relations (page 3).
2. Soviet poster boasts of downing three US planes (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Chinese reaffirm demand for return of all POW's in Korea (page 4).
4. Chinese Communists still fighting in Indochina (page 4).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]5. Thai leaders reluctant to participate in Southeast Asia defense[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).

SOUTH ASIA
6. India and Pakistan agree to further talks on Kashmir (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Iranian Communists prominent in Tehran riots (page 6).
8. Mossadeq may request withdrawal of US military and gendarmerie missions (page 7).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]9. Turkish Ambassador sees Middle East Defense Organization as vital[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 7).
10. King Farouk emphasizes seriousness of Egyptian situation (page 8).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]11. Netherlands may recognize Farouk's title to Sudan[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]] (page 8).

EASTERN EUROPE
13. First mass deportations from Czechoslovak city reported (page 9).

WESTERN EUROPE
14. Italy objects to announcement of projected aid to Yugoslavia (page 10).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. TASS correspondent again comments on US-Soviet relations:
In a mid-June conversation which he initiated with a reliable American newspaperman, Yuri Zhukov, TASS correspondent in Paris, said that the Americans are rebuffing Russian efforts to promote peaceful discussions at every point. As an example, he cited the American attitude toward a four-power conference on Germany. When queried as to whether he believed that the Americans wanted war, Zhukov replied that there was no other conclusion the Russians could draw, but that "we shall continue to make every effort for peaceful discussion and peaceful solutions even until the guns go off."
The American newspaperman commented that this was the first time Zhukov had ever implied so openly that he believed a war would eventually come.

Comment: This conversation differs somewhat from several others last year when Zhukov appeared to be seeking information on such matters as American rearmament, policies in the Far East, and military activity in the Near East. In this case, Zhukov was apparently trying to bring about a more receptive attitude toward negotiations with the USSR, which the West had not then proposed, by emphasizing the dangers of US intransigence.

2. Soviet poster boasts of downing three US planes:
Ambassador Kennan reports the appearance in Moscow of a new poster picturing three American planes being shot down by Soviet fighters. Excerpts from Pravda printed on the poster identify one as the B-29 lost over the Baltic on 5 April 1950, the second as the patrol bomber lost in the Far East in November 1951, and the third as the C-47 which landed in Hungary late last fall.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: The Soviet notes after the first two incidents did not admit that these planes had been shot down. However, the decoration of Soviet pilots subsequent to each of these incidents was the Kremlin's indirect way of both warning the West and reassuring the Soviet people as to the inviolability of Soviet borders. The fact that the Soviet Government now publicizes these actions represents, in the opinion of Ambassador Kennan, a studied insult.

FAR EAST

3. Chinese reaffirm demand for return of all POW's in Korea:
A Chinese Communist foreign affairs official recently told the Indian Charge in Peiping that his government would insist on repatriation of all Chinese POW's held by the United Nations and that any screening was unacceptable. The Chinese official violently abused the UN Command for the Yalu River bombing, characterizing it as "19th century gunboat tactics."

Comment: Despite a more aggressive tone at the talks and in their propaganda, there is no indication that the Communists are contemplating terminating the negotiations.

4. Chinese Communists still fighting in Indochina:
The campaign by Chinese Communist forces in support of a Viet Minh regiment against tribal guerrillas in northwestern Tonkin is still continuing. Despite supply problems, combined Communist troops have forced the French-supported Meo guerrillas to retreat and now have them encircled.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: This Chinese Communist operation, involving an estimated 5,000 to 6,000 men, has been minimized as purely local military aid to hard-pressed Viet Minh units. A Chinese invasion in force is still not indicated. This incursion, however, like previous ones, is indicative of China's apparent willingness to disregard the integrity of the Indochina border, at least in areas where regular French-Vietnamese troops are not present.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]5. Thai leaders reluctant to participate in Southeast Asia defense:
Despite their gratification that France, Britain and the United States are giving serious consideration to the security of Southeast Asia, they were concerned that these efforts might "at some stage" provoke the Chinese Communists. They said that Thailand would be willing to cooperate only at "a low and inconspicuous level."

Thai leaders hope for prompt United Nations action in the event of Communist aggression, but are trying not to commit themselves irrevocably to the West.

Comment: The views expressed by Phibun and his Foreign Minister represent a considerable modification of the policy of a year ago. At that time Thailand was a leading advocate of a Pacific pact, to include the United States, for collective security in Southeast Asia[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].
[PAGE 06]
SOUTH ASIA

6. India and Pakistan agree to further talks on Kashmir:
Both India and Pakistan have agreed to UN Representative Graham's latest suggestion for a meeting at ministerial level on Kashmir. India, however, has requested that the talks be delayed until early August.

Comment: By accepting Graham's suggestion, India and Pakistan avoid the onus of breaking off negotiations. India's request that a meeting be delayed until August, however, suggests that it is no more eager to reach a settlement now than it has been in the past.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Iranian Communists prominent in Tehran riots:
The American Embassy in Tehran reports that in the recent rioting the Tudeh supplied the most aggressive elements in the mobs, planned the most successful street tactics, and was responsible for the anti-Shah and anti-American slogans.

The Communists have attempted to take full credit for leading the fight against "imperialism" and reportedly are trying to secure a formal alliance with the National Front. Ambassador Henderson states that National Front leaders realize their debt to the Tudeh, but that Majlis deputies are reasserting their loyalty to the Shah and discouraging further anti-Shah agitation.

Comment: Previous temporary Tudeh cooperation with the National Front has not promoted the Communist cause to any extent. It is unlikely that Mossadeq, who is now in a stronger position than ever before, would permit collaboration which might threaten his control of the government.
[PAGE 07]
8. Mossadeq may request withdrawal of US military and gendarmerie missions:
Ambassador Henderson warns that the United States should be prepared to withdraw its military and its gendarmerie missions from Iran. He recalls that in early July Mossadeq told the Shah that the US military mission was straining the Iranian budget and that American military aid was increasing the cost of maintaining the army.

The Ambassador is inclined to believe that because of Mossadeq's long-standing opposition to foreign military assistance, he is not likely to favor retention of the Military Aid Advisory Group even though it costs Iran nothing.

Comment: Minister of Court Ala believes that Mossadeq can now obtain whatever he desires from parliament. He also considers that the Shah cannot refuse Mossadeq's requests.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_5]]9. Turkish Ambassador sees Middle East Defense Organization as vital:
A Soviet invasion of the Arab States through Iran would permit Turkey to be surrounded before the Atlantic Pact could be put into action. Hence the formation of MEDO is "a matter of life or death for Turkey."

Comment: The Turkish Chief of Staff previously expressed anxiety over the danger of Soviet encirclement. The Turks realize their dependence on United States assistance and have continuously urged complete American participation in Middle East defense[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_5]].
[PAGE 08]
10. King Farouk emphasizes seriousness of Egyptian situation:
King Farouk has repeatedly advised Ambassador Caffery not to underestimate the seriousness of the situation in Egypt. He stated that Cairo was "gone" and that he did not know what would happen in Alexandria. "If anything is to be done," the King warned, "it must be done at once."

Meanwhile the British Foreign Office has instructed its Charge in Cairo to inform Farouk that Britain can "not intervene with force in what appears to be an internal Egyptian problem."

Comment: While the situation still remains confused, it appears that at least temporarily a working arrangement has been achieved among the King, General Nagib, leader of the coup, and Prime Minister Ali Maher.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_6]]11. Netherlands may recognize Farouk's title to Sudan:
The Secretary General of the Dutch Foreign Office will recommend to the next Cabinet that it recognize Farouk as "King of Egypt and the Sudan." The Dutch official is quoted as having stated, with some irritation, that since Britain opposes European federation, it must expect other countries to act "quite independently[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_6]]."
[PAGE 09]
EASTERN EUROPE

13. First mass deportations from Czechoslovak city reported:
Reports of mass deportations from Bratislava on the Slovakian-Austrian frontier have been circulating in Prague for the past week. The American Embassy has been informed that thus far about 400 families have been given 48 hours to prepare for movement to unspecified destinations.

The Embassy believes that the deportations are designed to make living quarters now occupied by "capitalists and non-productive elements" available to workers and Communists.
[PAGE 10]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_7]]Comment: This is the first report of mass deportations from a Czech city. During the past year evacuations are known to have been ordered from restricted border zones in western and southern Bohemia.

In addition to the economic and political reasons given by the Embassy, it is probable that Bratislava, located at the southeastern end of the Czech border fortification line, is considered a strategic center. Two weeks ago, border guards ended free movement of Czechs between Bratislava and the Petrzalka area of Czechoslovakia across the Danube[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_7]].

WESTERN EUROPE

14. Italy objects to announcement of projected aid to Yugoslavia:
Premier de Gasperi has complained to the American and British Ambassadors that the announcement that additional economic and military aid is planned for Yugoslavia, following so closely Tito's statement that the time was not opportune for resuming negotiations on Trieste, has created an "unfortunate" impression in Italy.

When the American Ambassador pointed out that the contemplated aid to Yugoslavia was relatively small in comparison with what had already been given to Italy, the Prime Minister rejoined that he thought it essential to keep the "proper balance between Italy's role and that of Yugoslavia."

De Gasperi "presumed" that there were plans for the defense of the Balkans which would involve Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey, and said that he would like to be informed of their nature, because of Italy's "important and key role" there.
