6. KHRUSHCHEV STATES VIEWS ON FOREIGN AND INTERNAL ISSUES TO FRENCH SOCIALISTS

In conversations with the French Socialist delegation between 28 and 30 April, Khrushchev discussed a wide range of political and economic questions. On Germany he said that there were two Germanies, and that the USSR would not help the capitalist part take over the socialist part. He contended that a treaty between the NATO and Warsaw pact countries could be signed because there is one Germany on each side. Khrushchev also warned the French Socialists that Germany's objective has always been to dominate France and Britain, and the Germans are already beginning to play Britain and France off against the USSR. He said that in West Germany there are forces that want an economic rapprochement with the USSR, but that the Soviet leaders want contact with France. Khrushchev warned that if France rejected the Soviet Union, the USSR would turn to Germany as it did before.

In discussing the Middle East, Khrushchev said an agreement should be reached, in the UN or elsewhere, for an arms embargo to all states in the area and that, while the USSR was ready to negotiate such an agreement, the West was not because it would mean the liquidation of the Baghdad pact. Stating frankly that the Czech arms sold to Egypt were directed against the pact, he said that if the pact were abandoned, the situation would be changed. He reportedly added, "You talk of changing the form of the Baghdad pact and using it for economic and social aid. As if the pact were going to lay eggs."

In the field of internal affairs, Khrushchev said the Soviet regime would never create an opposition party, but suggested that the time had come for both the French and the Russians to abandon their use of epithets, and to get rid of obsolete ideas. After boasting of the USSR's transformation from a totally illiterate Russia into the world's second greatest power, Khrushchev reportedly declared, "And now you want us to set up a second party! Establishing an opposition party would be like putting a louse under our shirt!"
