Internal Situation in Nepal Deteriorating

King Mahendra has been moving to consolidate his position since he took over direct control of the government in December. Although many political leaders have been released from custody, former Prime Minister B. P. Koirala, most of his cabinet, and a large number of Nepali Congress party activists are still under detention. The King has removed a number of the more experienced and senior civil servants, appointing to their posts less knowledgeable, but presumably more loyal, individuals. He has tightened his control over the 10,000-man army by assuming the defense portfolio himself, appointing favorites to positions of importance, and sidetracking others by putting them in the civil service. There are increasing reports, however, of dissatisfaction in the army with the King’s actions and growing sympathy with the Nepali Congress.

The King’s centralization of authority and the uncertainty engendered throughout the bureaucracy by his changes have brought effective governmental action to a virtual standstill, especially in the fields of finance and planning. Economic dislocation and stagnation have given rise to scattered expressions of popular discontent, which both the Communists and the Congress party are seeking to exploit. The Communists are split, however, with one faction favoring support of the King so as to reduce Indian influence and the other favoring joint activity with the Congress party in opposition to the King.

The Congress party, spurning Communist support, is reportedly well advanced in its planning to bring about a return to parliamentary government. Organizing efforts are apparently beginning to bear fruit, and feelers are out to other non-Communist parties to form a united front against the King. One of the leaders of the socialist Praja Parishad has recently come over to the Congress group in India, and former Deputy Prime Minister Subarna Shumshere, leading the Congress party exiles in India, is hoping for an accord with the conservative Gorkha Parishad, the second largest party in the now dissolved Nepali

24 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
