[PAGE 01]
State Dept. review completed

22 December 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ARABS BEGINNING TO EMPHASIZE GAZA PROBLEM

2. LABOR OPPOSITION TO BOLIVIAN STABILIZATION
PROGRAM MAY TOUCH OFF WIDESPREAD VIOLENCE

4. ARMY COUP REPORTED IN INDONESIA

5. GREECE TO PRESS FOR IMMEDIATE UN DEBATE ON
CYPRUS

6. PAKISTAN TO REQUEST UN FORCE FOR KASHMIR

9. INTELLECTUALS RESTIVE IN NORTH VIETNAM

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. ARABS BEGINNING TO EMPHASIZE GAZA PROBLEM

With the Anglo-French evacuation near-
ing completion, Arab leaders and their
propaganda machines are beginning to
concentrate on Israel's occupation of
portions of Sinai, and particularly on
its announced determination to bar the
return of Egyptian control to the Gaza
strip.

Jordan's prime minister has told the
press that his government is preparing notes to other Arab
states insisting that the Suez Canal should not be cleared
and that oil pipelines remain shut down until Israel withdraws
from Gaza and from the islands at the mouth of the Gulf of
Aqaba. On 21 December Jordan's UN delegate called for a
report on the progress of the Israeli withdrawal. A similar
position was implied in the previously reported Syrian sug-
gestion that the United States fix a date for the Israeli evac-
uation of Gaza in return for a resumption of the flow of oil.

Arab emotionalism on this subject is
likely to be aggravated by the Israeli attitude. A UN offi-
cial stated on 20 December that the question of the Israeli
withdrawal now looms as a major problem, since Israel is
continuing to "drag its feet" and is even consolidating its po-
sitions in the Gaza strip and the gulf islands.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. LABOR OPPOSITION TO BOLIVIAN STABILIZATION
PROGRAM MAY TOUCH OFF WIDESPREAD VIOLENCE

Increasing labor opposition to the Bolivian
monetary stabilization program, promul-
gated 15 December, may lead to widespread
violence and the possible overthrow of the
Bolivian government.

The stabilization plan, which initially had
the substantial backing of key labor leaders, is a fundamental
economic reform supported by credits of the International Mon-
etary Fund and US government aimed at checking inflation. It
involves price and wage adjustments which will bear most heav-
ily on the laboring classes during early phases of implemen-
tation. President Siles Zuazo has considered resigning, and the
cabinet reportedly has tendered its resignation, as a result of
wavering labor support, other leftist opposition, and sporadic
public rioting.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]
4. ARMY COUP REPORTED IN INDONESIA

The reported army coup in central
Sumatra probably will stimulate Pres-
ident Sukarno to accelerate his efforts
to assert his personal authority over
the government. It will also encourage other disgruntled
army elements in Indonesia to take direct action.

the coup was led by
Lt. Col. Achmad Hussein, a local regimental commander.
He reportedly has deposed the provincial governor because
of "dissatisfaction among all strata of the population" and
established a "citizens' council" to rule in his stead.

Although he commands no more than 5,000
troops, Hussein would be in a fairly strong position if he is
acting with or receives the backing of his chief, Col. Simbolon,
the popular territorial commander of North Sumatra, who has
long been a leading critic of the inefficiency of the central gov-
ernment.

There is considerable sentiment through-
out Sumatra for a federal government rather than the central-
ized system desired by President Sukarno and other nationalist politicians. Similar sentiment exists in other non-Javanese
areas.

President Sukarno has been reported as
planning to declare a state of emergency whereby he could ac-
tively assume command of the armed forces. He is said to
have sought a justification from a prominent constitutional
authority.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
5. GREECE TO PRESS FOR IMMEDIATE UN DEBATE
ON CYPRUS

The Greek decision to press for imme-
diate UN debate on the Cyprus issue when
the political committee reconvenes on
3 January indicates that Athens has aban-
doned hope of negotiations with Britain and intends to seek a
showdown as quickly as possible. Discussion of Cyprus is
now scheduled for late in the General Assembly session. The
decision is also designed to counteract the effect on Greek
public opinion of the visit of Colonial Secretary Lennox Boyd.

Prime Minister Karamanlis apparently
hopes the General Assembly will appoint a commission of na-
tions not directly involved to make recommendations for a
Cyprus solution. Greece, according to Karamanlis, could
accept any UN-approved solution.

Ambassador Allen believes Karamanlis
would "very probably" resign if the United States were to sup-
port publicly the British proposals. Karamanlis told Foreign
Minister Averoff he would "feel it his duty" to resign in such
a case. While this threat is intended to influence US action,
Karamanlis might find it necessary under certain conditions
to resign to avoid being forced out of office and to protect his
political future.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
6. PAKISTAN TO REQUEST UN FORCE FOR KASHMIR

The Pakistani government on 20 Decem-
ber gave the American embassy an aide-
memoire stating its intention to ask the
Security Council to send a UN force into
Kashmir. Karachi also wants the Security Council to define
the obligations of both Pakistan and India under the UN-spon-
sored plebiscite agreement of 1948 and to appoint a plebis-
cite administrator. Karachi has requested a Security Coun-
cil hearing by 15 January.

Comment            The Pakistanis want to take advantage of
the precedent created by the UN Emergency
Force in Egypt. Foreign Minister Noon's recent hints that a
similar move would solve the Kashmir problem have been de-
rided by Prime Minister Nehru. Nehru has maintained sev-
eral times during the past year that "changed conditions"--
including US military aid to Pakistan--have eliminated India's
obligations for a plebiscite.

Since Bulganin and Khrushchev, during
their visit to India in December of 1955, supported India's
claims to Kashmir, the USSR may be expected to oppose the
Pakistani proposal in the Security Council. The proposal
will present a major problem to Britain, a fellow member
of the Commonwealth. London has in the past attempted to
avoid taking sides in the Kashmir dispute, but there have been
recent indications that Britain will give at least limited sup-
port to Pakistan in the UN.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
9. INTELLECTUALS RESTIVE IN NORTH VIETNAM

The Hanoi decree of 15 December sus-
pending publication of the new periodical
Nhan Van reveals the determination of
the Viet Minh leadership to keep popular
criticism of the regime within bounds.
Apparently the disorders last month, as
well as events in Eastern Europe, have given the authorities
second thoughts on the extent to which they should implement
their earlier promises to allow greater freedom of expres-
sion. In recent broadcasts, Hanoi has warned the people
against an "excess of democracy."

Nhan Van, which published only five is-
sues, addressed itself mainly to intellectuals with such ap-
peals as "Arts and letters demand freedom." The Communist
bureaucracy was pictured as stifling creative accomplishment
by individuals. In announcing suspension of the periodical,
Hanoi declared that some 33 of its articles had the effect of
"causing the readers to become discouraged, pessimistic,
and dubious of our regime and leadership... and had a disas-
trous effect on the consolidation of North Vietnam."

Although the disorders last month were
apparently confined to the rural areas of North Vietnam, the
suspension of Nhan Van lends credence to reports of intellec-
tual ferment in the cities. Some dissatisfaction among in-
tellectuals was in fact acknowledged in several Hanoi broad-
casts. According to still unconfirmed reports, students at
Hanoi University have staged protest meetings to criticize
certain regime policies.

22 Dec 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
[PAGE 14]
