[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Ten Chinese battalions reported in northwestern Tonkin (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West German pressure for four-power talks increases (page 5).
5. Danish Government may fall if US aid is suspended (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Ten Chinese battalions reported in northwestern Tonkin:

about ten Chinese Communist battalions, each numbering from 200 to 300 men, are now active in northwestern Tonkin. These units, in cooperation with the Viet Minh, have clashed with French-supported guerrillas, and for the first time dead combatants have definitely been identified as Chinese.

Comment: There is as yet insufficient information to judge whether these Chinese troops are provincial or regular forces and whether their operations will be confined to this relatively remote area of Tonkin. Three Chinese battalions were reported to have entered the same area about 13 May and to have withdrawn several weeks later.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
4. West German pressure for four-power talks increases:

There is a growing demand among political circles in West Germany for four-power discussions on German unification. This trend, which was touched off by press reports that France wants immediate discussions, was given further impetus by the recent postponement of German ratification of the Bonn-Paris treaties.

Meanwhile, East German Foreign Affairs Minister Dertinger is quoted in an East Berlin newspaper as stating that the Western powers may yield to popular pressure for such talks, but will attach unacceptable conditions.

5. Danish Government may fall if US aid is suspended:

Danish Foreign Minister Kraft has told the American Ambassador that his government may fall and that Denmark may have to review its entire foreign policy if MSA aid is stopped as a consequence of Denmark's delivering to the USSR a tanker recently completed under the 1948 trade agreement. The Danes have agreed to postpone delivery for a few days.

Kraft believes that the opposition Social Democratic Party could not assume power in these circumstances and still support NATO.

Comment: The United States requested Denmark to delay the delivery of the ship until late 1953, as scheduled in the agreement, or until the end of the Korean conflict, whichever is later. When Denmark replied that Soviet merchant marine officers were already on board the vessel, the United States warned on 25 June that if the tanker were delivered, the US would have to apply the Battle Act and probably terminate aid.

- 5 -
