[PAGE 01]
27 June 1952
Copy No.- 5
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Ten Chinese battalions reported in northwestern Tonkin (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. Turkish Ambassador urges Turkey be included in Middle East defense talks (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE
3. Italy makes clandestine shipments of ball bearings to Czechoslovakia (page 4).
4. West German pressure for four-power talks increases (page 5).
5. Danish Government may fall if US aid is suspended (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Ten Chinese battalions reported in northwestern Tonkin:
about ten Chinese Communist battalions,
each numbering from 200 to 300 men, are
now active in northwestern Tonkin. These
units, in cooperation with the Viet Minh, have clashed with French-
supported guerrillas, and for the first time
dead combatants have definitely been identified as Chinese.

Chinese probably entered Indochina to stop French interference with
the opium trade, and that this is not a "serious Chinese invasion."

Comment: There is as yet insufficient
information to judge whether these Chinese troops are provincial or
regular forces and whether their operations will be confined to this
relatively remote area of Tonkin. Three Chinese battalions were
reported to have entered the same area about 13 May and to have
withdrawn several weeks later.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Turkish Ambassador urges Turkey be included in Middle East defense talks:
The Turkish Ambassador in London believes
that the Acheson-Eden-Schuman conversa-
tions may include Middle East defense and
he has urged his government to "demand"
that Turkey participate in any discussions
on this subject. The Ambassador suggested that if the three powers
do not agree to its participation, Turkey should insist on being given
the opportunity to express its opinions on any decision.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: The British have been working
on a new version of the Middle East Command which they plan to pre-
sent to France, Turkey and the interested dominions.

Turkey, a sponsor of the proposed Middle
East Command, has been critical of the manner in which its estab-
lishment has been discussed.

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Italy makes clandestine shipments of ball bearings to Czechoslovakia:
an Italian
firm is sending a shipment of ball bearings
at the end of May. This consignment was
to be sent as "luggage." Another shipment was to be sent on 12 June
to Basel, and from there by airplane to Czechoslovakia.

Comment: Despite Italian assurances that
exports to Czechoslovakia of International List I bearings would be
held up pending United States consideration of these items as a possi-
ble exception to the Battle Act, clandestine shipments are being made.
The Czech-Italian trade agreement now in effect calls for supplying
Czechoslovakia with 1.4 million dollars worth of List I bearings,
which Italy has refused to ship since 1951.

smuggling from Italy to Czechoslovakia during the last six months
of such other strategic items as cobalt, molybdenum, tungsten and
nickel.
[PAGE 05]
4. West German pressure for four-power talks increases:
There is a growing demand among political
circles in West Germany for four-power
discussions on German unification. This
trend, which was touched off by press re-
ports that France wants immediate discus-
sions, was given further impetus by the
recent postponement of German ratification
of the Bonn-Paris treaties.

Meanwhile, East German Foreign Affairs
Minister Dertinger is quoted in an East Berlin newspaper as stating
that the Western powers may yield to popular pressure for such talks,
but will attach unacceptable conditions.

5. Danish Government may fall if US aid is suspended:
Danish Foreign Minister Kraft has told the
American Ambassador that his government
may fall and that Denmark may have to re-
view its entire foreign policy if MSA aid is
stopped as a consequence of Denmark's delivering to the USSR a
tanker recently completed under the 1948 trade agreement. The
Danes have agreed to postpone delivery for a few days.

Kraft believes that the opposition Social
Democratic Party could not assume power in these circumstances
and still support NATO.

Comment: The United States requested
Denmark to delay the delivery of the ship until late 1953, as scheduled
in the agreement, or until the end of the Korean conflict, whichever
is later. When Denmark replied that Soviet merchant marine officers
were already on board the vessel, the United States warned on 25 June
that if the tanker were delivered, the US would have to apply the Battle
Act and probably terminate aid.
