Mossadeq's campaign against the Court is strengthened by the departure of Prince Abor Reza for India and the reported plans of Queen Soraya to leave Iran. The closing of the two Tudeh and three anti-Mossadeq newspapers has for the time being reduced this source of criticism.

The Prime Minister, although weakened by the recent pro-Shah demonstrations, appears to control the situation once more. Further moves to reduce opposition elements can be expected.

7. Jordan may abrogate its Mount Scopus agreements with Israel:

Jordan may soon attempt to abrogate its Mount Scopus agreements guaranteeing Israel access to the area, which lies in the Jordanian-held sector of Jerusalem. According to the senior Jordanian representative on the UN Mixed Armistice Commission, his government will treat the Hadassah Hospital and the Hebrew University on Mount Scopus as Jewish private property and will deny that Israel has sovereign rights in the sector.

Comment: Adoption of such a policy by Jordan would bring the recent tensions between the two countries near to a breaking point.

The American Consul General in Jerusalem believes that Jordan will base its policy on security grounds and on the calculation that the Eisenhower administration is favorably disposed toward the Arabs.

8. Egypt sets conditions for dropping threat of West German boycott:

Egypt has assured the West German Government that the Arabs will not boycott German goods because of Bonn's ratification of the Israeli reparations treaty, provided certain declarations are made prior to ratification.

Egypt has asked for a statement that Germany is prepared to send experts to study the Aswan dam project, to send a delegation to other Arab states to investigate their economic needs, and to agree in principle to naming a neutral trustee to observe goods delivered to Israel in order to assure their being non-strategic.

The German Embassy in Cairo considers such a declaration a cheap price to pay for eliminating the threat of a boycott and has urged Bonn to accept the Egyptian suggestion.

Comment: Although Egypt, along with the other Arab League states, has threatened to boycott German goods since the beginning of Israeli-German negotiations, it has done so reluctantly because of the importance of its German trade. As some other Arab states have already privately renounced any intention of carrying out the boycott threat, it is unlikely that any concerted Arab League boycott will be attempted.

EASTERN EUROPE

9. Tito predicts weakened Soviet regime and sees possibility of Satellite defection:

Tito, who displayed undisguised pleasure over Stalin's death, believes it will result in weakening the USSR's hold over the Satellites and may furnish an opportunity for Albania to escape Soviet control. He cautions, however, that any successful movement against the present Albanian regime must come from within the country and that outside action would merely strengthen Premier Hoxha's regime and the Albanian fear of Yugoslav or Greek domination.

Comment: Recent actions indicate that Yugoslavia would be quick to exploit any lessened Soviet control over its Satellite neighbors. Despite Tito's disapproval of outside action, recent developments indicate the Yugoslavs may have already planned increased actions against the Hoxha regime.

- 8 -
