[PAGE 01]
SEC INFORMATION
CURRENT INT
21 October 1952
Copy No.
INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
Yoshida reportedly to remain as Japanese Prime Minister (page 3).
South Korea to continue enforcement of "Rhee Line" (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
Indonesian civil and military authorities reach accord (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
Mossadeq orders full support for North African nationalism (page 5).
Charles Malik submits resignation as Lebanese Minister (page 5).
Split reported in Egyptian army group (page 6).
Egypt reportedly considering establishment of leftist republic
(page 6).
Greek Rally may lose support of Social Democratic leader (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Yoshida reportedly to remain as Japanese Prime Minister:
Ambassador Murphy reports that agreement has virtually been reached within the Japanese Liberal Party that Yoshida will remain as prime minister. Although details are not yet known, Murphy believes that Yoshida may have agreed to include some Hatoyama supporters in his cabinet and to relinquish his position after a limited time, possibly by next March.

The Embassy has been informed that Hatoyama's hitherto adamant stand was changed by family pressure and by ambitious politicians close to him who realize that he cannot secure the premiership at this time.

Comment: Although this development removes the immediate threat of a Liberal split, the party's slim majority in the lower house will not permit the freedom of action held by the previous Yoshida government. A Japanese cabinet member informed an American observer on 16 October that plans are already being made for another general election next spring.

2. South Korea to continue enforcement of "Rhee line":
The South Korean Government, in a note to the American Embassy on 17 October, declared that its navy would continue to stop and search vessels that cross the "Rhee line." The South Koreans urged the United States to recognize and cooperate in maintaining the line, which they admit "does not affect any nation other than Japan." The United States was also requested to turn over for trial by South Korean prize courts any vessels captured within the UN Sea Defense Zone.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: The UN Sea Defense Zone, which includes practically the same waters as the "Rhee line," was established on 29 September primarily to prevent incidents between a Japanese fisheries patrol and the South Korean Navy. Rhee has countermanded UN Command orders and directed his chief of naval operations to seize and bring into Pusan any vessels found within the line.

Recent seizures of fishing vessels in the disputed area are arousing anti-Korean sentiment in Japan.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Indonesian civil and military authorities reach accord:
The highest Indonesian civil and military authorities are now "fully in accord" that the present cabinet should remain in office and that parliament should remain recessed for an indefinite period, agreement has been reached to hold elections as soon as possible. Sukarno refused an army petition that he become a dictator.

Comment: When the parliament, whose members were appointed, precipitated a government crisis on 16 October by passing a resolution demanding personnel changes in the army and in the defense ministry, army leaders organized demonstrations demanding its dissolution and the holding of general elections.

Efforts of the army and of the defense ministry to deal with the country's primary problem of internal insecurity have been thwarted, since independence, by political rivalries and government crises.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Mossadeq orders full support for North African nationalism:

Comment: Mossadeq's growing bitterness toward the West and his recognition of the UN as a useful forum for presenting Iran's case against Britain have apparently increased his willingness to support fully the nationalists of North Africa.

Iran's support may be countered by Pakistan, whose UN delegate recently assured the American delegation that he would urge his government to make every effort to sell a moderate viewpoint to the Arab-Asians.

5. Charles Malik submits resignation as Lebanese Minister:
Charles Malik has submitted his resignation as Lebanese Minister in Washington, and does not intend to join the Lebanese delegation at the UN General Assembly in New York.

Malik's action stems from his opposition to the appointment of Fuad Amoun, Director General of the Foreign Office, as head of the Lebanese UN delegation. Malik feels that Amoun has intentionally caused him difficulties at home and abroad. He has also been irked by the delay in promoting him to ambassador.
[PAGE 06]
The Department of State has instructed its Embassy in Beirut to tell the Lebanese President informally of its concern over the absence of Malik from the Assembly meetings.

Comment: Malik's continued absence or possible retirement from government service would deprive the West of an effective Arab friend.

6. Split reported in Egyptian army group:
Friction has allegedly developed between Colonel Abdul Nasr and Colonel Anwar Sadat, two important members of General Nagib's inner circle. The US Army Attache in Cairo, in reporting this information, adds that Colonel Sadat's probable retirement from the army's "high committee" has been suggested by several sources.

Comment: This is the first clear indication that serious dissension may be developing within the Egyptian military group. The reports of friction between Nasr and Sadat, coinciding with the removal of Colonel Mohanna from the former Regency Council, are additional evidence that the military group may not be functioning smoothly.

7. Egypt reportedly considering establishment of leftist republic:
The Egyptian military regime may soon establish a republic with leftist tendencies,

The inner circle reportedly includes "one or more Communists," principally Colonel Abdul Nasr, who is alleged to be the real leader of the group.
[PAGE 07]
the officers have taken no effective action to check Communist activities in Egypt, and that the army journal Al-Tahrir is edited by known Communists.

Comment: There have been persistent but unconfirmed rumors during the past week that Egypt may soon discard the monarchy and establish a republic.

There is no indication, however, that General Nagib and the "high committee" are dominated or influenced by Communists. On the contrary, evidence to date suggests that the military regime will move toward the right, possibly under the influence of the Moslem Brotherhood.

8. Greek Rally may lose support of Social Democratic leader:
George Papandreou, Social Democratic leader who has been supporting the Greek Rally, is considering staying out of the elections because Rally leader Marshal Papagos would not accept his candidates on the Greek Rally ticket.

Comment: The vote of the Greek Rally and the EPEK-Liberal coalition has been approximately equal, and realignment of the political leaders could materially affect the outcome of the elections. The reported defection to the Rally on 19 October of 24 Liberal deputies would tend to offset any withdrawal by Papandreou and his supporters.
