[PAGE 01]
25 May 1960
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 May 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-Indonesia: Major elements of the Indian fleet will visit Indonesia in late June, and Indonesian naval units are likely to participate in exercises with them. This visit, an

[PAGE 04]
extension of earlier Indian plans for exercises with British and Malayan naval units in Malayan waters, will coincide with the much-heralded arrival in Netherlands New Guinea of the Dutch carrier Karel Doorman and other naval units. Indonesia can be expected to play up the Indian visit as a demonstration of friendship and support by another Asian power against "Dutch imperialism."

Laos: The escape from jail on 24 May of Prince Souphanouvong and 15 other leaders of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat party will give the Pathet Lao insurgency movement a strong boost. Souphanouvong, the rallying point of anti-government "patriotic" elements throughout Laos, will probably try to go to the Pathet Lao command post, believed located in the Laos - North Vietnam border area. His escape will give the Communists added leverage in their political and subversive efforts against the government, and may be followed by a step-up in guerrilla warfare.

Guinea: Guinea's education minister stated on 20 May that his government has embarked on a "crash" program to recruit teachers wherever possible, including the Soviet bloc. This results from the decision by most of the 215 French nationals now teaching in Guinea to leave after the current term. The education minister formally requested American and British assistance in the recruiting effort so that Guinea would not become "wholly dependent on the bloc." Earlier this year the USSR reportedly offered to provide teachers, and a few Soviet nationals may already be employed in Guinean schools. (Page 6)

25 May 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Cuba: The Castro regime informed the American Embassy on 23 May that it intends to build facilities at the entrance to the US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay to control the entrance and exit of persons and vehicles. The embassy was informed that the purpose of this measure is "to capture the entirety of the dollars" earned by Cubans on the base. The 3,500 Cuban employees at the base earn about $600,000 a month. The regime will require "documentation" of each Cuban employee, a measure that will permit tight controls over personnel there for political purposes as well.

25 May 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indian Naval Visit to Indonesia Set for Late June

New Delhi has announced that major elements of the Indian fleet will visit Indonesia during late June, and may exercise with Indonesian naval units. The Indian force, consisting of two light cruisers and seven destroyer types, left Bombay on 24 May and presumably will be in Indonesian waters when the much-publicized Dutch carrier group calls at Netherlands New Guinea, (West Irian).

The Indian visit is in return for a good-will trip to Bombay in early May by three Indonesian warships and is an extension of previous Indian plans to conduct exercises this summer with British and Malayan units in the Indian Ocean and in Malayan waters. Elements of the Indian task force will also pay calls to Singapore and Malaya.

Exercises with non-Commonwealth forces are unusual for India. While the coincidence of the presence of Indian and Dutch naval units in Southeast Asian waters may be accidental, India's decision to expand the scope of its summer exercises to include a visit to Indonesia and maneuvers with Indonesian ships probably represents as much an effort to provide a calming influence as it does to extend support to a friendly nation.

While Djakarta has not yet commented on the projected Indian visit, it can be expected to play up the visit as a demonstration of friendship and support by another Asian power against "Dutch imperialism." During the past month, Indonesia has approached Asian and Arab governments for assistance in denouncing and obstructing the Dutch plan to augment forces in Netherlands New Guinea and to send naval units on a flag-showing cruise in the Far East. Other than statements of sympathy and cooperation, India's decision is the first demonstration of support which has resulted from Indonesia's efforts.

25 May 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
Escape of Jailed Pro-Communist Leaders in Laos

The escape of Prince Souphanouvong and 15 other jailed Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) leaders in the early hours of 24 May will give the Pathet Lao insurgency a strong boost, as well as constitute a serious loss of face for the Laotian Government. The government now is relieved of the need to carry out the long-deferred trial of these pro-Communist leaders, but this advantage is outweighed by the danger of having them at large again and by the embarrassment the army must suffer over their escape from the supposedly heavily guarded prison in Vientiane.

Souphanouvong and his party will probably try to reach the Pathet Lao command post, which is believed to be located somewhere in the Laos - North Vietnam border area. Because of Souphanouvong's considerable national prestige, his name will add weight to Pathet Lao directives and propaganda pronouncements. The Pathet Lao command structure will also be strengthened by some of the other escapees, who are reported to be key members of the clandestine Communist inner core of the NLHS.

In the past few months, the Pathet Lao insurgents have de-emphasized military operations in favor of propaganda and subversive activities in the hope of influencing the recent national elections. With these elections now out of the way and with the likelihood that the new government to be formed shortly will be dominated by the militantly anti-Communist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI), the insurgents may step up their guerrilla attacks.

25 May 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
