South Korea

The Supreme Council for National Reconstruction (SCNR) is continuing efforts to promote popular support for the military regime. The thoroughness of the campaign was indicated by the details announced in the South Korean press concerning the demonstration held in Taegu on 22 May. Organizers are reported to have required that each household provide one participant; factories were ordered closed so that all employees could attend; all businessmen were ordered to be present. The groups from each precinct were required to bring two placards displaying approved slogans. About 35,000 people were present at the Taegu demonstration, but the rally was described as lackluster. The American Embassy reports that although there is evidence of "increasing disenchantment" on the part of educated persons and students, general public attitudes range from "acceptance of the coup and military rule to bewildered confusion as to changes."

Of the persons reported arrested since the coup, over 600 are politicians, 540 are teachers, but only 70 are students, bearing out previous indications that the regime intended to handle the student problem cautiously. The arrest of the politicians muzzles such potential opposition leaders as former speaker of the lower house Kwak Sang-hun, and vice speaker So Min-ho. Foreign Minister Kim Hyong-il told American Charge Green yesterday he had discussed the matter of the arrest of political leaders with the SCNR and that he was making efforts to get at least the members of the Chang Myon cabinet returned to their homes soon. Lieutenant General Chang To-yong also told Charge Green yesterday that political arrests would soon be stopped and that certain persons who had been arrested would be released after they had been screened and cleared; he said that members of the Chang cabinet, with one or two exceptions, would be taken from jail and put under house arrest.

Air Force chief Lieutenant General Kim Shin told the American air attache in Seoul on 22 May that regime leaders Chang To-yong and Pak Chong-hui had informed him the military

25 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
