1. RIOTS IN POLAND

Press reports of rioting which paralyzed the Polish city of Poznan throughout 28 June have been confirmed by a Polish government broadcast which states in part that "Enemy agents succeeded today (28 June) in provoking street riots. Certain public buildings were attacked and this led to casualties." There has been no confirmation of rumors that similar riots have broken out in other Polish cities.

The disturbances in Poznan apparently started early in the morning on a limited scale as a protest by factory workers against low wages, lack of food, and poor working conditions. According to eyewitnesses, a mass demonstration rapidly developed and took on political overtones when the headquarters of the Polish United Workers (Communist) Party was attacked. Soviet flags were torn down, and the crowds began calling for the Russians to leave Poland.

The workers probably were stimulated to demonstrate at this time by the fact that the 25th International Trade Fair is now being held in Poznan. They shouted in German and French to visiting foreigners: "Tell the outside world what you have seen. We want things to become better, and we want the Soviets to disappear."

The regime has stated that order has been restored. According to eyewitness reports, the armed forces, including tank units, were used to curb the demonstration. Local police are reported to have stood by passively until the arrival of the armed forces.

Despite the current liberalization program in Poland, it seems likely that the regime will carry out its threat to punish those responsible "with all the severity of the law" and will use whatever force is necessary to keep the riots from spreading. The demonstrations will be considered by the Communist leaders an example of the dangers of proceeding too rapidly with the liberalization program. The liberal forces within the Polish party are probably alarmed by the demonstrations and will be more cautious than in the past in pressing their view that further reforms are desirable.
