The Situation in Laos

A group of officers under the leadership of Major Bountheng, commander of the Third Infantry Battalion, seized control of the royal capital of Luang Prabang on the night of 10 November, with the apparent objective of swinging the First Military Region over to General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. Phoumi promptly flew paratroop elements to Luang Prabang to help Bountheng sustain his coup. The coup was staged while First Military Region Commander Col. Houmpanh and Armed Forces Commander General Ouane were touring northern Laos with Souvanna Phouma. When he heard of the coup, Souvanna flew directly back to Vientiane while Houmpanh returned to Luang Prabang, apparently in an effort to dissuade the Bountheng group from going ahead with its plans to declare for Phoumi.

Bountheng's action was probably stimulated by the belief that Souvanna was not taking adequate measures to counter the Communist-dominated Pathet Lao, who have made substantial gains during the crisis touched off by Captain Kong Le's August coup. The Luang Prabang take-over probably also stemmed from the conviction that Ouane and Houmpanh had temporized too long in carrying out their pledge to lead the First Military Region into opposition against Souvanna if he failed to bring the Pathet Lao under control.

If Bountheng can maintain control of Luang Prabang and carry other units in the First Military Region along with him, Souvanna's position will suffer a major blow. His several fence-mending trips to northern Laos in recent weeks reflect the importance he attached to holding the First Military Region, without whose support he would be reduced to dependence on the support of the Vientiane garrison. This latter force is believed still semiparalyzed by fear of the Pathet Lao, who share control of Vientiane Province with regular army elements.

The American Embassy in Vientiane, commenting on the Luang Prabang take-over, expresses concern that this development, coupled with frequent reports of an imminent Phoumi
