[PAGE 01]
15 April 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
15 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Poland: Commenting on the recent party congress in Warsaw,
stated that Khrushchev's grudging endorsement of both Gomulka and Poland's special brand of Communism is, in time, bound to have an impact on the Communist world. In the long run, Moscow may be faced eventually with the alternative of crushing Gomulka or permitting other satellites the same degree of autonomy as Poland, which would weaken Soviet control.

Communist China - Tibet - India: Peiping's statements and dealings with India have been increasingly cautious since the Tibet revolt started last month. Communist China has thus far made no formal protest concerning Indian Government statements critical of the Communist handling of the revolt. Reflecting this policy,
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
III. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions were to be used in context with SNIE 100-2-59 (24 February 1959) and with the review of that estimate in SNIE 100-2/1-59 (17 March 1959):

1. Evidence of preparations for evacuation of Soviet control elements from Berlin continues to mount. While the USSR will not turn over access controls to the GDR in the near future, the physical transfer of access controls could be accomplished with little or no advance warning.

2. There are no reliable indications of a bloc intent in the near future to blockade Allied or West German access to West Berlin, or to seal off West Berlin from the bloc. However, the USSR could take such actions with little or no warning. The recent completion of new facilities at the Marienborn checkpoint suggests that the East Germans may impose tighter controls on railroad traffic between West Germany and Berlin.

3. There are as yet no clear indications of specific Soviet tactics at the forthcoming foreign ministers' meeting in Geneva. Moscow is using propaganda media and covert channels to play down East-West tensions and attempt to soften Western positions on the basic issues involved.

4. It is still too early to determine what effect, if any, Chancellor Adenauer's decision to seek the presidency will have on Bonn's foreign policy.

5. Tension throughout West Berlin has noticeably abated and the upward trend of the stock market is a significant indicator of confidence. There is still considerable apprehension about the confusion surrounding international debate on Berlin and all-German problems. Most West Berlin political leaders prefer the status quo, despite its weaknesses, to any compro-
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Possible Impact on the Bloc of Khrushchev's Endorsement
Of Gomulka

Khrushchev's grudging endorsement of Gomulka and Poland's own special brand of Communism is bound in time to have an impact on the Communist world. In the long run, Moscow may be faced with the alternatives of having to crush Gomulka or of permitting certain other satellites a degree of autonomy which would weaken its control.

The truce between Khrushchev and Gomulka is based on mutual necessity, As a Communist, Gomulka, in the final analysis, can look only to Moscow for support and dares not defy the USSR openly. On the other hand, trouble in Poland could mean only trouble for Khrushchev, who does not want to risk another Hungary while he is so deeply involved in important international political maneuverings.

Concern over the possible effect of the outcome of the Berlin crisis on Poland's unique position in the bloc has been expressed
feels that if the United States makes too many concessions to the Soviet Union in the current crisis over Berlin, the USSR would regard its dominance in Eastern Europe as assured and would no longer feel it necessary to tolerate the Polish differences. As long as there is some uncertainty in the USSR about the American attitude toward Eastern Europe, it will maintain the status quo in Poland and in some of the other countries.

Currently many Poles, including Gomulka, are concerned that the Soviet Union, despite Khrushchev's assurances to the contrary, will make "territorial adjustments," stripping Poland of its highly prized western territories in order to effect a German settlement. While Poland would prefer the Oder-Neisse border to be established for good, it fears the possible results of negotiations over Germany and will settle for a continuation of the status quo
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
