Albanian Premier Reaffirms Support for Chinese

Albanian Premier Mehmet Shehu, speaking on 25 October to the National Assembly on the current international situation, in effect re-endorsed Albania's support for Communist China while at the same time paying lip service to certain of the Soviet leader's positions. He implied that some of Khrushchev's proposals made at the current UN General Assembly session are impractical, and he used arguments advanced in the past by the Chinese Communists to show why these proposals cannot be implemented. On the disarmament question, for example, he stated that while Albania supports Soviet proposals on this question, Albania believes the "imperialists will never accept" disarmament merely through "discussions." He went on to say that only through a determined struggle of all "peace-loving" peoples can disarmament be forced on the West.

Shehu, who implicitly criticized Khrushchev's meetings in New York with Tito, also directly disagreed with two Soviet-sponsored proposals advanced earlier by satellite leaders. He condemned the idea of total disarmament in the Balkans--proposed prior to the General Assembly meeting by Gheorghiu-Dej of Rumania and Zhivkov of Bulgaria--as "absurd and dangerous" as long as "imperialism" surrounds the bloc. He also disagreed with Gomulka's suggestion that a first step toward disarmament could be the acceptance of existing military bases on foreign soil if new bases are prohibited. He said this would involve acceptance of the presence of "hundreds of US bases" around the "socialist camp." Tirana probably sees in such Soviet bloc actions a threat to its importance as an "outpost of socialism" on the Adriatic and perhaps even to its existence as a state.

Shehu's speech comes at a time of continuing signs of Sino-Albanian amity and Soviet-Albanian friction. In a 24 October cable of thanks to Albania, China again congratulated Tirana for its consistency and for its struggle to keep Marxism-Leninism "pure." Deputy Premier Kellezi, in a speech on 26 October, following his return from Peiping, broadened Albania's support of Peiping to include Chinese internal policy, hailing the communes and the "leap forward" as "extremely correct" and

1 Nov 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
