III. THE WEST

British Labor Party Reconsidering Nuclear Policy

To avoid a Labor party split before the general elections ex-
pected this fall, party and trade-union leaders will meet on 23
June to seek ways of dealing with the growing pressure within the
Labor movement to advocate a unilateral renunciation of nuclear
weapons by Britain.

The meeting is being held a month earlier than originally
scheduled, primarily to meet the threat posed by a resolution
passed on 4 June by the powerful right-wing National Union of
General and Municipal Workers, the third largest British trade
union. This resolution calls for "the next Labor government"
to stop the manufacture of nuclear weapons in Britain and pro-
hibit their use on British territory. The Labor leadership ap-
parently hopes to stave off a similar resolution from the Trans-
port and General Workers Union--Britain's largest.

The present party policy, formulated in March 1958, merely
calls on the government to press for an international agreement on
the suspension of thermonuclear tests and to adopt a unilateral
British test ban for one year. While Gaitskell, Bevan, and other
party leaders continue to oppose any unilateral British nuclear
disarmament, they are searching for measures which, while not
limiting a future Labor government's freedom of action, will of-
fer a contrast to the Macmillan government's policy. Bevan, for
instance, favors a proposal that Britain should offer to give up
its nuclear weapons to help form a non-nuclear "club" of all
nations except the US and the USSR. He privately acknowledges,
however, that Britain would not have to make good on its offer
since France is unlikely to accept such a proposal.

Even a slight shift in Labor party policy would bring addi-
tional pressure on the Macmillan government to achieve a test-
suspension agreement. The government has continually shown
its sensitivity to public opinion on the issue by seeking compro-
mises for Soviet-Western differences on the subject.
