Peiping and Moscow Issue Sharply Divergent Propaganda on Eisenhower's Trip to Latin America

The propaganda coverage being given the early stages of President Eisenhower's Latin America trip by Peiping and Moscow diverges as sharply as their coverage of his trip to Asia last winter.

The Chinese are taking an openly hostile attitude. The authoritative party paper People's Daily on 23 February bitterly charged that the United States is a "savage aggressor" and that Eisenhower "is no friend of the Latin American people." Blaming Eisenhower for the overthrow of the "democratic" government of Guatemala in 1954, People's Daily warned that "American imperialism" is increasing its intervention in Cuba in order to subvert the Cuban revolution and impede the anti-US struggle in Latin America. One Chinese commentary cited the recent air raid over Cuba by an American-based plane as evidence of the "barbarity and shamelessness" of "American imperialism" and declared that the 650,000,000 Chinese people stand firmly by the side of the Cuban people.

Moscow, however, has given the trip reasonably factual coverage but has used excerpts from the foreign press to imply that the tour is intended to "soften the anti-American sentiment" in the area. A domestic broadcast on 22 February reported the President's television broadcast and quoted him on the purposes of the trip. This was offset, however, by comments purportedly taken from a Senate report on Latin America which Moscow claims is critical of US policy motivated by "egoism" and the "desire to increase profits." The American press is quoted as claiming that the President is not taking "any concrete proposals!" which would help Latin Americans.

Peiping's harsh criticism illustrates again the basic disagreement between China and the USSR over the best tactics to be pursued toward the United States. While both powers agree that the future will belong to "socialism," the Chinese disagree with the Soviet policy of "peaceful contacts" to achieve that end and prefer a vigorous attack on the United States as the "arch-enemy" of the bloc.

24 Feb 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
