[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

8 March 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 41
NO CHANGE IN CLASS
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE:
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 14 Jan 80  REVIEWER:

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. JORDAN SITUATION DISPLAYS SIGNS OF CONTINUED
INSTABILITY

2. COMMUNISTS MAY BACK MOLLET GOVERNMENT ON
ALGERIA

3. AMBASSADOR BOHLEN'S OBSERVATIONS ON SOVIET
PARTY CONGRESS

6. IMPENDING AMERICAN NUCLEAR TESTS AROUSING
FUROR IN JAPAN

8. VIET MINH WEAKNESS IN CENTRAL VIETNAM DESCRIBED

9. USSR REPORTEDLY HAS OFFERED "FREE GIFT" OF AID
TO LIBYA

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. JORDAN SITUATION DISPLAYS SIGNS OF
CONTINUED INSTABILITY

King Hussain's dismissal of General
Glubb has intensified the instability in
Jordan. Jordanian prime minister
Rifai virtually admitted to US ambassa-
dor Mallory his government's fear of
prompt British counteraction, such as
withdrawal of all British officers in the
Arab Legion and termination of the Brit-
ish subsidy. Both of these moves are
under discussion in London. The impres-
sion left by the Foreign Office on Ambas-
sador Aldrich is that Britain considers
its position in Jordan irretrievably lost.

Reports from Amman and elsewhere
strongly suggest that King Hussain is under the domination
of a group of young Jordanian officers of the Arab Legion
called the Free Officers Movement, which seems to be sim-
ilar to the Revolutionary Command in Egypt. The British
believe disintegration of the Arab Legion is likely, and the
young officer group might then resort to drastic moves, in-
cluding even removal of the king, to retain its position.
Further unrest and political agitation are likely to develop
in Palestinian West Jordan, where Communist elements are
active.

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]
2. COMMUNISTS MAY BACK MOLLET GOVERNMENT
ON ALGERIA

The French Communist Party (PCF)
is seriously considering supporting
Premier Mollet in the National Assem-
bly vote on special powers for Algeria,
according to a member of President Coty's staff. The act-
ing secretary general of the Socialist Party believes that
the Communists may at least abstain. He comments that
the current PCF line stressing "ties between France and
Algeria" is an amazing change probably linked with the re-
cent return of Communist leaders from Moscow.

The US embassy believes Mollet's chances
are very favorable for winning the vote, which is expected
by 13 March.

Comment
Communist support of Mollet for a
strong policy in Algeria would indi-
cate the party's determination to use every device to achieve
a popular front.

In an effort to get widespread support
on this issue, Mollet has been consulting with party lead-
ers from the Communists to the Poujadists. None of the
major nongovernment parties has committed itself. How-
ever, it is believed that the right-center would be unwilling
to bring down the government now, particularly since the
government's Algerian policy is much more to its liking than
seemed possible when Mollet assumed office. In the event of
Communist support, the right-center can also be expected to
back the government in an effort to avoid the appearance of a
popular front.

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. AMBASSADOR BOHLEN'S OBSERVATIONS ON SOVIET
PARTY CONGRESS

Ambassador Bohlen stresses that the
Soviet 20th Party Congress did not in-
augurate a new phase in Soviet develop-
ment but merely confirmed and "legal-
ized" the main lines of policies which have been developing
since Stalin's death.

The ambassador believes that the ideolog-
ical readjustments set forth by the congress were necessary
because Stalinist ideology based on "the cult of personality"
could not serve as a foundation for the more flexible and real-
istic policies which collective leadership has permitted. Ideo-
logical adjustments were also necessary in order to take cog-
nizance of the changed relationships between the Soviet Union
and other members of the Communist bloc, as well as to bol-
ster up new relationships with Yugoslavia. These adjustments
may also reflect diminished Soviet need for Communist par-
ties in non-Soviet countries, a logical corollary of increased
Soviet confidence in the strength and international position of
the USSR. The new ideological developments also confirm
the view that ideology is the servant of the Soviet state and
not, except in broadest outline, its master.

Bohlen notes that by laying down formida-
ble political and psychological barriers to the resumption of
one-man rule, the congress has made it more difficult for
Khrushchev or any other leader to become a second Stalin.
He adds that collective leadership implies the continuing posi-
bility of discord among its members, which might lead to
its breakdown. He believes, however, that such a develop-
ment would be unlikely except during an emergency or crisis,
signs of which are not visible, or from an unbridgeable dif-
ference of opinion on current policy. Agriculture remains

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
the most likely source of dispute, particularly in the event
of failure this year of Khrushchev's new-lands and corn
projects.

Bohlen concludes that the changes since
Stalin's death have not resulted in any improvement of the
Soviet moral position. The cynicism of the regime is well
illustrated by the spectacle of the leaders at the congress,
every one a creature of Stalin and involved up to the hilt in
all his actions, now turning on him without a single dissent-
ing voice.

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. IMPENDING AMERICAN NUCLEAR TESTS AROUSING
FUROR IN JAPAN

The announcement on 2 March of the
danger zone for the forthcoming Amer-
ican nuclear tests in the Pacific has
provoked sharp press and popular crit-
icism in Japan, Ambassador Allison
reports.

Allison notes that the Japanese govern-
ment recognizes that the tests cannot be suspended, and

that safety measures are adequate. Tokyo's principal aim
is to secure compensation for the fish usually caught in the

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9

[PAGE 10]
danger zone, for the cost of detouring around the zone,
and for the expenses incurred in checking the radioac-
tivity of the fish subsequently caught in the affected area.

Comment
A recent Japanese public opinion sur-
vey stated that 60 percent of the people
interviewed believed atomic energy is more a curse than
a boon and would favor a ban on nuclear armaments, even
if the USSR had superiority in conventional weapons.

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
8. VIET MINH WEAKNESS IN CENTRAL VIETNAM
DESCRIBED

Viet Minh influence in Central Vietnam
(Annam) has declined greatly in recent
months,

President Diem's strongly nationalist stand
has deprived the Viet Minh of its basic point of appeal--oppo-
sition to the French--and his anti-Viet Minh propaganda pro-
gram has given additional momentum to the significant pro-
Diem swing.

The Viet Minh elements in Central Viet-
nam have no aggressive potential except for isolated acts of
terrorism,

Comment
The regrouping of military forces in ac-
cordance with the Geneva truce gave most
of Central Vietnam its first freedom from Viet Minh rule in
eight years. Although the Viet Minh left behind a well-developed
apparatus, basic popular hostility to the Viet Minh has oper-
ated strongly in Diem's favor. Diem's appeal in Central Viet-
nam is also enhanced by his family's close ties there.

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12

[PAGE 13]
9. USSR REPORTEDLY HAS OFFERED "FREE GIFT" OF
AID TO LIBYA

Libyan prime minister Ben Halim
told Ambassador Lodge during his
visit to Tripoli in late February
that the Soviet Union had offered
Libya a "free gift" of economic aid
as a token of Soviet good will. The offer reportedly in-
cludes a large quantity of wheat as well as bitumen and
cement for road building, heavy agricultural machinery
from Czechoslovakia, equipment for hospitals and schools,
and medical supplies.

Ben Halim stated that the offer was
made with "no strings attached" except for a request that
a TASS correspondent be admitted to Libya.

Comment
This is the most specific information
yet received on a Soviet gift offer to
Libya.

Ben Halim has previously used Soviet
offers to exert pressure for additional American assistance.
The size of the offer, if correctly reported, underlines
Soviet determination to outbid the West for Libyan favor.
(Concurred in by ORR)

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 13

[PAGE 14]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 7 March)

An Israeli military spokesman reported
an exchange of shooting between Egyptian and Israeli forces
in the Gaza area. Israel claims an Egyptian military position
in the Gaza strip opened fire on an Israeli outpost. Egypt has
protested to the Mixed Armistice Commission over five flights
made by Israeli planes on 6 March over the northern part of
the Gaza strip.

The American military attaché in Tel Aviv
reports that the 11th Armored Infantry Brigade is currently at
full strength, "beautifully equipped," in first-class condition,
and on stand-by at Camp Sarafand at Tel Aviv. The brigade
could "roll" on a moment's notice.

The Israeli press is pointing up the in-
creased danger of war as a result of General Glubb's dismissal
from the Arab Legion. The semiofficial newspaper writes that
the "threat to Israel, with Glubb's departure, has increased
ominously." Israel is planning to make its most extensive civil
defense test early next week in Haifa. Civilians as well as mili-
tary units will participate in the test.

The American military attaché in Jordan
anticipates an increase in border incidents along the Israeli-
Jordanian border as a result of Glubb's dismissal. He believes
that lack of restraint and mature judgment under Jordanian lead-
ership along the border could precipitate war. The attaché based
his belief on a report that Arab Legion troops under a Jordanian
commander had fired on Israeli boats as they withdrew from
Syrian fire.

The American military attaché in Damascus
reports that the chief German adviser to the Syrian army fears

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 14

[PAGE 15]
the danger of hostilities because of the absence of the Syrian
chief of staff in Cairo and the chance that it gives "young offi-
cers" to make a "mistake."

8 Mar 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 15

[PAGE 16]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
