Egypt Dissatisfied With Some Aspects of Soviet Economic Aid

High-level Egyptian officials are becoming increasingly critical of Moscow's performance in aiding the UAR's industrialization program. The head of the UAR purchasing mission in Moscow has complained that the USSR is "going back on its word" and is attempting to stretch out certain important industrial projects far beyond their originally planned completion dates.

Moscow had been expected to begin a major expansion of Egypt's Helwan steel plant last February and complete the project in 1963. Recently, however, Soviet officials have stated that they will not begin delivery of equipment before 1965 and that completion is not likely before 1968. They explained this delay by claiming that their industry is "committed for the next five years." Moscow is substantially behind schedule on a number of other projects listed in the Soviet-UAR trade agreement.

Moscow also is expected to build a shipyard at Alexandria. The chief of the UAR's economic planning board, however, has been making unfavorable comparisons between repeated Soviet delays on this project and prompt West German action on the similar shipyard project at Port Said.

In addition, the $2,000,000 Damietta textile factory in Egypt--the first complete installation built by the USSR--has proved unsatisfactory for spinning long-staple Egyptian cotton, and the UAR probably will have it dismantled. The UAR minister of industry reportedly is considering the cancellation of two Soviet contracts for textile mills.

Despite these setbacks, Cairo will continue to depend heavily on Soviet economic aid, although it may attempt to focus Communist assistance on the more general basic projects such as the Aswan High Dam and Syrian river development. Egypt, in line with Nasir's current policy of actively encouraging large-scale Western participation, probably will increasingly contract with the West for its needs for factories with modern industrial equipment and technology.
