[PAGE 01]
21 June 1956
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. YUGOSLAV-SOVIET COMMUNIQUES (page 3).

2. OKINAWA LAND ISSUE CAUSING PRE-ELECTION
FUROR IN JAPAN (page 4).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]3. POLICY SPLIT REPORTED IN POLISH PARTY HIERARCHY[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]
(page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 6)
[PAGE 04]
1. YUGOSLAV-SOVIET COMMUNIQUES

Comment on:

The communiqué on party relations issued at the conclusion of President Tito's visit to the USSR reveals agreement to expand party contacts considerably. The framework for increased party relations conforms closely to the preconditions set by Yugoslavia.

The two parties acknowledged that "the roads and conditions of socialist development are different in different countries." The declaration states that party co-operation "should be based on complete freedom of will and equality, on friendly criticism, and on the comradely character of exchange of views on disputes between our parties."

References to the pressing need for "co-operation of all progressive and peaceful forces" suggest that the Yugoslavs may assume leadership in developing popular fronts and increased international contacts between Communist and Socialist parties.

A separate governmental communiqué issued simultaneously does little more than document the issues on which Tito has previously indicated agreement with the USSR. It supported Communist China's admission to the UN, endorsed the cut in Soviet forces as a step toward partial disarmament, urged talks between East and West Germany to bring about reunification, supported the removal of obstacles to free trade, and called for aid to underdeveloped countries through the UN. The communiqué proposed no new measures in bilateral governmental relations, but merely endorsed a continued expansion of trade and scientific and cultural relations.
[PAGE 05]
2. OKINAWA LAND ISSUE CAUSING PRE-ELECTION
FUROR IN JAPAN

A recommendation by an American congressional committee that the United States purchase additional land for bases on Okinawa, as well as land now being leased, has caused a furor in Japan, according to Ambassador Allison. He feels the Japanese government may be forced into a firm stand against the United States on this issue in order not to handicap the government party's chances in the upper house election on 8 July.

Ambassador Allison emphasizes that the Socialist Party has been quick to exploit the Okinawa land issue and the testimony before a congressional committee that American bases in Japan can be retained permanently. The Japanese press is uniformly critical of American policy on Okinawa, and several major newspapers have said that the USSR certainly will make no territorial concessions as long as the United States retains its Okinawa base.

Comment

The Socialist Party, hard-pressed in the present election campaign to counteract the damage its prestige suffered from its roughhouse tactics in the Diet, may use the Okinawa issue to revive agitation on the question of American bases in Japan proper.

Although the United States had announced previously that Japan retains residual sovereignty over Okinawa while the USSR has actually annexed the Kurils, many Japanese find the legal distinction unconvincing. During the Japanese-Soviet talks in London, which were suspended in March, Soviet representative Malik accused the Japanese of inconsistency in demanding the return of south Sakhalin and the Kurils while accepting American occupation of the Ryukyus and Bonins.
[PAGE 06]
3. POLICY SPLIT REPORTED IN POLISH PARTY HIERARCHY

The rivalry between First Secretary Ochab of the United Workers Party and Premier Cyrankiewicz has been increasing, and the alignment of politburo members behind these men is becoming apparent.

Ochab is reportedly supported by Francizek Mazur and Jerzy Albrecht, who are also members of the secretariat, while Cyrankiewicz is backed by President Zawadzki of the Council of State, Marshal Rokossowski, and Foreign Minister Rapacki.

the position of Cyrankiewicz is constantly growing stronger, and that Ochab is unlikely to continue for long as first secretary.

Comment

There have been earlier reports indicating a rivalry between Cyrankiewicz and Ochab, but these are the first details of the alignment of politburo members behind the men. Cyrankiewicz reportedly favors a continuation of criticism and expansion of liberal practices, which Ochab reportedly does not.

A Polish Communist official believes that Cyrankiewicz, a man of greater significance in a changing Poland and may become the most important member of the politburo.
[PAGE 07]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 20 June)

Israel permitted UN observers on 13 June to inspect the Syrian-Israeli demilitarized zone near Banat Yacov, where the Israelis were reported building tactical defensive positions. The inspection disclosed two shelters which are considered legitimate civil defense installations and a reinforced room allegedly designed for POL storage. The nature of two additional installations, previously tentatively identified as bunkers, could not be determined as they had been recently covered with dirt. The chairman of the Israeli-Syrian military armistice commission said he would have to report his investigation as "incomplete." Though he was of the opinion that these installations were "purely a local effort," he believes that settlers in the area are violating the general armistice agreement. An inspection of alleged Israeli fortifications was also permitted at another post, apparently in the demilitarized zone on the southeastern shore of Lake Tiberias. The observers found a perimeter of defense positions "mostly old, but with some signs of recent work", which were clearly designed to protect the Ein Gev settlement.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]the value of agreements already signed in the Syrian-Soviet bloc arms deal is at least $24,000,000. The Syrians have allocated a total of $36,500,000 for the entire deal.

the Syrians have thus far signed two agreements and are soon to sign a third. Under the framework of these agreements a series of contracts are negotiated. The value of the first agreement is not known, although it probably includes 15,000 submachine guns, armored cars, and various types of artillery. The second agreement includes two contracts, one for 60 tanks totaling $5,880,000 and the other for MIG-15's, artillery, and other equipment totaling $17,600,000. The third agreement which is expected to be signed[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]shortly probably includes 20 T-34 tanks, radar and from 100 to 600 Czech trucks.

(Prepared by ORR[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]])
