Situation in Laos

Government reports indicate continuing maneuvering by
enemy elements on the immediate northern and eastern ap-
proaches to Luang Prabang. The situation is obscure, and
the anxiety of the Laotian Army commanders in the area is
compounded by the poor quality of the city's defending forces,
which comprise mostly volunteer-type troops and new re-
cruits. Meanwhile, Muong Houn, about 50 miles west of
Luang Prabang, has fallen into enemy hands as a result of
abandonment of the position by the government garrison.

The Souvanna delegation going to Geneva is headed by
Quinim Pholsena, information minister and acting finance,
defense, and foreign affairs minister in the "Royal Laotian
Government"; the Pathet Lao group is led by Phoumi Vong-
vichit, secretary general of the central committee of the Neo
Lao Hak Sat--the political arm of the Pathet Lao. The pro-
posed Boun Oum government delegation consists of Phoumi
and fellow cabinet members, Nhouy Abhay, Ngon Sananikone,
and Sopsaisana, plus several advisers.

In Saigon, South Vietnamese Foreign Minister Vu Van
Mau has told Ambassador Nolting that the Diem government
considers it vital that the Boun Oum government delegation
be seated as the official Laotian representation at Geneva.
Mau said that any compromise which would not permit the
government delegation to be seated would be degrading, but
he indicated that an observer role for the Pathet Lao would
be acceptable. He said that he would prefer to see Laos not
represented at all rather than by observers from the opposing
factions, as this would equate the government and the rebels.
Mau indicated that the Diem government had not yet decided
on its own participation, but Ambassador Nolting expects
South Vietnam to attend.

Chou En-lai has written Prince Sihanouk urging him to
join in the Geneva Conference on Laos. There has been some
indication that Sihanouk would like some face-saving pleas
10 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
