Bloc Economic Overtures to Brazil

As in all bloc aid programs, details of the Rumanian
credit must be worked out later. The agreement, however,
is the largest credit arrangement ever offered by Bucharest
and is the first in which Brazil has accepted substantial eco-
nomic aid from the bloc. The only previous bloc aid to
Brazil has been in the form of medium-term commercial
credits, amounting to less than $4,000,000 to finance Czech
and Polish exports.

Khrushchev, in a conversation with the head of the
Brazilian trade delegation now in Moscow, stated that the res-
toration of diplomatic relations between the two countries would
provide a "strong stimulus" for a significant expansion of trade.
Since Quadros was inaugurated, Brazil has expanded its diplo-
matic ties with Eastern Europe to include all the satellites ex-
cept East Germany. These countries now are responding fa-
vorably to Brazil's requests for credits, technical assistance,
and expanded trade. The Brazilian mission touring Eastern
Europe is likely to conclude further aid agreements, and Mos-
cow probably will offer a sizable credit to Brazil if arrange-
ments are made for the eventual exchange of diplomatic repre-
sentatives.

The Chinese Communist trade delegation now in Brazil is
assessing the opportunities for Sino-Brazilian trade. Peiping's
contacts with Latin American countries, except Cuba, have
been extremely limited. Leftist Brazilian Vice President
Goulart reportedly has said he will visit China in June to "for-
malize" the trade contacts being made now. The Chinese prob-
ably envisage the conclusion of a trade agreement as a prelude
to political recognition.

The initiation of a Soviet bloc aid program in Brazil will
serve to promote bloc interests far better than normal trade
contacts, which in Brazil have not proved particularly success-
ful. Bloc-Brazilian trade rose moderately last year to nearly
$150,000,000--some 6 percent of Brazil's foreign trade. Poland
and Czechoslovakia accounted for more than half this amount,
while the USSR's share increased to nearly 20 percent. Despite
10 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
