[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

28 July 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 31
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
[ ] DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 11/14/80  REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
Page Denied
[PAGE 03]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ex-king Sihanouk reported appointed Cambodian chief of army operations (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Adenauer outlines plans for Moscow trip (page 4).
4. Norwegian officials reportedly receive Soviet bid to visit Moscow (page 5).
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Ex-king Sihanouk reported appointed Cambodian chief of army operations:

Cambodian prince Sihanouk was named chief of army operations on 25 July.

Sihanouk is now, in effect, commander in chief of the Cambodian security system and is in a position to control the country through the police as well as the army.

Comment: Sihanouk abdicated the throne last March in favor of his parents in protest against what he regarded as unwarranted interference by foreign diplomats in Cambodia's internal affairs. His resentment was directed in particular against the Indian members of the International Control Commission, who had urged that he not proceed with plans to revise the constitution as a means of strengthening the monarchy.
[PAGE 05]
The prince has remained the most influential person in Cambodia, however, and his political party is campaigning for the national elections of 11 September on a platform calling for the implementation of his "reforms." Sihanouk is not a candidate, but the reported appointment, presumably engineered by himself, would enable him to ensure an overwhelming victory for his followers.

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Adenauer outlines plans for Moscow trip:

Chancellor Adenauer told American officials at Geneva on 25 July that he will not "give up anything" when he visits the Soviet Union. He intends to go to Moscow around 8 September and wants to co-ordinate his plans with the United States before leaving.

Foreign Minister von Brentano fears the USSR may make attractive unification proposals, not in the hope of reaching agreement, but rather in the hope of discrediting Adenauer in the eyes of the West German people as the individual blocking German unity.

Adenauer is confident, however, that he can meet the unification issue successfully by pointing out that a Germany in NATO would want peace since its territory would inevitably be the first battlefield. If, on the other hand, the Russians broke up the unity of Western Europe, they would create conditions under which Germany could become as dangerous as it was in the past.

Comment: The USSR is likely to take a more positive approach on German unification with Adenauer than it did at Geneva, but without giving up its insistence on neutralization.
[PAGE 06]
4. Norwegian officials reportedly receive Soviet bid to visit Moscow:

The Soviet ambassador in Oslo has approached Norwegian foreign minister Lange several times this month urging him to accept an official invitation to visit Moscow.

The USSR reportedly proposed discussing trade and outstanding Soviet-Norwegian border problems. Lange suggested talks on Norwegians in Soviet prisons.

According to the Norwegian Foreign Ministry, Prime Minister Gerhardsen was recently asked by the Soviet ambassador if he would accept an invitation to Moscow if one were extended. The Foreign Ministry believes that a similar approach will be made in Denmark.

Comment: The Soviet Union has been making similar approaches to a number of non-Communist governments and the reported invitations probably do not imply that Norway is being singled out for special attention.

For some time the Norwegians have been interested in securing Soviet agreement on use of the Pasvik River, which forms the greater part of the Norwegian-Soviet boundary.
[PAGE 07]
Page Denied

Next 3 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
