[PAGE 01]
10 June 1961  
Copy No.

CENTRAL  
INTELLIGENCE  
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
10 June 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Dominican Republic. (Page iii)

4. Iran: Government issues election announcement in attempt to offset criticism from National Front. (Page v)

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Dominican Republic: John Abbes, symbol of past police brutalities from which Dominican leaders are now trying publicly to dissociate themselves, has applied urgently for Canadian and Jamaican transit visas, according to Canadian and British embassy officials who were told that he had been assigned to the Dominican Embassy in Tokyo. Jose Martin Otero, nominal head of Radio Caribe which disseminated anti-US and pro-Castro propaganda prior to the assassination, is also reportedly being assigned to the embassy in Tokyo. The American Consulate was informed that Abbes plans to travel in Europe, possibly including the Netherlands. This, in the consulate's view, could mean that he may be planning to contact Soviet bloc officials on behalf of the Dominican government. Abbes made similar contacts while in Europe last year through the Dominican diplomatic mission in The Hague.

Although Abbes has generally been identified with the clique around General Ramfis Trujillo, there are some indications of past rivalries between the two. Abbes' departure, even if temporary, will permit Ramfis to strengthen his personal control of the secret police machinery. A rumor heard by the consulate on 8 June that Abbes had signed a statement admitting responsibility for the assassination attempt on Venezuelan President Betancourt last year suggests the regime may be preparing to use Abbes as a scapegoat. The attempt to assassinate Betancourt, in which Abbes almost certainly participated under the direction of the late dictator, was the most important event that led the OAS to impose sanctions against the Trujillo regime last year.

Meanwhile, dissident Dominicans, though basically friendly to the US, are afraid to display friendship toward US officials and newsmen, they doubt the sincerity of the friendly gestures now being made

10 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
by Dominican officials toward the US and fear that retaliatory measures will be taken against Dominicans in contact with Americans.

In conversations on 7 June related to Ambassador Stevenson's visit with President Frondizi, Argentine Foreign Minister Mugica told Ambassador Briggs and Rubottom that his country would oppose any additional OAS sanctions against the Dominican Republic beyond those of an economic nature. Mugica, who gave Ambassador Rubottom an impression that Argentina had little information on the Dominican situation, added that his government would take a "dim view" of armed intervention there in almost any circumstances and expressed concern that Venezuelan President Betancourt might "get too far ahead of the procession." A similar view was recently expressed by the Colombian Government in regard to Betancourt's position.

10 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Iran: The Iranian Government's announcement on 8 June that the prime minister had asked the Shah for a decree proclaiming parliamentary elections appears to be an attempt to deprive the National Front of an issue with which to attack the government. The announcement gave no indication of when elections would be held, but a regime spokesman said unofficially that the government hoped to hold them within two months. With Amini adopting most of the National Front's program, the Front has been left with little to attack except Amini's delay in calling new elections. The government announced that no new electoral law would be drawn up but that a committee of judges was reviewing the present law to suggest amendments which would make the law more effective. Amini has previously expressed reluctance to hold elections before 1962, and he may attempt to prolong the review of regulations and preliminary arrangements for the election.

10 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    v

[PAGE 09]
Next 7 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT  
The Vice President  
Executive Offices of the White House  
  Special Counsel to the President  
  The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs  
  The Scientific Adviser to the President  
  The Director of the Budget  
  The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization  
  The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
  Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities  
The Department of State  
  The Secretary of State  
  The Under Secretary of State  
  The Director, International Cooperation Administration  
  The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
  The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration  
  The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council  
  The Director of Intelligence and Research  
The Treasury Department  
  The Secretary of the Treasury  
  The Under Secretary of the Treasury  
The Department of Defense  
  The Secretary of Defense  
  The Deputy Secretary of Defense  
  The Secretary of the Army  
  The Secretary of the Navy  
  The Secretary of the Air Force  
  The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)  
  The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)  
  The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff  
  Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy  
  Chief of Staff, United States Air Force  
  Chief of Staff, United States Army  
  Commandant, United States Marine Corps  
  U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO  
  Supreme Allied Commander, Europe  
  Commander in Chief, Pacific  
  The Director, The Joint Staff  
  The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff  
  The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army  
  The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy  
  The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force  
The Department of Justice  
  The Attorney General  
  The Federal Bureau of Investigation  
    The Director  
The Atomic Energy Commission  
  The Chairman  
The National Security Agency  
  The Director  
The United States Information Agency  
  The Director  
The National Indications Center  
  The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
