[PAGE 01]
23 September 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
23 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR regards De Gaulle's policies as providing opportunities for exploiting "disunity" in Western alliance.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Nasir says trend of UAR-Soviet relations is "downward"
Sudan sentences officers responsible for abortive coup effort; takes precautionary measures against possible new attempt
Cambodian - South Vietnamese relations likely to deteriorate

III. THE WEST
Cyprus--Early establishment of new regime could be jeopardized by disclosure and political exploitation of secret Greek-Turkish-UK agreements
Honduras--Friction mounts between armed forces and partisans of governing Liberal party; serious fighting could result
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: (Moscow apparently continues to regard President de Gaulle's policies as providing opportunities for exploiting "disunity" in the Western alliance. Khrushchev held a special meeting with Thorez and Ulbricht on 12 September to formulate propaganda strategy aimed at alienating France from West Germany.) (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*UAR: Nasir told Ambassador Hare on 17 September that he had concluded it is "virtually impossible" for a non-Communist country to come to basic agreement with the USSR and that the trend of UAR-Soviet relations is "downward." He added that the USSR is following a "policy of pressure" toward the UAR, although this is not yet evident in the economic field. Hare comments that Nasir's "disenchantment" points toward the UAR's eventual assumption of a policy of neutralism in fact rather than only in words.) (Page 3)

Sudan: After taking a series of precautionary measures against possible new moves by dissident army officers and political leaders, the Abboud military government has announced sentences of life imprisonment against the six officers primarily responsible for the abortive coup attempt of 22 May. The government ordered an army alert beginning on 10 September. In an effort to minimize hostile public reaction, Abboud commuted the death sentences recommended by the court martial. In an earlier conciliatory move on 19 September, he announced he was studying various ways for a gradual shift to "representative government." (Page 4)
[PAGE 05]
Cambodia - South Vietnam: Evidence being accumulated by the Sihanouk government indicating South Vietnam's encouragement of Cambodian dissident elements points to the likelihood of a rapid deterioration in the recently improved Cambodian - South Vietnamese relations. Anti-Sihanouk broadcasts continue to emanate from South Vietnamese territory, and Cambodian security forces recently have intercepted several armed dissident agents allegedly trained at a sabotage school in South Vietnam. The belief of Cambodian officials that the bomb attempt on Queen Kossamak's life last month was the work of dissident leader Sam Sary, whom they are convinced is still supported covertly by South Vietnam, adds to their suspicions. (Page 5)

Cyprus-Greece-Turkey-UK: Progress toward the early establishment of a new regime for Cyprus could be jeopardized by disclosure and political exploitation of secret agreements made by Greece, Turkey, and Britain during the Zurich-London talks last January and February. The secret protocols between Greece and Turkey provide among other things for Cypriot adherence to NATO and the banning of the local Communist party when the republic is established. Greek officials, who believe Cypriot extremist leader General Grivas has knowledge of the secret protocols, are considering their early public release in an effort to minimize any exploitation Grivas might attempt in an effort to undermine the Greek Government and its relations with Cypriot leader Archbishop Makarios. (Page 6)

Honduras: Frictions are mounting between the Honduran armed forces and armed partisans of the governing Liberal party. Reports of an imminent attempt by the military to effect a coup have caused the Liberal-controlled police to prepare for action in defense of the Villeda Morales regime. Serious fighting could be touched off by a relatively minor incident. (Page 7)

23 Sept 59
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Still Confident De Gaulle's Policies Will Disrupt Western Alliance

Soviet leaders apparently are still hopeful that President de Gaulle's policies will provide opportunities for exploiting "disunity" in the Western alliance. These hopes were reflected in the remarks of a high Soviet Foreign Ministry official who reportedly stated recently that Moscow is convinced that De Gaulle's differences with his Western allies regarding Algeria and his demands for a larger voice in Western policies will increase, and that these divergent interests will eventually jeopardize the existence of NATO. He recalled that for years the USSR has "sought" a Western leader whose conflicts with NATO would be "suitable for our purposes," and said Moscow intends to encourage De Gaulle because the French President, with his "arrogance and pride, is the suitable man."

The Soviet official stated that Moscow plans to invite De Gaulle to visit the USSR and that, although "we are quite certain De Gaulle wants an invitation," First Deputy Premier Mikoyan will be sent to France to ensure acceptance. The Soviet official said the USSR would explain to the French that it was "forced" to support the Algerian rebels in the United Nations, but would remind them that the Algerian military delegation that visited the USSR several months ago received no encouragement or material aid.

Moscow's desire to avoid offending De Gaulle was evident in recent Moscow interviews in which Foreign Minister Gromyko and one of his deputies made it clear to Arab diplomats that Moscow does not contemplate early recognition of the Algerian rebel government. The Arabs were told that the USSR must take broader "international conditions" into account.

The USSR's confidence that the growing military and political power of West Germany will eventually disrupt the rapprochement between Bonn and Paris was reflected in Khrushchev's remark on

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 07]
5 August that this was only a "marriage of convenience, and such marriages are never stable." The Soviet premier held a special meeting with French Communist leader Thorez and East German party boss Ulbricht on 12 September to formulate propaganda strategy aimed at alienating France from West Germany.

It was agreed that De Gaulle's statement on 25 March recognizing the Oder-Neisse line should be particularly emphasized.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nasir Comments on UAR-USSR Relations

In a lengthy conversation with Ambassador Hare on 17 September, UAR President Nasir reviewed his difficulties with the USSR, beginning with his anti-Communist campaign last December, and concluded with the statement that it was "virtually impossible" for any non-Communist country to reach basic agreement with the Soviet Union. He complained of continued Soviet interference in matters related to "local" Communists, and stated that the recent ups and downs in Soviet-UAR relations now have settled into a downward trend. Nasir prefaced his remarks by commenting that he hoped the Khrushchev visit to the United States would be successful in easing world tensions, but added pessimistically that it would be a "difficult matter" because of the USSR's dedication to the world-wide propagation of Communism.

Nasir claimed that the USSR was following a policy of pressure in its relations with the UAR, specifically mentioning alleged price increases and delays in arms deliveries. He said, however, that the pressure was not yet evident in the economic field, presumably referring to commercial transactions and Soviet commitments under economic aid programs.

In the sharpest Soviet press attack in recent months, Pravda charged on 19 September that an "anti-Soviet campaign" was currently being waged by the UAR press and accused "certain ill-disposed persons" of using the press to worsen Soviet-Arab relations. The American Embassy in Moscow comments that Pravda's reference to "nonpolitical" Soviet economic aid, particularly in regard to the Aswan High Dam, suggests that Moscow may have wished to hint publicly that Cairo's present course, if continued, could affect the Soviet economic aid program.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 09]
Sudanese Government Prepares for New Trouble

The Abboud military government anticipates a hostile public reaction to the sentences for life imprisonment imposed on the six army officers primarily responsible for the abortive coup attempt of 22 May and the lesser sentences given six other implicated officers. Abboud commuted the death sentences of the six leaders.

The government delayed the announcement while it took steps to minimize the expected reaction and adopted precautionary measures against possible moves by dissident army officers and political leaders. Abboud and his Deputy Commander in Chief Hasan Bashir Nasir used a series of officer transfers and reassignments to strengthen their control. As a further precaution, the government on 10 September instituted an army alert. British pilots working with the embryo Sudanese Air Force have reportedly been ordered to be ready to fly the few light Sudanese military aircraft if that becomes necessary. The Sudan has only one or two qualified military pilots of its own.

In response to growing popular pressure for "return of the army to the barracks," Abboud declared on 19 September that he was considering various alternatives for a gradual return to "representative government." One plan submitted to him for study is the single-party "national union" system used by Nasir in the United Arab Republic.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 10]
Cambodian - South Vietnamese Relations

A deterioration in relations between Cambodia and South Vietnam may result from the Sihanouk government's growing conviction that South Vietnam is actively encouraging Cambodian dissident elements. Spurred by the 31 August bomb attempt on Queen Kossamak's life, which the government attributes to dissident leader Sam Sary, Cambodian officials have been quietly gathering evidence to document their suspicions.

Three "Free Cambodia" agents captured recently by Cambodian security forces allegedly have confessed to having been trained at a sabotage school in South Vietnam; in addition, ten armed Vietnamese seized on Cambodian territory earlier this month are reported to have admitted being agents of the small Cambodian dissident movement. The continuation of clandestine anti-Sihanouk broadcasts emanating from South Vietnamese territory is an added factor. The arrest in Phnom Penh of a Vietnamese charged with delivering the gift-wrapped bomb to the palace grounds addressed to the Queen, has particular significance in view of the suspect's close identification with South Vietnam's former representative in Cambodia, Ngo Trong Hieu, who was deeply implicated in the abortive Dap Chhuon coup effort last spring.

The frequently impetuous Sihanouk has acted with great restraint, seemingly reluctant to damage the "entente" with South Vietnam which he claimed his top-level talks there in early August had achieved. He has also acted promptly to head off propaganda efforts by the pro-Communist press to implicate the United States in the bomb incident, and has indicated he would welcome American help in trying to salvage relations with South Vietnam. In this instance, Sihanouk's concern over Communist pressures against Laos and India probably has deterred the normal tendency of Cambodia to move closer toward the Sino-Soviet bloc during disputes with South Vietnam.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
[PAGE 11]
Secret Protocols Regarding Cyprus May Be Published

Greek officials fear that opposition elements may seek to use secret protocols signed by Greece, Turkey, and Britain last January and February to disrupt progress toward establishment of an independent republic of Cyprus within the context of the Zurich-London agreements. The documents involved include a "gentlemen's agreement" by Greece and Turkey that Cyprus should become a member of NATO, that the Communist party of Cyprus should be outlawed, and that the Turkish-Cypriot vice president of the new republic should have certain veto powers. Confidential "agreed minutes" signed by all three powers provided, among other things, that American facilities on Cyprus and that any problem concerning British bases would be settled by the British military authorities and the proposed tripartite headquarters of Cypriot, Greek, and Turkish forces.

Greek officials now believe these documents have been passed to General Grivas in Athens, who is the acknowledged leader of the extreme rightist element on Cyprus. Athens is particularly concerned that Grivas may use them in an attempt to undermine the Greek Government and poison its relations with Archbishop Makarios, who represents the more moderate element among the Greek Cypriots and who is provisional president of the new Cyprus Government.

Hoping to minimize exploitation of the documents by Grivas, Athens is considering the advisability of releasing them to the public with the explanation that secret protocols are in accordance with standard diplomatic practice. Disclosure in any event would embarrass the Greek Government and possibly result in a denunciation of the agreements by Makarios in an attempt to maintain Cypriot loyalty.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 6
[PAGE 12]
Tensions Between Military and Government Party Dangerously High in Honduras

Frictions are mounting dangerously between Honduran armed forces and armed partisans of the governing Liberal party. There are reports of an imminent coup attempt by the military, which has been accused by El Cronista--a Tegucigalpa newspaper with Communists on its staff--of summarily executing two members of the civil police who allegedly killed an army officer in a barroom brawl on 6 September.

Parts of the army and the entire air force are on full alert. An irregular force known as the "Black Army" consisting of some civilian police components and members of the Liberal party is reported being briefed on tactics to be used if conditions worsen.

The outcome probably will depend on the positions taken by President Villeda Morales and the university students. A strong plea by the popular President for peace between the military and the Liberal party probably would be obeyed, but Villeda Morales has proved to be indecisive and equivocal during other crises. According to a press report, the main Honduran student federation, FEUH, which is influenced strongly by Communists, joined El Cronista on 20 September in demanding that those responsible for the alleged police deaths be brought to justice.

El Cronista and the FEUH have acted as constant irritants to the military and periodically have revived the civil-military feud that has existed since the constitution written in 1957 for the first democratically elected government in Honduras gave the armed forces an autonomous status within the government.

Serious fighting between the military and the "Black Army" could be touched off by a relatively minor incident.

23 Sept 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
