Comment: Tam was active as Minister of Security and later as Acting Governor of Tonkin for a period of five months prior to March 1952. His repressive police methods and his liquidation of the popular nationalistic Dai Viet Party, the principal rival of the pro-French ruling faction which Tam represents, earned him the enmity of the Tonkinese. The incumbent governor of Tonkin is reported to have tendered his resignation on learning of the Tam appointment, but was ordered by Bao Dai to remain on duty.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Ambassador Kennan comments on Rumanian situation:

The American Ambassador in Moscow suggests that the recent changes in Rumania may be part of a new phase in Soviet foreign policy. He speculates that as a result of the present German crisis, the USSR may exploit puppet Satellite forces more boldly to heighten international tension and that, as part of this move, the Russians are taking further steps toward including Rumania in the USSR.

The Ambassador does not feel that integration is imminent, but he suggests the possibility that the present purges and reform of the judicial system may be partly intended to lead the way.

Comment: Although the timing of the Rumanian purges appears to connect them with the East-West struggle in Europe rather than with purely internal causes, a power struggle within the party hierarchy is the major factor.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Italy prepares to resume direct discussions with Yugoslavia over Trieste:

Italy will propose that direct discussions with Yugoslavia on Trieste be held in London, according to the Secretary of the Italian Foreign Ministry. Appropriate instructions are being sent to the Italian Ambassadors in Washington, London, and Paris.

The Italian official pointed out that Italy has not yet replied to the most recent Yugoslav proposal.

Comment: The Italians favor London as the conference site because they now believe that Britain will assume a sympathetic attitude toward Italy.

Foreign Secretary Eden agreed with Secretary Acheson on 27 May that Britain and the United States should consider "imposing" a Trieste settlement on Italy and Yugoslavia.

- 5 -
