Indian Cabinet Reshuffle Likely in Near Future

A reshuffle of the Indian cabinet may take place shortly. Prime Minister Nehru apparently plans to move Finance Minister Morarji Desai to the Home Ministry--a steppingstone to the prime ministership--to replace Home Minister Pant, who recently suffered a heart attack. While the capable 71-year-old Pant is expected to be able to return to work in about a month, it is unlikely that he will be able to hold the demanding post of home minister. He may be made a minister without portfolio.

Desai, a 63-year-old moderate socialist, is an able administrator. He won national reputation as chief minister of Bombay State from 1952 to 1956 when Bombay was generally conceded to be the best-run state in India. He was commerce minister from 1956 to 1958 when he became finance minister. As home minister, Desai would be in charge of India's internal administrative and political affairs, a responsibility ranking immediately under that of the prime ministership.

Nehru apparently is considering the appointment of former Finance Minister C. D. Deshmukh as minister of finance. Deshmukh, who held this post from 1950 to 1956, has had extensive experience in both Indian and international financial matters and is widely respected throughout the country. His appointment would ensure continued capable handling of the Five-Year Plan and foreign aid problems. He has differed with Nehru in the past because of his somewhat more conservative approach to economic and financial problems.

Defense Minister Krishna Menon apparently is in trouble over his handling of the recent incident in which Pakistani fighter planes shot down an Indian Canberra bomber. The Canberra reportedly was sent on a photo-reconnaissance mission at his express order against the advice of his chiefs of staff. In addition, Menon, who in the past had done a good job as defense minister, apparently is no longer getting along well with Army Chief of Staff General Thimayya. Because of his close ties with Nehru, however, it seems unlikely that Menon will be fired.

6 May 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5
