Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: As a result of unrest in the Congo, the government of the white-dominated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland is increasingly concerned over the possible intensification of African nationalism within the Federation. A number of African nationalists have been arrested by Southern Rhodesian authorities, processions in Salisbury have been banned for three months, and federal army and police reserves have been called up. African strikes and demonstrations in Salisbury, which lasted two days before being brought under control, may lead the Southern Rhodesian and federal governments to clamp down even further. Activities of hitherto moderate African leaders reflect disillusionment with the multiracial approach and may lead them to shift to a more radical approach along racial lines.
(Page 3)

Saudi Arabia: A group of Saudi army officers is making plans for an effort to overthrow the monarchy. The group hopes to move within the next few weeks and plans to attempt the assassination of key members of the royal family and of the Defense Ministry and to seize control of three major cities in western Saudi Arabia. Some of the troop units likely to be involved have in their possession stocks of arms and ammunition supplied them for use in summer military exercises. A conclave of important members of the royal family and other officials in Riyadh early this week. The regime may be aware of this plotting.
(Page 4)

Morocco-France: The Moroccan Government has categorically rejected France's offer to evacuate French bases in Morocco by the end of 1964 and insists on the end of 1962 as the terminal date, according to French Ambassador Parodi in Rabat. Prodded by increasingly sharp criticism of foreign bases by both the rightist and leftist press, the King and crown prince are likely to intensify efforts to bolster the prestige of their government by obtaining commitments from both France and the United States to withdraw forces by the end of 1962.
(Page 5)

23 July 60 DAILY BRIEF
