The Situation in the Congo

The warning on 20 October by Cleophas Kamitatsu, governor of Leopoldville Province, that his province will "secede" from the Congo unless Mobutu ends his "reign of terror" in Leopoldville is designed primarily to provide propaganda for deposed premier Lumumba. Although spokesmen for Kasavubu's Abako party have periodically threatened secession in the past, the threat had not been invoked by Kamitatsu's African Solidarity party (PSA), the Abako's main rival. Kamitatsu's statement may reflect the desire of PSA chief Antoine Gizenga to undermine Mobutu by portraying him as an obstacle to Congo unity.

Western diplomats in the Congo were "anesthetizing" UN representative Dayal with their protestations of support for Congo unity. He urged that Cairo come forward with a Congo program based on a reconvening of parliament, the removal of the Congo Army from politics, and the expulsion of all Belgians. He added that all "foreign activity" should be ended except that devoted to "consolidating the national economy under the supervision of the central government".

Lulua villages in Kasai Province appeared to have suffered heavy damage in the sporadic tribal fighting between the Balubas and Luluas. Defeated Lulua tribesmen have reportedly fallen back on the city of Luluabourg, as fighting has shifted to Katanga. There Baluba attacks pose a serious threat to the government of Moise Tshombe, and recent statements by the Katanga leader have reflected dissatisfaction with the measures taken by UN forces to maintain security.

Elsewhere, five Soviet IL-18s in Accra, which have been used by Ghana while it awaited delivery on five IL-18s purchased from the USSR, have scheduled return flights to Moscow on about 21 October. Two other IL-18s--presumably the first of those ordered by Ghana--were scheduled to arrive in Accra on 20 October. The returning Soviet aircraft would carry Soviet diplomatic personnel who were evacuated from Leopoldville in September.

21 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
