Comment: It is not customary for a Soviet representative to hint at possible future actions or attitudes of his government, particularly with regard to a question as important as a Korean peace settlement.

4. Morale of Chinese Nationalist forces declining:

Suicide and desertion among members of the Chinese Nationalist armed forces have become a problem, according to a senior Chinese Nationalist general. The causes: (1) fear of the Soviet-style political officers of Chiang Ching-kins, the Generalissimo's eldest son; (2) physical sickness; (3) homesickness, heightened by the backfiring of propaganda promising an early return to the mainland; and (4) assignment to "coolie jobs."

Comment: Any marked increase in the already high sick rate would seriously affect the combat potential of the Nationalist forces. While the institution of political officers serving with the armed forces is not new, they had not been accorded as much power prior to Chiang Ching-kio's appointment as their chief. Chiang spent approximately 10 years in Russia, and reportedly is attempting to emulate the Soviet methods of insuring control over both military forces and civilians. In the process, he is arousing increasing resentment from all elements.

NEAR EAST

5. Tanker receipt problem under consideration in Iran:

The US Ambassador in Tehran reports that he saw Prime Minister Mossadeq on 2 July and suggested acceptance by the new National Oil Company of the receipt proposed by AIOC (Anglo-Iranian Oil Company) which acknowledges the amount of oil loaded, but which would not prejudice the eventual outcome of the oil dispute. Mossadeq stated that he would accept such a reservation only if given an "absolute guarantee" that this endorsement will not be used by the AIOC or any other company transporting the oil as an excuse to avoid payment.

Comment: This suggests that the current dispute over the oil tanker loadings could be resolved. Since Mossadeq has maintained an intransigent position heretofore, however, it will be surprising if he does not manage to attach conditions involving the "absolute guarantee" which will be unacceptable to the British.
