[PAGE 01]
24 June 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET - SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Iranian Prime Minister disappointed with The Hague sessions (page 3).
2. Britain has no new proposals on Iranian oil settlement (page 3).
3. Saudi Arabia opposes any interference in Jordan's internal affairs (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Turkish Foreign Minister analyzes prospects for Yugoslav military cooperation (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Austria seeks Latin American support on state treaty issue (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Iranian Prime Minister disappointed with The Hague sessions:

Prime Minister Mossadeq is pessimistic regarding the Anglo-Iranian case now being considered by the International Court of Justice. Mossadeq is worried also over the situation developing in Iran during his absence.

Comment: Opposition to the Prime Minister, whose political strength was weakening prior to his departure for The Hague, has increased during his absence.

The government has authorized a demonstration to welcome him on his expected return to Tehran on 24 June. This will provide Mossadeq an opportunity to generate popular support through emotional appeal.

2. Britain has no new proposals on Iranian oil settlement:

Great Britain is not now considering detailed proposals for a long-term settlement of the Iranian oil dispute. The Foreign Office foresees a lengthy delay before a definite plan emerges, since the management company idea that is being considered involves many difficult problems.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
There is the general feeling that an interim settlement might be acceptable to any new Iranian regime and provide the best means of resuming production while working toward a permanent settlement. No new specific interim proposals are being considered.

3. Saudi Arabia opposes any interference in Jordan's internal affairs:

The Saudi Arabian Government has
it approves Syria's policy of supporting the present Jordan Government. Saudi Arabia deplores the "unscrupulousness" of the Iraqi Regent's activities in regard to Jordan and will not tolerate interference in the country's internal affairs by him or anyone else.

Comment: The Iraqi Regent, who visited in Amman recently, has taken advantage of King Talal's illness to promote union with Jordan.

Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Egypt are opposed to any such union. Israel is also known to regard a union of Jordan or Syria with Iraq as a threat to its security.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Turkish Foreign Minister analyzes prospects for Yugoslav military cooperation:

The Turkish Foreign Minister is convinced that Yugoslav leaders have no desire to discuss military plans with Turkey at this time. After discussing the subject with the Yugoslav Ambassador in Ankara, the Foreign Minister told the American Embassy that he believed the Yugoslavs would, however, be ready to coordinate defense plans after NATO plans for the defense of Thrace had been developed in conjunction with Greece and Turkey.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
The Foreign Minister stated that he had informed the French Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs, who was in Ankara at the time, and the Italian Ambassador of these views, and had specifically asked the latter to advise Premier de Gasperi.

Comment: Both the Turks and Yugoslavs have hesitated to undertake bilateral defense plans with neighboring countries.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Austria seeks Latin American support on state treaty issue:

Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber intended to visit Brazil in mid-July to request Latin American support in the United Nations if an Austrian state treaty is discussed there.

Comment: Although the Western occupation powers have not looked favorably on the idea, Austria at various times has proposed presenting its case for a state treaty before the United Nations.

The USSR has not yet replied to the 9 May Western note proposing an abbreviated treaty.
