[PAGE 01]
17 August 1960
Copy No.
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
17 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
North Korean federation proposal is move to take propaganda initiative from Seoul.
Chinese Communist delegation offends Japanese; may hinder Japanese overtures to Peiping.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Congo--Hammarskjold to seek Security Council backing in dispute with Lumumba.
Jordan--King Husayn believes prospects fair for anti-Nasir coup in Syria; now more inclined to aid plotters.
Iraq--New arrest of conspirators is further evidence of erosion of Qasim's position.

LATE ITEM
The situation in Laos.
South Korean Assembly rejects Kim To-yun for prime minister.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
17 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

North Korea - South Korea: Premier Kim Il-sung on
14 August proposed a loose federation of North and South
Korea in an apparent effort to take the propaganda initiative
from the new South Korean regime, which has indicated sup-
port for UN-supervised elections to reunify the peninsula.
Khrushchev can be expected to dramatize Communist propos-
als for a Korean settlement when he visits Pyongyang in early
October. The Communists will attempt to use South Korea's
rejection of the federation idea as grounds for charges that
Seoul is responsible for the continued division of Korea.
(Page 1)

Communist China - Japan: Chinese Communist party of-
ficials who have just concluded a visit to Tokyo reportedly
told the Japanese that Peiping will not automatically equate
the Ikeda government with the Kishi regime. They made it
clear that Communist China's future attitude will depend on
Ikeda's moves toward meeting Communist China's conditions
for normalization of relations--that Tokyo agree to govern-
ment-to-government contacts and stop supporting the "two
Chinas" concept. The behavior of the Chinese Communist del-
egation during its visit antagonized the Japanese and may have
temporarily discouraged possible Japanese overtures for im-
proving relations.
(Page 2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

The Congo: Secretary General Hammarskjold, who has
rebuffed Lumumba's demand for withdrawal of non-African UN
contingents from the Congo, is calling an early meeting of the
Security Council. He is expected to request a council ruling
[PAGE 05]
concerning his opinion that the UN force cannot be used on
Lumumba's behalf to subdue Katanga. The action by Leo-
poldville police on 16 August in detaining for investigation
several hundred Europeans--including UN personnel--sug-
gests that as he develops his own police force Lumumba may
attempt even greater harassments in dealing with the UN and
his political opponents. Later on the 16th Lumumba decreed
martial law over the entire country for a period of six months.
(Page 2)

Jordan-Syria: King Husayn on 14 August expressed the
belief that prospects for a successful anti-Nasir army coup in
Syria are "fair," and he now appears more inclined to support
the plotters. The Jordanian defense minister has recently been
in touch with a leader of the conspiracy in Beirut who report-
edly said the situation could "become suitable for action very
soon." Meanwhile the UAR and Jordan are continuing their in-
tensive propaganda warfare involving charges and countercharges
of plotting against each other.
(Page 3)

Iraq: The Qasim regime reportedly has uncovered another
conspiracy and arrested, among other officers, the commander
of the 4th Armored Division and the flying wing commander at
the Habbaniyah air base. This evidence of continued plotting co-
incides with other suggestions of widespread disillusionment with
the Qasim regime. Qasim's position is gradually eroding, despite
the slackening of overt UAR attacks on him.
(Page 4)

LATE ITEMS

*Laos: A ranking member of General Phoumi's "counterrevolu-
tionary group" claims that King Savang is secretly in sympathy with
the group's plans to suppress the revolt led by Kong Le. Phoumi's
plan to retake Vientiane is said to involve a coordinated attack by
air-dropped paratroopers and by ground forces, including some in-
fantry already being transported by river craft from Luang Prabang.
[PAGE 06]
Preparations for an operation of this scope would take a con-
siderable length of time and its execution would require out-
side logistic and air transport support. Meanwhile, Captain
Kong Le gives evidence of harboring political ambitions of his
own and of considering the newly formed Souvanna Phouma gov-
ernment to be merely a way station to some other type of re-
gime. Souvanna has admitted that his government is a provi-
sional one intended to last only until "peace" is restored
throughout the country. Aside from Souvanna, the govern-
ment is made up largely of second-rate officials.
(Page 5)

*South Korea: Newly elected South Korean President Yun
probably will nominate former Vice President Chang Myon for
prime minister following the House of Representatives' rejection
of Kim To-yun, the President's first selection for the post. How-
ever, the narrow margin of Kim's defeat--three votes less than
the simple majority necessary for confirmation--suggests that a
government headed by Chang would have tenuous support. Chang,
titular chief of the majority Democratic party, controls a little
less than half of his party's two-thirds majority in the powerful
233-seat lower house.
(Page 7)
[PAGE 07]
Kim Il-sung Calls for Federation of North and South Korea

Keynoting a "liberation day" celebration in Pyongyang, North
Korean Premier Kim Il-sung on 14 August attempted to take the
propaganda initiative on Korean reunification from the new South
Korean Government, which has indicated support for UN-supervised
peninsula-wide elections.

Kim called for elections "without outside intervention" and sug-
gested an interim North-South federation in which a "supreme na-
tional committee" with representatives from both sides would work
out economic and cultural cooperation. Such cooperation, Kim said,
would help to solve South Korea's "economic catastrophe." Kim also
suggested that North and South Korea each reduce its troop strength
to "100,000 or less." Implicit in the premier's speech was Pyong-
yang's usual insistence on withdrawal of US forces from South Korea
before "peaceful unification" can be achieved.

A South Korean Democratic party spokesman has publicly re-
jected the North Korean proposal, and on 15 August acting Prime
Minister Huh Chung termed it "another rehash of a worn-out prop-
aganda tactic." Pyongyang probably now will attempt to exploit this
rejection in efforts to make Seoul appear responsible for continued
division of Korea.

Khrushchev, who has accepted an invitation to visit Pyongyang
in early October, can be expected to provide dramatic publicity on
Communist proposals for a Korean settlement. He also may use
this visit to amplify Moscow's position in the current Sino-Soviet
dispute, just before a high-level meeting of Communist parties which
may be held in Moscow in conjunction with the USSR's Bolshevik Rev-
olution celebration.
[PAGE 08]
The Situation in the Congo

Secretary General Hammarskjold, who has rebuffed Lu-
mumba's demand for the withdrawal of non-African UN con-
tingents from the Congo, is calling an early meeting of the Se-
curity Council.

Hammarskjold has interpreted the UN resolution of 9 Au-
gust as meaning that the UN command in the Congo could not
be used on behalf of the central government, as in any move
to subdue Katanga. He will request a ruling on this interpreta-
tion at the Security Council meeting.

The action by the Leopoldville police on 16 August in de-
taining for investigation several hundred Europeans--including
UN personnel--suggests that as he develops his own security
forces Lumumba will increase his harassment of both the UN
and his political opponents. An estimated 400 to 500 Europeans
were detained for document checks after Lumumba charged
that Belgian officials still in Leopoldville were avoiding arrest
by wearing UN arm bands.

Meanwhile, Ghanaian President Nkrumah--who together
with Guinea's Sekou Touré has warmly supported Lumumba's
cause--may be moving to dissociate himself somewhat from Lu-
mumba's extreme position regarding Katanga. On 13 August,
Nkrumah indicated that his earlier offer of
Ghanaian troops to Lumumba had been a "political move" and
would not be followed up. According to Ghana radio, Nkrumah
is giving "active consideration" to an invitation from Presi-
dent Tshombé to visit Katanga and see conditions there. In
Monrovia, President Tubman has stated that Nkrumah now
agrees with him that an African "summit" meeting scheduled
for Leopoldville from 25 to 30 August is not required, and
that any meeting there could be held on the ministerial level.
[PAGE 09]
King Husayn Sees Chance for Anti-Nasir Move by Syrian Army

King Husayn
was optimistic about prospects for an anti-Nasir army
coup in Syria. As a result he seems more inclined to support
the plotters, although a firm Jordanian commitment apparent-
ly has not yet been given. The plotting group has asked Jordan
for a "small amount" of financial support and for immediate
recognition of the post-coup government in Syria, which might
imply Jordanian military support in the event of outside inter-
vention. The group also reportedly asked Husayn to seek
American support for the conspiracy.

Husayn's assessment is based on information recently ob-
tained by Jordanian Defense Minister Wasfi Mirza, whom the
King sent to Beirut for a meeting with retired Syrian Army
Colonel Khalid Jadah, head of the conspiracy's planning group.
Jadah is quoted as saying the situation in Syria "could become
suitable for action very soon." According to an earlier report
from Beirut, the plotters planned to begin their action by as-
sassinating Nasir and attacking other key individuals and pre-
assigned targets. Their original assumption was that Nasir
would open the Damascus trade fair on 15 August, affording
them their opportunity. The conspiracy allegedly involves key
Syrian Army elements, including the Qatana garrison near
Damascus, and a civilian group headed by five unnamed UAR
ministers--presumably from the Syrian region.

Meanwhile, the UAR and Jordan are continuing their in-
tensive propaganda warfare, each accusing the other of sub-
versive plots. Radios in both countries have broadcast appeals
for rebellion in the other, and UAR transmitters are publicizing
and belittling a press report from Amman that Husayn is organ-
izing a free Syrian army to "liberate" Syria. Damascus radio
also claims that Jordan is attempting to jam Cairo newscasts
and political commentaries.
[PAGE 10]
Unrest and Plotting Continue in Iraq

The reported arrest on 13 August of Major General Sadiq
Ismail Hasan, commander of the 4th Armored Division at Hab-
baniyah, along with some of his staff officers and Lt. Col. Arif
Abd al-Razzaq, flying wing commander at Habbaniyah air base,
emphasizes the continued erosion of Prime Minister Qasim's
prestige. Abd al-Razzaq was a leader in a revolutionary organ-
ization which was supported by the UAR and was planning to over-
throw the Qasim regime.

Although overt UAR attacks on the Qasim re-
gime have diminished, a number of
Baathists left Iraq in early August to receive military training in
the Syrian region.

Senior Iraqi military officers are dissatisfied with Qasim,
but their resources appear to be so fragmented and they so di-
vided on the question of a successor regime that a successful
move against him in the near future appears unpromising. The
arrest of the subversive group at Habbaniyah is likely to make
other disaffected elements increasingly cautious.
[PAGE 11]
Situation in Laos

King Savang is now secretly in sympathy with
General Phoumi's plans to suppress the revolt led by Kong Le.
Khamphan also claimed that nine of the 14 members of the Somsanith
government, excluding the ex-prime minister, are members of
Phoumi's "counterrevolutionary group." Other reports indicate that
the King's acceptance of the Somsanith government's resignation on 14
August and his designation of Souvanna Phouma to form a new govern-
ment the next day were taken reluctantly and only to avoid bloodshed.
In the interim Khamphan and other followers of Phoumi may have
persuaded Savang of the necessity and the feasibility of Phoumi's
plans to retake Vientiane.

These plans are said to embrace a coordinated attack on Vientiane
utilizing air-dropped paratroopers and ground forces approaching the
city by road. Included in the ground forces are about 500 infantry
troops who are already being transported by river craft from Luang
Prabang. They will presumably debark above Vientiane, where they will
remain until the day of the attack. Armored elements within Vientiane,
ostensibly under Kong's control, are also reportedly ready to participate.
Preparations for an operation of this scope would take a considerable
length of time, and its execution would require outside logistic and
air support. A further complicating factor is the decision of the
French Government to deny Phoumi the use of Seno military base,
which they control. This may force Phoumi to transfer his headquarters
to Pakse farther south.

Meanwhile, Captain Kong Le shows signs of developing personal
political ambitions. He is reported to have told a group of Thai news-
men that the newly formed Souvanna Phouma government is merely
provisional and that the Youth party, organized by the rebels and to
be headed by Kong Le, will be the only legal political group once order
is restored. Souvanna Phouma's
new government was in fact provisional and would resign when "peace"
is restored throughout the country.
[PAGE 12]
Souvanna's new government will receive the approval of the
National Assembly shortly. Aside from Souvanna, the most
noteworthy appointment is that of Quinim Pholsena as interior
minister. Quinim is the leftist, neutralist leader of the Santiphab
party, which was in parliamentary alliance with the pro-Communist
Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) when both parties were represented in the
assembly. Otherwise, the cabinet is made up largely of unknowns.
The King must give his approval for the government to be legitimate.
[PAGE 13]
Selection of South Korean Prime Minister

Newly elected South Korean President Yun Bo-sun probably
will nominate former Vice President Chang Myon for prime
minister following the House of Representatives' rejection on 17
August of Kim To-yun, the President's first selection for the post.
Under the constitution, if the President's second nominee is re-
jected, the lower house selects the prime minister whose election
then requires only a plurality of votes. The President must announce
his second choice within five days and the house must act upon his
recommendation in not less than 24 hours and not more than 48 hours.

Kim's defeat by a narrow margin of only three votes suggests
that a government headed by Chang would have a tenuous majority.
Chang, titular chief of the Democratic party, controls slightly less
than half of the party's two-thirds majority in the powerful 233-seat
lower house. Kim, leader of the party's right-wing faction, has
strongly opposed any compromise with Chang's followers and at times
he has appeared to favor a party split.

Chang has stated that if he becomes prime minister he would
select a broadly representative cabinet, which would include members
of both factions and presumably independents. Early press reports
indicate that Kim was defeated after a group of independents rejected
his answers to a list of questions which they submitted to him and
Chang. Should most of the 44 independents in the lower house act
as a unified group they might exercise the balance of power between
the nearly evenly divided pro- and anti-Chang factions of the
majority party.
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 15]
