[PAGE 01]
6 November 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. CHINESE COMMUNISTS MAY BID FOR LEBANESE RECOGNITION (page 3).

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 5)

6 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. CHINESE COMMUNISTS MAY BID FOR LEBANESE RECOGNITION

The question of Lebanese diplomatic recognition of the Peiping regime will probably be raised in conjunction with a Chinese Communist bid for closer Sino-Lebanese trade relations. A statement to this effect was made to the press by a spokesman of the Chinese Communist trade delegation which arrived in Beirut on 3 November.

The Chinese Nationalist minister in Beirut believes that a commercial accord between Lebanon and Communist China is likely, but that there is little chance Beirut will grant Peiping diplomatic recognition. The American ambassador in Beirut comments that while a trade treaty would have little economic significance, it would be a step toward eventual recognition.

Comment
Sino-Lebanese trade has been negligible, and Chinese Communist efforts in Lebanon, as in Syria, are almost purely political. Whether Beirut grants Peiping diplomatic recognition will probably depend on the course taken by Egypt and Syria.

Peiping's program of winning Arab friendship through establishment of trade ties appears to be meeting success with the conclusion of a pact with Egypt and apparently successful negotiations with Syria. (Concurred in by ORR)

6 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700 6 November)

Small-scale raids and local exchanges of fire are keeping the situation tense on the Egyptian-Israeli frontier. Several minor incidents have also been reported on the Israeli-Jordanian border.

Israeli spokesmen, in discussing the Israeli attack of 2 November in the El Auja area, have insisted to American officials that there was no counterattack as Cairo has claimed, and that the Egyptian position at Sabha was reoccupied only after Israeli troops had withdrawn. Impressions of American newsmen returning from the area tend to support the Israeli version. An Israeli military spokesman has told American officials that the Israelis would welcome an attempt at retaliation because they would then have an opportunity to "clobber" the Egyptian army.

A number of minor incidents and exchanges of fire have been reported on the Israeli-Jordanian border. Israel has charged that Jordanian infiltrators attempted to blow up two houses on the Israeli side of the border on 5 November. Jordan has alleged that an Israeli patrol penetrated its territory on 6 November, but was driven back by Arab Legion forces.

Syria continues to maintain its alert on the Israeli frontier, but no activity has been reported here since a brief exchange of fire on 4 November. The Syrian chief of staff has assured the American army attaché in Damascus that he has not issued any mobilization orders.

6 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
A UN plan which has been delivered to Egypt and Israel calls for Egyptian military evacuation of the El Auja demilitarized zone, for limitation of Israel personnel in the zone to civilians and 30 policemen, and for a permanent demarcation of the border in that area. In Washington, the Egyptian and Israeli ambassadors responded on 5 November to an American demarche supporting the UN peace plan by expressing their countries' willingness to consider the proposals, though each ambassador blamed the other's country for the continued tension.

Israel's intention to conduct this week the first production test of an oil well at Helez in Israeli territory near the northern tip of the Egyptian-occupied Gaza strip may lead to new border incidents. The newly discovered oil-bearing formation being tapped by the Israelis is believed to extend into the Gaza strip.

France will probably soon recommence arms shipments to Egypt, and is prepared to furnish military equipment to Syria, French spokesman Ambassador Dillon in Paris on 4 November. The French plan to balance this action by authorizing the delivery of Mystere jet fighters to Israel.

According to the Jordanian Defense Ministry, Britain plans to deliver about 15 November the 10 jets it has agreed to send to Jordan.

6 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
A Soviet-Israeli trade agreement was concluded in Moscow on 3 November calling for the exchange next year of citrus fruits for crude and fuel oil. The agreement provides for trade to continue at about the same level as called for in arrangements for the current year.

6 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 08]
