[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

29 May 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. EGYPT URGING OTHER ARAB STATES TO RECOGNIZE PEIPING

3. EAST GERMAN STUDENTS STAGE ANTIREGIME DEMONSTRATIONS

4. MARSHAL ROKOSSOWSKY MAY BE REPLACED

5. ALBANIA REFUSES TO MAKE CONCESSION TO TITO

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. EGYPT URGING OTHER ARAB STATES TO
RECOGNIZE PEIPING

Libyan prime minister Ben Halim told
Ambassador Tappin on 23 May that the
Egyptians were applying pressure on
Libya and other Arab states to follow
Egypt's lead in recognizing Communist
China. The Egyptian ambassador, Ben
Halim said, had told him that other Arab
states, including Lebanon and Syria,
were giving the matter serious consider-
ation. The prime minister said he had told the Egyptians
Libya would not recognize Peiping.

The government-controlled Cairo radio
reported on 25 May that the Arab League secretariat had been
informed Saudi Arabia would soon recognize Communist China
and had nearly completed arrangements for re-establishing
diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.

Comment
Although Egypt is almost certainly work-
ing to bring other Arab states to follow its
lead, only Syria and possibly the Sudan are likely to recognize
Communist China in the immediate future.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. EAST GERMAN STUDENTS STAGE ANTIREGIME
DEMONSTRATIONS

East German university students
demonstrated in Dresden between
24 and 27 May to protest the regime's
opposition to students taking vacation
trips to West Germany.

Comment
Keeping East German youth in line has
been one of the major problems of the
regime. Other reports indicate that university students have
been increasingly critical of the party and its policies since
the Soviet Twentieth Party Congress.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. MARSHAL ROKOSSOWSKY MAY BE REPLACED

Polish minister of defense Marshal
Konstanty Rokossowsky was to be re-
placed by Lt, Gen. Zygmunt Berling
at a plenary meeting of the central
committee of the Polish United Workers (Communist)
Party scheduled to meet on 27 May, according to rumors
reaching the American embassy in Warsaw on 25 May.

Comment
The removal of Marshal Rokossowsky,
a World War II Soviet general, would
be a logical part of the present campaign to build up the ap-
pearance of Polish independence. Such a move would be
welcomed by the Polish people to whom he symbolizes
Poland's subservience to the USSR. He was in command
of the Soviet forces that refused to come to the aid of the
Poles at the time of the Warsaw uprising against the Ger-
mans in 1944.

General Berling, presently under secre-
tary of the Ministry of State, was the commander of the
Kosciuszko Division which was organized in the Soviet Union
during World War II. He was removed from this position
late in 1944, reportedly for attempting to send forces to aid
in the Warsaw uprising, and has occupied only minor posts
during the past decade. However, he was recently awarded
the Banner of Labor First Class.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. ALBANIA REFUSES TO MAKE CONCESSION TO TITO

Albanian Communist Party boss Enver
Hoxha announced on 25 May to his party's
third congress that the execution in 1949
of Koci Xoxe, former interior minister
and the leading Albanian Titoist, was "completely justified."
He denounced Xoxe's activities as having been hostile to the
party and state, and claimed that Xoxe's crimes, along with
fabrications by Beria and other "misunderstandings," were
the cause of the bad relations with Yugoslavia.

Comment
The failure to rehabilitate Koci Xoxe in-
dicates the extreme sensitivity with which
the Tirana regime still regards its relations with Yugoslavia.
Albania's refusal, unique among the Satellites, to make any
significant concessions to Yugoslavia presumably stems from
a fear that any move in this direction would be interpreted as
an invitation for the resumption of Yugoslav influence in Albania.

The strong support of Xoxe's condemnation
suggests that no major effort to placate Tito, such as demo-
tion of Tito's archenemy, Premier Mehmet Shehu, will be made
at the congress.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 May)

An Israeli army spokesman stated on
28 May that Israeli troops in the El Auja area were fired on
by Egyptian forces on the night of 27 May. No casualties
were reported.

Egyptian ambassador to the United States
Hussein, now in Cairo for consultations, told Ambassador
Byroade, following his meeting with Prime Minister Nasr last
week, that (1) he personally was completely reassured that Nasr
had no intention of attacking Israel but that (2) Nasr's feelings
"were intense" on the question of arms for Israel and he be-
lieved there was a definite decision made to try to keep Israel
as strong as the Arab states. Nasr apparently feels that the
British are behind the rumors of a plan for a UN arms embargo,
and that they envisage a plan whereby Israel could circumvent
it as in the past. Hussein, on Nasr's orders, stated that the Egyp-
tian recognition of Communist China was not "to slap the United
States," but was related solely to establishing a new source of arms
because of Nasr's feelings on the question of arms for Israel.

Major General Nuwar, new commander in
chief of the Jordan Arab Legion, told the press on 25 May that
the days of meeting Israeli aggression with complaints are gone
forever. Hereafter, aggression would be met with force.

that Greece on 27 May granted clearance for landing and refuel-
ing of six French-built Ouragan jet fighters en route to Israel.
These planes have not yet been reported as landing in Athens.
They are apparently French deliveries to Israel in addition to the
24 Mysteres already agreed upon. A strong Arab reaction, par-
ticularly from Egypt, is likely should this become public.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9

[PAGE 11]
army was in the process of receiving enough Czech SU-100
assault guns for a regiment.
Syria had been
tentatively offered more T-34 tanks but he had refused and had
selected the SU-100's instead, presumably to use as tank de-
stroyers. The attaché comments that a Syrian armored regi-
ment has 54 tanks or tank destroyers.

29 May 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
