Anti-Qasim General Strike in Mosul

Fearing that Prime Minister Qasim is about to favor Mosul's pro-Communist elements, anti-Communists there began a general strike on 13 January. This action follows a student strike begun in Mosul schools on 1 January after the arrest of several anti-Communist teachers. Rumors have spread in Mosul that Qasim intends to replace two strongly anti-Communist officials--the governor and the police chief--who have tacitly condoned revenge killings of Communists during the past several months. These assassinations, which have averaged six or seven a week since early last fall, have been in retaliation for massacres by Communist elements in the aftermath of the March 1959 Mosul revolt. Although Iraqi military courts have been carrying out repressive measures against Iraqi Communists, Qasim has repeatedly vitiated the courts' work by releasing imprisoned Communists.

On 28 December the Baghdad military court handed down death sentences to seven Communists and gave 22 other Communists and pro-Communists prison sentences for their part in the Mosul massacres; 55 others were sentenced the day before. Meanwhile, the editor of the country's largest Communist paper failed to appear in court on 27 December to face charges of violating censorship regulations; he is believed to have gone underground.

While apparently trying to mollify local Communists, Qasim appears to appreciate the strength of Iraqi "nationalist" sentiment in favor of Arab solidarity. Emphasis on Arabism has become an increasingly dominant theme in his recent speeches: he has frequently referred to the "Arab nation," talked of greater economic and political cooperation, and displayed a less hostile attitude toward the UAR. However, none of these gestures is likely to placate Iraqi anti-Communist and pan-Arab elements. Some plotting against Qasim appears to be continuing, although rivalries between factions have militated so far against efforts to overthrow him.

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
