[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

13 May 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Record number of Chinese jet divisions believed based on Korean border (page 3).
2. French official sees "psychological shock" required in Indochina (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. British will not forcibly repress Sudanese pro-independence demonstrations (page 4).
4. Turkey denies planning military talks with Yugoslavia (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Adenauer reports progress in reviewing contractual agreement (page 5).
6. France may delay ratification of EDC treaty (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Record number of Chinese jet divisions believed based on Korean border:

Four Chinese Communist MIG-15 divisions are based on Manchurian fields near the Yalu River. They are the 4th Division probably at Antung, the 6th and 17th at Tatungkou, and the 12th at Takushano.

Comment: Four Chinese jet divisions are the largest number noted in this area, and they represent a doubling of strength since February.

In addition to these four divisions, with an average of 50 planes each, there are believed to be one Korean and three Soviet MIG-15 units, of unknown strength, in the Antung area.

2. French official sees "psychological shock" required in Indochina:

The new French diplomatic counselor in Indochina believes that a "psychological shock" is required to end the "hopeless" military stalemate in Indochina. He personally suggests a joint French-British-American declaration of common aims in Southeast Asia, namely, national independence, security, and improved living conditions.

The counselor believes his government would be willing to go "very far" to obtain a tripartite declaration of this nature. He spoke of the desirability of a declaration "confirming" France's desire to give greater autonomy to the Associated States.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: Minister Resident Letourneau recently expressed opposition to further political concessions to the Associated States so long as military operations are in progress. When the counselor was questioned as to the apparent conflict in these views, he stated that the "need to revise the situation" and the demands of French public opinion would "weigh more heavily."

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. British will not forcibly repress Sudanese pro-independence demonstrations:

High British officials in the Sudan have intimated that they would rather leave the Sudan entirely than forcibly repress Sudanese demonstrations in favor of independence, reports the French liaison office in the Sudan.

The British expect that demonstrations would be provoked by the intensification of Egyptian propaganda which would undoubtedly follow Britain's recognition of Farouk as "King of the Sudan."

Comment: British officials have suggested that the available Sudanese forces might not be able to control such demonstrations. American State Department observers, however, after visiting the Sudan in January, concluded that the attitude of the British-controlled government would probably determine whether any disturbances could be held in check.

4. Turkey denies planning military talks with Yugoslavia:

The Turkish Foreign Minister in a 9 May conversation with Ambassador McGhee expressed "great satisfaction" with the results of the recent Greek-Turkish talks in Athens. He said that a joint Greek-Turkish approach to Yugoslavia had been the

[PAGE 05]
main topic discussed, but emphasized that military talks with Yugoslavia had not been undertaken and would be considered only after prior discussion with the United States.

Comment: A Greek Foreign Office official informed the American Ambassador in Athens on 6 May that the Turks had agreed to join Greece in approaching Yugoslavia on military defense planning. The Foreign Minister's statements, however, are in line with his previous assertion that he intended to limit his forthcoming talks in Belgrade to economic and cultural matters.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Adenauer reports progress in reviewing contractual agreement:

Chancellor Adenauer is convinced that he has made real progress in satisfying objections of members of the coalition parties to the Allied-German contractual agreement. He believes that the criticism which was directed at all articles of the general convention can be overcome by a few changes in presentation which will not alter the substance.

Regarding the annexes to the general convention, however, the majority of cabinet and party leaders have expressed very strong opposition to the article on decartelization and deconcentration. Adenauer feels that unless substantial modifications in this article are accepted by the Allies, the contractual agreement itself may be jeopardized.

Comment: The right-wing coalition parties may ask that the decartelization and deconcentration provisions be expunged from the contractual agreement and included in a transition agreement which could be repealed when the Schuman Plan becomes operative.

[PAGE 06]
6. France may delay ratification of EDC treaty:

The French Government does not plan to submit the European Defense Community treaty to the National Assembly before October, according to several high French officials.

The American Embassy in Paris thinks that Premier Pinay's relative indifference toward foreign affairs makes it questionable that he would personally make an all-out fight for ratification.
