[PAGE 01]
12 November 1953
Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SECURITY INFORMATION

SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. (page 3).
2. Finnish vessel reportedly delivers Satellite guns to Communist China (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Chinese Communists in Burma reportedly advised to be ready to leave (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Israel believed strongly opposed to US-proposed Jordan River project (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. France seeks close collaboration with US on new weapons development (page 6).

****
[PAGE 03]
INFORMATION

GENERAL

1.

2. Finnish vessel reportedly delivers Satellite guns to Communist China:
in Canton's port of Whampoa in October he observed a Polish and a Finnish vessel unloading six-inch guns.

The guns were from Czechoslovakia's Skoda works.
[PAGE 04]
SECURITY INFORMATION

Comment: This Finnish shipment, if correctly reported, is in violation of assurances given the United States by Helsinki earlier this year that it would not permit its vessels to carry items of direct military use to Communist China. These assurances followed protests concerning the Finnish tanker Wiima's unsuccessful attempt to deliver kerosene to China from the Black Sea.

The delivery of weapons to Communist China by sea has been rarely attempted, because rail shipment through the USSR is more secure.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Chinese Communists in Burma reportedly advised to be ready to leave:

Comment:
The Chinese Communists may believe that the continued presence of Chinese Nationalist troops in Burma will greatly intensify anti-Chinese sentiment among the Burmese. They may thus be taking steps to avoid entanglement in official or unofficial Burmese retaliation against the Chinese community.
[PAGE 05]
SECURITY INFORMATION

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Israel believed strongly opposed to US-proposed Jordan River project:
American charge Russell in Tel Aviv believes that the real Israeli attitude toward the American-sponsored Jordan River "TVA" project is represented by the widespread Israeli press criticism of the Johnston mission to the Near East rather than by the government's apparently open-minded attitude in its discussion with the special envoy. The government's show of cooperation probably reflects a tactical decision based on the belief that Arab opposition to the plan is sufficient to block it.

Russell states that there is little chance of obtaining a firm Israeli decision on the Jordan project unless Arab acceptance seems probable.

Comment: Because of Israel's desire to use the Jordan River to irrigate the Negev desert, opposition to the American proposal, which allocates more water to Jordan than to Israel, has been expected.

In the present tense atmosphere, no Arab agreement to the plan seems likely.

5.
[PAGE 06]
SECURITY INFORMATION

WESTERN EUROPE

6. France seeks close collaboration with US on new weapons development:

Comment: Bidault has publicly expressed the interest of his government in a NATO strategy based on atomic weapons.

The French representative to the North Atlantic Council has stated that Paris is concerned not over the question of the withdrawal of American troops now, but about modifications of the 1954 NATO military program and changes in future planning. The French press, however, has played up statements of American officials regarding the possible withdrawal of some United States ground troops from Europe during the next two years.
