1. MOVE TO FORCE INDONESIAN PRESIDENT INTO EXILE
MAY BE UNDER WAY
(Information as of 2400 EST, 12 Dec 57)

Prime Minister Djuanda's announcement that President Sukarno is "physically and mentally tired" and will leave Indonesia for a "rest in a neighboring country," perhaps within the next week, suggests that moderate elements are making a serious effort to take control of the government and check the drift toward chaos and Communist domination. Earlier indications of intensive army activity give credibility to reports that Sukarno is a virtual prisoner of the army, and that his projected "rest" may, in fact, amount to at least temporary exile. The motivation for such action undoubtedly would be the belief that the only hope of preserving a united, non-Communist Indonesia lies in getting Sukarno out of the country. There will, however, be no renunciation of Indonesia's claim to Irian or an immediate restoration of seized Dutch property.

Although Sartono, the vacillating speaker of parliament, has been named to act as president in Sukarno's anticipated absence, the real force behind the current moves is probably a triumvirate composed of Djuanda, former Vice President Hatta and army Chief of Staff Nasution. The latter two were primarily responsible for crushing the Communist uprising at Madiun in 1948.

Vigorous opposition to Sukarno's departure can be expected from leftist and Communist elements. They were the first to suggest that Sukarno postpone his previously scheduled trip to various Asian and Latin American countries in order to continue his leadership of the Irian campaign. They probably will try to use Sukarno's enormous popularity with the Javanese masses to prevent his departure. This could lead to open conflict with the army. Sukarno may also attempt to maneuver himself out of his apparent predicament. If he succeeds, he will continue to throw his weight to the Communists and facilitate the rapid expansion of their already considerable strength.
