East German Regime Campaigns to Halt Withdrawals From Collective Farms

East German peasants who were forced into collectives during the all-out drive last winter now are withdrawing in increasingly large numbers.

As a pretext the peasants are using the regime's reiterated assertion that the collectivization was "voluntary." Some of them are reported to have said: "The collectives are merely temporary affairs... in joining, we have lost all interest in work... formerly we were farmers and now we are only hired hands."

The main center of unrest appears to be in the north-central part of the country, there has also been trouble in the extreme south. On 2 July Gerhard Grueneberg, central committee secretary in charge of agricultural affairs, berated party leaders in Neubrandenburg district for failing to correct what he termed the "critical situation" and said that the movement was spreading to neighboring districts. control has not yet been re-established in Neubrandenburg, that Grueneberg is greatly concerned over the adverse effect of the withdrawals on agricultural production, and that the SED central committee--probably scheduled to meet on 19 July--plans to take a "hard and clear line" to correct matters.

In Potsdam district, the situation appears to be deteriorating. On 8 July the SED first secretary reported that many peasants had announced they would leave collectives and, in one area near West Berlin, there were "countless withdrawal declarations," Peasants were said to be threatening: "In the fall, if we stand together, we shall once again become the farmers we were before."

The top SED leadership is taking measures on the eve of the harvest to halt withdrawals and to organize farm work. The central committee is dispatching activists to trouble spots, and local officials are being subjected to a mounting barrage of criticism and threats. Grueneberg described one local broadcast as "a catastrophe" in that it revealed numerous defections, resistance by farmers, and local inefficiency.
