imminent food shortage in Leopoldville, together with the failure of many Congolese to receive salaries from employers who have fled, could lead to civilian rioting. Belgian reinforcements totaling about 350 paratroops occupied Leopoldville on 13 July, after other Belgian troops had been repulsed by mutineers at the port of Matadi the previous day.

Premier Lumumba has renewed demands for the removal of Belgian forces, apparently on the assumption that a UN police force will ultimately be dispatched to restore order. In Katanga Province, provincial premier Moise Tshombe has hedged on his 11 July announcement of an "independent" Katanga, and in the absence of Belgian recognition may be prepared to "rejoin" the Congo if guaranteed a sufficient measure of internal autonomy.

*Moscow's statement of 13 July accusing the five Western powers of seeking to "liquidate" the new Congo state through direct military action and under cover of the United Nations is apparently designed to encourage Lumumba to resist any outside intervention, as well as further the Soviet pose as the protector of the newly independent African states.

India: The response among India's 2,000,000 government workers to the 12 July strike call by socialist and Communist labor leaders continues spotty, but incidents of violence and sabotage are reported increasing. Non-strikers, supervisors, and army reservists are maintaining most of the essential services in such seriously affected areas as Bombay and Calcutta. The unions are reported planning for a long siege, and they may be aided by a 24-hour sympathy strike threatened by Communist and socialist unions in nongovernment fields. Their capability to hold out is limited, however, especially in the face of an apparently unyielding attitude on the part of the government.

Somali Republic: The selection of Abdirascid Ali Scermarche as premier-designate of the newly independent Somali Republic appears to reflect tribal realignments and to have ended the political stalemate. Each of the main regions--former British Somaliland and the Italian-administered trust territory of Somalia--now has received a major political office in the government. The premier-designate, reportedly a devout Moslem opposed

14 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
