[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

5 February 1957

Copy No. 131
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. NASR REMAINS ADAMANT ON SUEZ ISSUES (page 3).

2. USSR APPROVES NEW EGYPTIAN ARMS REQUIREMENTS (page 4).

3. CRISIS IN JORDAN MAY FOLLOW KING'S CHALLENGE TO CABINET (page 5).

4. SOVIET MINISTER SEEKS EARLY VISIT TO YEMEN (page 6).

5. ATHENS WARNS OF ANTI-GREEK RIOTS IN TURKEY (page 7).

6. FORMER OPPONENTS OF ULBRICHT ADMITTED TO EAST GERMAN PARTY CENTRAL COMMITTEE (page 8).

7. KREMLIN BACKS ANTI-GOMULKA ELEMENTS IN POLAND (page 9).

8. PROVISIONAL PRESIDENT OF HAITI REPORTEDLY RESIGNS (page 10).
[PAGE 04]
1. NASR REMAINS ADAMANT ON SUEZ ISSUES

Comment on:

President Nasr's reply to a 27 January request from UN secretary general Hammarskjold to give "positive co-operation" and to separate the canal issue from the problem of the Israeli withdrawal--has indicated that the Egyptian position on control of the canal and on toll collection remains essentially unchanged.

In regard to canal toll collections, Nasr said there is "no question that all ships which pass through the canal must pay the tolls to the Egyptian Suez Canal administration." He stated that Egypt would welcome co-operation in obtaining a settlement which would enable him to focus his efforts on raising his country's standard of living. However, he emphasized that Egyptians "will not agree under any circumstances that the price of this co-operation contain any trace of international control or collective colonialism!"

Nasr said that Egypt is prepared to discuss Suez Canal issues "as soon as the withdrawal of Israeli forces has been completed."

Although Nasr has left little room for negotiations, Hammarskjold plans to go to Cairo in the near future to talk with him about a Suez settlement as well as the future deployment and legal status of UN forces.
[PAGE 05]
2. USSR APPROVES NEW EGYPTIAN ARMS REQUIREMENTS

Comment on:

the USSR had agreed to provide at least 50 aircraft in addition to those already shipped or contracted for. New Soviet-Egyptian arms contracts for long-term requirements probably will now be negotiated.

Preliminary Egyptian proposals presented to the USSR "as a guide" called for establishing an Egyptian air force of up to 32 squadrons, replacement and reinforcement of antiaircraft and field artillery units, replacement of medium tanks lost in Sinai, and additional supplies of radar, radio equipment, submarines, subchasers and vehicles.

Some military equipment is still being shipped to Egypt under the April 1956 contract. In late December and early January, Egypt called for the dispatch of tank spare parts and a step-up in truck deliveries.
[PAGE 06]
3. CRISIS IN JORDAN MAY FOLLOW KING'S CHALLENGE TO CABINET

Comment on:

A political crisis may develop in Jordan following the refusal of Prime Minister Nabulsi and his cabinet to heed King Hussain's demands for measures designed to curb anti-Western influence.

the king asked the prime minister to suspend the Communist newspaper Al-Jamahir; appoint the cabinet representative of the leftist Arab Socialist Resurrection Party, Rimawi, as minister of justice instead of minister of foreign affairs; remove both Rimawi and the representative of the Communist-front National Bloc from the delegation negotiating termination of the Anglo-Jordanian treaty; and to agree to make no change in Jordan's election law.

the majority of the cabinet was unwilling to resign and favored forcing the king to dismiss the government--a move which would be unacceptable to the public. When confronted with the cabinet's refusal to comply, the king was reported to have "laughed and stated that he did not insist on his demands and that he would consider the whole affair as not having happened."

The Egyptian attache reported that large-scale demonstrations were expected to take place if the king attempted to dismiss the government.

Hussain has previously indicated his desire to replace the Nabulsi government at the earliest opportunity with more conservative and responsible leadership. By challenging the cabinet and then backing away from a showdown, Hussain has alerted Jordan's anti-Western forces who may be able to rally majority support against him.
[PAGE 07]
4. SOVIET MINISTER SEEKS EARLY VISIT TO YEMEN

Soviet ambassador to Egypt Kiselev, who is accredited to Yemen, sought the Imam's permission to present his credentials during the week of 31 January to 6 February.

His request was made through the Yemeni minister in Cairo, who stated that "he would like to hear from us immediately."

the Chinese Communist ambassador in Cairo is also about to depart for Yemen.

Kiselev sought permission to "exhibit a type of Russian plane which would be safe since it can take off and land with one motor." Referring to Kiselev's request, the Yemeni minister advised that "perhaps he and his government do not think it safe to ride in our planes... and perhaps there would be no risk in approving his wishes."

Comment

Soviet-Yemeni contacts have become more frequent since the first arrival of Soviet arms in Yemen last October, and recently there has been increasingly close co-ordination in Cairo between Egypt, the USSR and Yemen in their campaign against the British position in Aden.
[PAGE 08]
5. ATHENS WARNS OF ANTI-GREEK RIOTS IN TURKEY

Under instructions from Prime Minister Karamanlis, Greece's acting foreign minister has told Ambassador Allen that the Greek government is "greatly worried" over the possibility of anti-Greek disturbances in Istanbul during the UN debate on the Cyprus issue. Athens is anxious, according to the minister, that Ankara "know in advance such disturbances are expected so that the Turkish government cannot say that the police in Istanbul were taken by surprise!"

Allen comments that Karamanlis is now in an angry mood and may take some drastic anti-Turkish move if trouble recurs in Istanbul.

Comment

A similar warning was given by the Greek government just before the Istanbul riots of September 1955.
[PAGE 09]
6. FORMER OPPONENTS OF ULBRICHT ADMITTED TO EAST GERMAN PARTY CENTRAL COMMITTEE

The admission to the central committee of the East German Socialist Unity (Communist) Party (SED) of three former opponents of First Secretary Walter Ulbricht's policies may be designed to appease the restive intellectual element by giving it greater representation in high party circles. The most prominent of the three is Franz Dahlem, former politburo member who was once regarded as Ulbricht's principal opponent in the party. The other two are Hans Jendretzky, former Berlin party boss, and Alexander Abusch, leading East German intellectual. All three men were publicly criticized by the party in 1952-53.

These appointments do not necessarily presage any fundamental concessions to dissident elements demanding more freedom, as Dahlem, at least, appears to have been intimidated into supporting Ulbricht's policies.

Ulbricht, in his speech to the central committee meeting last week, sharply rejected the concept of national Communism, once espoused by Dahlem, and declared that East Germany would not follow the Yugoslav pattern.

The ferment among intellectuals and students and their demands for more freedom are causing the regime serious concern. One group, led by a university professor who was arrested in late November 1956, reportedly had contacts with intellectuals in Hungary and Poland and with Social Democrats in Germany with a view toward encouraging changes in East Germany.
[PAGE 10]
7. KREMLIN BACKS ANTI-GOMULKA ELEMENTS IN POLAND

The Russians, through their ambassador in Warsaw, have been financing and organizing anti-Gomulka Stalinist elements in Poland.

Gomulka had not realized until recently that the Stalinists were backed by the Kremlin and "were really out to cut his throat." Now that the elections are over, Gomulka "will go after them" and will try to get rid of those holding government and party offices and replace them with his own people. Gomulka's attitude toward his "comrades" was changing and that he "is beginning to see who are his friends and who are his enemies in the party."

Comment

Gomulka will probably act to remove the Stalinists, but at the same time will probably try to prevent the press from voicing anti-Soviet sentiments and student and youth groups from making extreme demands.
[PAGE 11]
8. PROVISIONAL PRESIDENT OF HAITI REPORTEDLY RESIGNS

Comment on:

Provisional President Pierre-Louis of Haiti is reported to have resigned in the face of a general strike, cabinet resignations, and increasing criticism of his government. A meeting of presidential candidates and army leaders reportedly decided to set up an interim revolutionary government. It is possible that a junta will assume power.

The question of legal succession is unclear.

The American embassy believes that Pierre-Louis, who became chief executive following the ouster of dictator Magloire on 12 December 1956, could be followed constitutionally by J. B. Cineas, a senior judge of the court of appeals. Cineas is reported acceptable to several presidential candidates and a majority of the interested public.

Opposition to Pierre-Louis had developed over his delay in setting a date for elections and his failure to obtain enactment of electoral reform laws and laws sequestering the assets of members of the Magloire administration.

The financial and economic situation of the country is serious and political unrest can be expected to continue.
[PAGE 12]
