Angola

Portuguese authorities in Angola are suspicious of both Catholic and Protestant groups. On 1 April they arrested Monsignor Manuel Mendes das Neves, the vicar general in Angola, claiming that he might be the "supreme chief of the subversive organization responsible for the terrorist attacks." The authorities have accused Protestant missions in northern Angola of being intimately connected with last month's uprisings because the attacks were better organized in areas where these missions are most active. Portuguese have staged violent demonstrations against Protestant missions in Luanda and destroyed a clinic.

the coming conference in Casablanca will be co-sponsored by the pro-Communist African Revolutionary Front for the National Independence of Portuguese Colonies (FRAIN) based in Guinea, the African Independence party of Portuguese Guinea, and the Goa League. Invitations have been sent to leading nationalist organizations representing Angola, Goa, Mozambique, Portuguese Guinea, Sao Tome, and Timor; observers from various Afro-Asian organizations have also been invited. The sponsors hope to adopt a resolution to form a solidarity committee "to organize the struggle" against Portuguese imperialism "on all fronts." The Leopoldville-based Angola Peoples Union (UPA) which played a major role in the March uprisings, apparently was not invited.

Portuguese officials who recently visited Angola reportedly were astonished at the extent of participation by natives in the March uprisings. They admitted that Portugal was unprepared for such events and stated they were convinced that Lisbon would have to institute major economic and social reforms if it hoped to retain this overseas province.

The over-all impact of the incidents on Angola's economy may be grave; coffee production, which accounts for nearly half of the province's foreign exchange receipts, is expected to decline by about 10 percent because of damaged plantations and a labor shortage during the harvest season. Lisbon recently sent

7 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
