The Situation in Laos: King Savang in Luang Prabang signed on 12 December a royal ordinance ousting the Souvanna Phouma government and temporarily transferring all powers to General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. This action followed a National Assembly vote of no confidence against Souvanna, taken at a meeting in Savannakhet; it appears that the deputies will soon go to Luang Prabang, where the King has convoked a special session of the assembly to deal with the formation of a new government. The most likely choice to be the new premier is Prince Boun Oum, co-leader with Phoumi of the Revolutionary Committee. Phoumi himself will probably be assigned major portfolios, including in all likelihood that of defense.

Meanwhile, reports of increased Pathet Lao military pressure in the Luang Prabang area may indicate an intent to harass or capture the royal capital. On 12 December, the "Supreme Command of the Pathet Lao armed forces" broadcast an order which, in addition to calling for expanded guerrilla warfare throughout Laos and for cooperation in the defense of Vientiane, directed Pathet Lao units to join in a move to "rescue the King and liberate Luang Prabang." Three columns of Pathet Lao are reported to be advancing northward toward Luang Prabang and may now be only 20 miles or so away. Other Pathet Lao elements are believed to be located to the north and northeast of Luang Prabang. The pro-Phoumi garrison at Luang Prabang has been weakened by the withdrawal of three companies of paratroopers for use in the Vientiane area.

The buildup of both Kong Le's and Phoumi's forces in and around Vientiane is continuing. Soviet IL-14s reportedly delivered from four to six 120-mm. mortars for Kong Le on 12 December; in addition to the howitzers brought in the day before, four 90-mm. antiaircraft guns have also been brought in; a minimum of two howitzers and all of the antiaircraft guns are said to be in place along the Pak Sane road and at the Vientiane airfield. The Soviet airlift capacity from Hanoi may be augmented.

Quinim Pholsena, self-styled head of the Vientiane government, is seeking through various avenues a truce between the Kong Le and

13 Dec 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
