CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
6 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-China: In an unpublished speech during a February meeting of bloc leaders in Moscow, Khrushchev is reported to have attacked Chinese policies and actions in strong terms, accusing Peiping of endangering bloc unity. By criticizing Peiping before this audience, Khrushchev probably hoped to forestall any influence Peiping's independent views might have on the actions of satellite regimes and to make clear that the USSR would not change its policies to mollify the Chinese.

USSR-Greece: The Soviet ambassador in Athens has told the Greek Foreign Ministry that Greece's "generally hostile attitude" toward the USSR made it difficult to expand economic relations at this time and that the visit of the Soviet foreign trade minister, scheduled for April, had been postponed until July or August. Foreign Minister Averoff feels that the USSR probably has not given up its economic offensive, but has merely postponed its main trade offers until a more suitable occasion. Moscow may hope that developments at the summit meeting in May will induce Greece to join in the "spirit of detente" and, coupled with offers to absorb surplus Greek commodities, pave the way for a weakening of Athens' pro-Western policies. (Page 2)

USSR-France: The German question remained the major point of disagreement between De Gaulle and Khrushchev in their final talks as it had been in their initial conversations. Khrushchev expressed approval of De Gaulle's Algerian policy, but was noncommittal on De Gaulle's ideas for joint East-West aid to less-developed countries and for noninterference in internal affairs of other countries. Khrushchev made a considerable point of Moscow's good relations with China, but did not suggest that France recognize Peiping. De Gaulle found Khrushchev clever, intelligent, and well-informed, but not of Stalin's stature.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Africa: The South African Government has intensified its campaign to suppress African unrest. Police are using strong-arm methods in several cities to "intimidate the intimidators" who allegedly were responsible for the recent work stoppage. The aim of the police, according to a ranking officer, is to stamp out African nationalist organizations for all time.

Guinea: The financial situation in Guinea appears to be worsening following Conakry's recent severance of monetary relations with the French franc zone and issuance of a new national currency. Confidence in the new Guinea franc is not developing; it is being discounted up to 50 percent in West African capitals and is not gaining acceptance in Guinea's northern region.

Laos: the Pathet Lao insurgents plan armed attacks on American personnel in the Pakse region of southern Laos some time before the 24 April elections. The Pathet Lao probably have the capability for such action, but it would seem to run counter to present Communist tactics in connection with the elections.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Delegates from the Sino-Soviet bloc and from Latin American nations are now in Havana for the Fourth National Congress of the Youth Section of the Cuban Communist party, which began on 4 April and is scheduled to last a week. The congress has been given TV time and other facilities by the Castro regime. The Communists are also preparing a Latin American Youth Congress for later this year, which would ostensibly be under non-Communist "democratic" leadership.
