to force a re-registration of students and, by this maneuver, to eliminate known Communist sympathizers, (b) arrest a considerable number of Tudeh Party members who participated in a recent parade he had prohibited and exile some of them to southern Iran, (c) install agents in the schools and universities to counteract Communism. Zahedi's son also stated that his father was angered by police inefficiency and was planning a shake-up in the police organization and in the gendarmerie.

Comment: Although both the Shah and the Prime Minister have shown a desire to clamp down on the pro-Soviet Tudeh agitators, it is doubtful that the present government is able to take effective action. Only recently the government prohibited street demonstrations; yet they have been held. Moreover, the Tudeh Party itself has long been officially banned, but its organization continues and its activities have increased in recent months.

6. Israel transshipping industrial diamonds to Soviet Bloc:

In commenting on Israel's transshipment of priority materials to the Soviet sphere, the US Ambassador in Tel Aviv recognizes the possibility that the re-export of such items as diamonds and diamond tools "may be reaching serious proportions". However, on the basis of conversations with Israeli Government officials and economic officers attached to various foreign missions in Tel Aviv, the Ambassador concludes that Western European countries, with the "partial exception" of the UK, have not taken effective action to prevent the re-export of their products and do not appear to be aware of the US concern over this matter.

Comment: Israeli transshipment of certain high-cost materials to the Communist world is well-known and has been periodically scrutinized by US officials. Israel has for some time conducted a flourishing re-export business with the Soviet Bloc in pharmaceutical and antibiotic materials (penicillin, streptomycin, etc.), as well as industrial diamonds and diamond tools. In the absence
