1. USSR SLOWS RATE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH FOR 1957

At the opening session of the Supreme Soviet on 5 February the USSR revealed a more realistic "new look" in its planning aimed at salvaging Sixth Five-Year Plan goals. Planned growth of industrial production in 1957 has been cut back from the 10.7 percent for 1956 to 7.1 percent in order to concentrate resources in lagging raw materials industries. The 1957 budget allocations to industry and agriculture are slightly higher than last year.

Industry: Incomplete data from the speeches by the new chief of planning, M. G. Pervukhin, and Finance Minister A. G. Zverev give no indication that the USSR has abandoned the Sixth Five-Year Plan goals, but prospects for success are by far the worst that have faced the Soviet Union since World War II. By radically rephasing the investment program Soviet leaders may still hope to reach the 1960 goals for iron, steel, coal, cement and electric power, the key industries in which construction of new capacity is far behind schedule. The machine building industries will concentrate on producing the capital equipment required by these basic industries. State investment expenditures on machinery and equipment will increase by 20 percent, from 55 to 60 billion rubles. Production of agricultural machinery, however, still has high priority. Growth rates in heavy and light industry were cut back about equally.

Consumer Welfare: The budget provides for a substantial reduction in the state loan and higher personal income tax exemptions, and more than half of the increase in total budget expenditures is allocated to health and welfare measures. Although investment in housing is increased from 25 to 30 billion rubles and loans to private builders will increase six times, no change in the original housing goals for 1960 is apparent. The planned 9.5 percent increase in agricultural production in 1957 assumes that the extremely favorable weather conditions of 1956 will recur. Thus prospects for the Soviet consumer in 1957 appear essentially unchanged.

6 Feb 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
