[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

16 November 1952

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Pro-Communist Indian delegate ostensibly has free hand in UN Korean talks (page 3).
2. East Germany held unable to supplant Bonn in Arab market (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. North Korean brigade reports civilian unrest due to UN bombing (page 4).
4. Jet bomber build-up in Manchuria continues (page 4).
5. Chinese Nationalist Air Force increases fighter potential (page 5).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
6. Thai Prime Minister seen responsible for drive against Communists (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Comment on status of transport to West Berlin (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Pro-Communist Indian delegate ostensibly has free hand in UN Korean talks:

Indian Foreign Secretary Nehru told the
on 13 November that V. K. Krishna Menon,
Indian delegate to the UN, "has a free hand"
in the current talks on Korea. Nehru also said there had been no
communications between Delhi and Peiping concerning Menon's talks
in New York.

Comment: Krishna Menon, long a fellow-
traveler, appears to be playing a leading role in the Korean discussions
now going on at the UN. It is not likely that he would be allowed to
proceed without some instructions from his government. Even if there
have been no communications between Delhi and Peiping, he could be
informed of Peiping's position through the Soviet delegates to the UN
with whom he is known to have been in contact.

2. East Germany held unable to supplant Bonn in Arab market:

American authorities in Berlin consider it
highly unlikely that East Germany could
"fill the gap" created by any Arab League
embargo on West German exports. They
do not take seriously reports of an East German bid to replace West
Germany in the Arab market.

These officials believe that the Egyptian
representative in East Germany has either been misled or misinformed
if, as reported, he has advised Cairo that East Germany is prepared
both to import Egyptian cotton and to supply goods previously exported
from West Germany.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: Although it is likely that existing
foreign trade and internal rearmament demands are placing a considerable strain on the East German economy, the suggestion of an East
German trade offer may be instrumental in increasing Arab-West
German tension.

The Bonn government, meanwhile, plans soon
to send an economic-political mission to the Arab capitals to discuss
trade possibilities.

FAR EAST

3. North Korean brigade reports civilian unrest due to UN bombing:

enemy planes were cutting
the supply lines and creating confusion among
the people. These UN attacks are "especially
undermining the ideology of the population near the front lines" and
causing disorder.

Comment: This is the first admission
that heavy UN aerial attacks are undermining
civilian morale.
North Korean propaganda has in the last few
months singled out UN aerial attacks as a primary target.

4. Jet bomber build-up in Manchuria continues:

Twelve Soviet twin-jet bombers were
scheduled to fly from Chita in the Soviet
Union to Tsitsihar in Manchuria on 15
November. Three of the aircraft, which

[PAGE 05]
were assigned call signs noted in previous IL-28 ferrying operations
this month, have already landed at Tsitsihar.

Comment: The completion of this flight
will raise to 45 the number of IL-28 aircraft which have been flown
to Manchuria from the Soviet Union since 26 October.

5. Chinese Nationalist Air Force increases fighter potential:

The recent arrival of 25 conventional fighter
aircraft has "furnished a necessary and
important tonic to Chinese Nationalist Air
Force personnel," according to the American
Air Attache in Taipei. This first shipment since 1949 of aircraft consigned to China under the United States aid program will increase by
20 percent the Chinese Nationalist Air Force potential.

Comment: This brings to 326 the number of
Chinese Nationalist conventional combat aircraft on Formosa. The
CNAF has no jet fighters.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

6. Thai Prime Minister seen responsible for drive against Communists:

Prime Minister Phibun is believed to have
ordered Police Director General Phao to carry
out the recent round-up of Communists and
fellow-travelers in Bangkok after the latter
had "dragged his feet" in dealing with the problem.

The American Ambassador believes that
the recent arrests may well be the first important step toward
implementing Thailand's anti-Communist program "after four years
of hollow promises."

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on status of transport to West Berlin:

The volume of traffic between Western
Germany and West Berlin has shown a steady increase in 1952
despite the closing of the Rothensee canal lock and intermittent
Soviet harassment of road and rail facilities to the city. Although
canal shipments dropped off 50 percent during August when the
Rothensee lock was first closed and low water prevailed in the
alternate route, they are now moving at near normal rates. Rail
transport has remained almost constant in volume, and road traffic
in October reached an all-time high.

In view of this situation, the Soviet Control
Commission is in a position to justify a denial of Allied requests for
additional rail transport facilities.
