[PAGE 01]
20 August 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Bao Dai reportedly refuses French request to negotiate with Viet Minh (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA

3. Pakistan negotiating with Soviet Union for 300,000 tons of wheat (page 4).

4. Comment on probable Communist-front activity in Kashmir (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Egyptian Communist leaders arrested for opposition to army group (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Comment on the West Berlin coal situation (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Bao Dai reportedly refuses French request to negotiate with Viet Minh:

Bao Dai is reported to have stated that Letourneau asked him in May to participate in efforts to open negotiations with the Viet Minh. Bao Dai's present trip to France is said to be designed to avoid involvement in current French-Viet Minh negotiations.

Comment: The French were attempting to open negotiations in May. Ambassador Heath in Saigon, however, early in August dismissed as local gossip new rumors of negotiations raised by Bao Dai's trip.
[PAGE 04]
In June, Letourneau told American officials that France would not negotiate unless the Viet Minh took the initiative, in which case he would consult the Vietnam Government and the "free world." In April, however, while discussing before the French Assembly the possibility of a "solution," he had said that there would be a chance of succeeding only if action were taken without publicity, and referred to "contacts and conversations which have taken place."

SOUTH ASIA

3. Pakistan negotiating with Soviet Union for 300,000 tons of wheat:

The Pakistani Prime Minister has told American Ambassador Warren that he is negotiating with the USSR for 300,000 tons of wheat in exchange for cotton and jute.

He added that if the 300,000 tons of wheat requested from the United States were not forthcoming, he would have to ask the Soviet Union for a total of 600,000 tons to ease his country's prospective food shortage.

Comment: According to the best available estimates, Pakistan will need to import between 400,000 and 500,000 tons of wheat within the next twelve months. Of this amount, Pakistan has obtained almost 150,000 tons from Turkey and India, and it has tried to acquire the balance from the United States. There is no indication that Pakistan will need more than 300,000 tons from either the United States or the Soviet Union.

4. Comment on probable Communist-front activity in Kashmir:

A Peiping radio broadcast of 18 August described a "cultural peace conference" held in Kashmir on 8 and 9 August which represented what was probably the first formalized overt Communist activity in that state.
[PAGE 05]
The conference, reported as the first of its kind in Kashmir, was presided over by the President of the Kashmiri Constituent Assembly and addressed by the Finance Minister. These men are among Sheikh Abdullah's closest advisers and are both suspected Communists.

The 100 delegates attending the conference included prominent Kashmiri poets, singers, artists, and representatives of village peace committees. Persons in these categories have figured largely in the most successful Communist-front groups in India.

The conference passed a typical Communist-line resolution urging world peace and condemning American bombing of the Yalu River hydroelectric plants in Korea.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Egyptian Communist leaders arrested for opposition to army group:

The Egyptian Army arrested 30 to 40 Communist leaders at the party's headquarters in Cairo on the night of 16 August. The action was taken following the circulation of Communist pamphlets attacking army leaders.

Comment: Earlier on 16 August the police reportedly arrested ten workers and students in Cairo for Communist activities.

This was the first action by the army against Communist agitators. It follows a declared policy of vigorous suppression of any group threatening disorders.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Comment on the West Berlin coal situation:

Despite current efforts to double the West Berlin coal stockpile in preparation for a possible blockade, the stockpiles may by next spring be only slightly larger than now if the Rothensee canal lock remains closed and Soviet authorities refuse to grant compensating transport facilities to the city.

Prospects for increasing the coal stocks over the winter months may improve, however, as a result of the new interzonal trade agreement which provides for the delivery of nearly 650,000 tons of brown coal from East Germany. Deliveries should begin next week if the East German Government intends to fulfil the agreement.

The Soviet contention that the canal lock actually needed repairs, and that its closure was not merely a harassment measure. The lock is being worked on at this time, and Soviet authorities may intend to reopen it in the next few weeks.
[PAGE 07]
