[PAGE 01]
26- July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Britain warns Egyptian regime of possible intervention (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2. New Deputy Minister of State Security of the USSR identified
(page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Communist China attempting to purchase Chilean copper (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on strength of Sheikh Abdullah's government in Kashmir
(page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Former Minister of Interior warns of further Egyptian violence
(page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Satellites introduce multilateral trade procedure (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. West Berliners may be prohibited from buying in East Berlin (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Britain warns Egyptian regime of possible intervention:
Great Britain is informing the new Egyptian regime that while it has no wish to intervene, it will do so if necessary to protect British lives. Britain is assuring General Nagib that the precautionary preparations which it is now undertaking are not directed against the Egyptian armed forces. A message to Prime Minister Ali Maher advises against ending martial law or holding elections.

The Churchill cabinet has also ordered that the forces which would occupy Cairo under the long-standing plan for emergency occupation of the Nile delta cities be placed on a 48-hour alert basis. The alert for Alexandria was left at 96 hours. The cabinet, aware that the Egyptian insurgents are apprehensive of British reactions, centered its discussion on the need to avoid "ostentatious or provocative" moves, according to a high Foreign Office official.

Comment: This is the first time since the 26 January riots that Britain has formally communicated to an Egyptian government its readiness to intervene in any way.

SOVIET UNION
2. New Deputy Minister of State Security of the USSR identified:

[PAGE 04]
Comment: This is the first identification of a new Deputy Minister of the USSR Ministry of State Security since S. D. Ignatiev became Minister in August 1951. Epishev is presumably Aleksej Aleksevovich, who was identified last August as Party Secretary of the Odessa Oblast. This shift would continue the pattern of increased party control of the MGB established by Ignatiev's appointment.

FAR EAST
3. Communist China attempting to purchase Chilean copper:
Shipments of Chilean copper to Orbit countries by Western European firms in early 1952 are estimated to have averaged almost 1,000 tons a month.

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on strength of Sheikh Abdullah's government in Kashmir:
Kashmiri Premier Sheikh Abdullah made no major concession affecting his present semi-autonomous position in the recent New Delhi conference on relations between India and Indian-held Kashmir.

[PAGE 05]
This is good evidence of the strength Abdullah has developed in the past three years -- a strength not entirely to India's liking. It further demonstrates that Abdullah must also be considered in efforts to resolve the Kashmir issue.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Former Minister of Interior warns of further Egyptian violence:
Former Minister of Interior Maraghi Pasha states that General Mohammed Nagib is a mere figurehead for a group of the most extreme elements in the Egyptian Army.

Maraghi alleges that the insurgents are determined to revert to violence to achieve their objectives, among which are the expulsion of the British by force and the establishment of a "Communist-Moslem Brotherhood dictatorship."

Ambassador Caffery believes that Maraghi's allegations may be exaggerated in an effort to encourage Anglo-American military intervention. Caffery warns, however, that the possibility of extremist influence on the new movement cannot be overlooked.

Comment: An alliance between Nagib and the Moslem Brotherhood or the Wafd Party would offer a new threat to moderate government and to Western interests. Any cooperation on the part of the small, outlawed Communist Party would be on its initiative and wholly opportunistic.

King Farouk's position remains in jeopardy as Nagib steadily consolidates his hold on Egypt's internal affairs.

[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE
6. Satellites introduce multilateral trade procedure:

Comment: This is further evidence of a trend toward increasing multilateral trade among the Satellites in order to attain greater economic integration than is possible under existing bilateral trade agreements.

WESTERN EUROPE
7. West Berliners may be prohibited from buying in East Berlin:
The head of the East German labor unions is quoted to the effect that an ordinance will be issued shortly forbidding West Berlin residents to make any purchases in East Berlin.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Such an order would work severe hardship on West Berlin's lower-income groups, which buy much of their food and other household items in East Berlin. The East German Government, in an announcement on 16 July, took a step in this direction by restricting fruit and vegetable purchases in East Berlin to holders of ration tickets.
