[PAGE 01]
10 October 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. INDONESIAN ARMY ARRESTS TEN OFFICERS
(page 4).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

10 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. INDONESIAN ARMY ARRESTS TEN OFFICERS

Comment on:

The Indonesian army's arrest of ten officers on 8 October on charges of having attempted to overthrow the government was probably taken to forestall widely rumored military action against the government which was to occur "sometime after 2 October." The identity of only one of the ten arrested officers has been announced--Lieutenant Colonel Taswin, former chief of staff in the West Java territorial command, where army discontent is greatest. The arrests, however, reportedly affect all seven territorial commands, and more arrests are expected.

During the past six months, there have been numerous reports of army dissatisfaction and of plans to overthrow the government. Discontent derives particularly from inadequate military pay, quarters and supplies, and the knowledge that corruption is increasing in the civil government.

10 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 9 October)

On 7 October the Israeli cabinet held a session on security and foreign policy lasting over seven hours. Apparently there was a lack of unanimity, and the discussion is to be resumed on 14 October. The embassy assumes that the cabinet reviewed the tactical problem of successive border raids and the strategical consequences of the unrest in Jordan and the rumored movement of Iraqi troops into Jordan. Israel has not retaliated for the latest ambush on Israeli civilians near the Jordanian border, but the embassy reports private opinion in Israel that the government may be considering some "new departure" of a more radical nature than action taken in the past. The semi-official Jerusalem Post in a recent editorial placed responsibility on Egypt for the recent incidents on the Israel-Jordanian border and stated that "if Jordan crumbles, Israel will not sit with folded hands and Egypt will not inherit."

The American army attaché in Tel Aviv reports that in the last few days the Israeli defense forces apparently have completed full or partial mobilization. According to the attaché, there is no indication of immediate hostile action and he believes the units called up are on stand-by awaiting a policy decision of the cabinet.

10 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
