[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

19 April 1952
Copy No. 52

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Indonesian delegation to Moscow allegedly offers rubber to the USSR (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Far East Command sees no imminent Communist offensive (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Britain believes four-power talks on German unity may be necessary (page 5).
6. French-German controversy over Saar worsens (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Indonesian delegation to Moscow allegedly offers rubber to the USSR:

The Economic Secretary of the Singapore Government states that he has fairly reliable information that Indonesian representatives to the Moscow Economic Conference emphasized to the Russians that the difficulties of the Indonesian rubber producers result from American "price-depressing tactics." They appealed for Russian help and offered "unlimited quantities" of Indonesian rubber to the Soviet Union.

Comment: Within the past month the Indonesian Government has conducted conversations with at least three central European countries for the exchange of raw materials, including rubber, for capital goods.

Indonesia is not known heretofore to have approached the USSR to sell rubber,

FAR EAST

2. Far East Command sees no imminent Communist offensive:

The Far East Command, in a review of the enemy's intentions and capabilities in Korea, observes that "there are no indications of an imminent attack." The comment continues, however, to point out that the Communists have made good use of the relative quiet provided by the cease-fire to reinforce, both in men and materiel, and to re-deploy and retrain their units.

The enemy, FECOM estimates, is able to launch a major offensive with little warning. The duration of such an attack would depend on the Communists' ability to keep their advancing units supplied.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
Page Denied
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Britain believes four-power talks on German unity may be necessary:

Foreign Secretary Eden plans to tell the British Cabinet that four-power talks on all-German elections may be a necessary prelude to French and German ratification of the European Defense Community and the contractual agreement. Eden, who sees no need for a prompt reply to the Soviet note of 9 April, believes that the West should continue to press for signature of both treaties, meanwhile taking into account British and Continental opinion toward subsequent ratification.

The American Embassy in London, recalling Churchill's and Eden's often expressed willingness to negotiate with the Soviet Union under favorable circumstances, expects that the British Labor Party's continuing fear of a rearmed Germany will lead it also to demand further probing of Soviet intentions.

Comment: The West German Government, especially Chancellor Adenauer, opposes four-power discussions on unity at this time. France, however, would probably not reject such talks if Britain insisted.

6. French-German controversy over Saar worsens:

The recent developments in the Saar are forcing both France and the Federal Republic into antagonistic positions from which it will be increasingly difficult to retreat, according to American representatives in Bonn. The French, indignant over German Government-sponsored propaganda in the Saar, have now angered the Germans by banning a German magazine which criticized the French Ambassador to the Saar.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
American officials fear that when the Bundestag debates the Saar issue on 23 April, dissident elements in the coalition might, under the goading of the opposition, demand a Saar solution before the ratification or even signing of the contractual agreement and the European Defense Community treaty.

One of Adenauer's close advisers, Blankenhorn, remarks that it is useless now to negotiate with the French for a definitive Saar solution, since Schuman is "discredited in Paris" and could make no binding commitments.

Comment:

Widespread French feeling that Schuman is too pro-American almost led to his exclusion from the Pinay Cabinet.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
Page Denied
