[PAGE 01]
27 October 1960

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

27 October 1960

DAILY BRIEF

i
[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

"El Salvador": The ouster of President Lemus by national guardsmen early on 26 October probably was engineered by followers of ex-President Osorio. The widely popular Osorio, a retired army officer who appears to have strong backing in the armed forces, seems likely to be called back to power by the military, which had been critical of Lemus for failure to act effectively against Communist and pro-Castro elements. Osorio would almost certainly call elections to legalize the regime and attempt to implement drastic reforms to alleviate the country's deep-seated social and economic problems.

The inclusion of three civilians, among them the leftist university rector Fortin Magana, in the present six-man military-civilian junta is probably an attempt by an essentially military-led group to secure initial support from leftist elements that have sparked unrest in recent months.

IV. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the United States Intelligence Board concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future;

27 Oct 60

ii
[PAGE 06]
B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. Situations offering opportunities for continuing and increased exploitation by Communist hostile action exist in Laos and South Vietnam.

D. While there is as yet no indication that an armed attack against US military facilities in Cuba is imminent, the Cuban Government is receiving military aid from the Soviet bloc; recent Communist propaganda and Cuban actions against US interests further indicate that the Communist world regards its position in the Cuban situation with growing confidence.

27 Oct 60

iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
President Lemus of El Salvador Ousted

The ouster of Salvadoran President Jose Maria Lemus by national guardsmen early on 26 October probably was engineered by followers of ex-President Oscar Osorio.

The US Embassy reports that a combined civilian-military junta consisting of three military men and three civilians has taken power. Press reports that Lemus is now in Guatemala are unconfirmed.

The appointment of three civilians, including a former university rector who has extreme leftist tendencies, probably is an attempt by the essentially military-led groups to secure initial support from leftist elements. It seems likely that the junta will soon call the widely popular Osorio to power. Colonel Alberto Escamilla, who was chief of staff of the army during Osorio's administration, reportedly has been appointed minister of interior in the new government. Osorio, a retired army officer, appears to have strong backing in the armed forces, which began to consider ousting Lemus after he revealed himself as a weak and inept executive in dealing with pro-Communist and pro-Castro demonstrators who threatened the government during August and September.

Osorio, if called to power, would almost certainly call elections to legalize the regime and attempt to implement reforms to alleviate the country's deep-seated social and economic problems. While Osorio is known to be strongly anti-Communist, he might attempt to apply some Castro-type reform measures. The US Embassy stated last month that as president he probably would not be as openly pro-US or as amenable to US suggestions as Lemus has been.

27 Oct 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
