I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Tactics at the Foreign Ministers' Conference

Foreign Minister Gromyko appears to be playing for time at Geneva on the assumption that the Western ministers will eventually take the initiative in working out an interim formula on Berlin which would open the way for a summit meeting. In the first week of private talks on Berlin, Gromyko cautiously adhered to the position that any new arrangements governing Western access must be within the framework of the USSR's free-city proposal. He made it clear that Moscow intends to transfer access controls to the East Germans but reaffirmed the USSR's readiness to guarantee Western access rights under a new agreement with which East Germany would be associated. He specifically rejected any procedures in which the East Germans would act as agents for the USSR.

Gromyko offered more detailed proposals than heretofore on ways to guarantee West Berlin's free-city status. According to the Soviet concept, the four powers, or neutral states, would maintain symbolic forces in West Berlin, on the order of a platoon for each power. A permanent commission composed of representatives of the four powers and East Germany would supervise the observance of the free-city status. The commission would submit annual reports to the four powers, East Germany, and the UN Security Council and would inform the four powers of any violations or threats to violate West Berlin's status. The four powers would take appropriate measures to ensure the observance of the free-city status.

Gromyko continues to insist on Western acceptance of the free-city proposal for tactical purposes, but the USSR may eventually agree to some modification of existing access procedures short of converting West Berlin into a free city. Moscow's minimum terms for an interim Berlin solution apparently include some form of East German participation and the exclusion of any formal reaffirmation of Western rights, including the right to maintain troops and the right of free access.

Gromyko suggested that any new arrangements might take the form of an agreement, a protocol, or a declaration. He stated
