Argentina Planning Expulsion of Bulgarian Minister

Argentina's President Frondizi has decided to expel Bulgarian Minister Boris Popov on 8 June or shortly thereafter in the latest of a series of efforts to shore up his government against insistent domestic pressures. The military has been increasingly restive over labor defiance of state-of-siege regulations, and Communist-Peronista agitators threaten to continue exploiting the economic situation through strikes and violence.

A group of disgruntled military officers and retired officers is reported to be planning a takeover of the Frondizi government during June or July. They feel the people have lost faith in Frondizi, that the "desperate economic situation" is affecting the working class throughout the country, that many officers of the army garrisons oppose Frondizi, and that they had better take over the government than permit the ultranationalists to seize on an incident to overthrow Frondizi. Frondizi reportedly says he expects this month to be an especially critical one.

Frondizi plans to release to the press copies of monitored Bulgarian telegraph messages which presumably will link the legation to domestic disorders. In April, when one Rumanian and four Soviet diplomats were expelled, the government announced it had "irrefutable proof" of Soviet bloc complicity in serious rioting earlier that month. Frondizi may hope that by renewing this charge, he can again postpone the need for unpopular repressive measures and at the same time persuade the public that he must have broader legislative authorization to deal adequately with subversive activity.

Police have been attempting to control disturbances with tear gas and water hoses, avoiding recourse to extensive arrests or shooting. Frondizi reportedly stated he would order more drastic measures if necessary, but subsequent government actions--exposing evidence of joint Peronista-Communist plotting and appealing to the public for support of the austerity program--indicate continued reluctance to use force until all other remedies are exhausted.
