[PAGE 01]
4 April 1959
Copy No. C 62
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
4 APRIL 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Indian observer in Lhasa believes Tibetans are still loyal to Dalai Lama, ignoring Chinese puppet rival; free-Asian reaction likens suppression of revolt to Hungary.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
UAR cancels sale of tanks to Indonesia, pleading "critical" need for weapons.
Iraqis report Syrian artillery fire and menacing concentrations of Syrian tribesmen and armed forces in border area; UAR may be planning to increase supply of weapons to tribesmen harassing Iraqi frontier.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
4 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Tibet: The Indian consul general in Lhasa, who reportedly has been virtually restricted to his compound by the Chinese authorities since the outbreak of the Tibetan revolt, states that a large number of Tibetans have been hanged in Lhasa, presumably as a warning to the rebels, and that food supplies are reported "diminishing rapidly." He also says Tibetans generally are remaining loyal to the Dalai Lama and show no respect for Peiping's puppet, the Panchen Lama. It is not clear, however, whether the Indian official is in a position to make any broad assessment of the situation.

Free Asian reaction continues adverse to Peiping, comparing Tibetan developments to the USSR's action in Hungary and stressing Communist treatment of religion. (Page 1)

II. ASIA- AFRICA

UAR: UAR military authorities in late March canceled a sale of French-made light tanks to Indonesia on the ground that the UAR is in "an extremely critical position" and "needs armament of every type,"
if Indonesia could find a way to act as intermediary, the UAR itself would like to buy more tanks from France.
(EIDER NOFORN) (Page 2)

[PAGE 05]
UAR-Iraq:
mounting evidence that the UAR intends to arm the Shammar tribesmen to an extent which will permit expansion of their harassing attacks on Iraqi territory near the Syrian border.
requested from Cairo 5,000 British .303 rifles, 100 British Bren light machine guns, and 5,000,000 rounds of .303 ammunition and asked for information within ten days as to when this equipment will arrive.
Mosul and Baghdad said Syrians had shelled an Iraqi border village, that Syrian tribesmen and armed forces were massing, and that the situation was "very grave." Iraq is sending additional small detachments of troops and armored vehicles to the frontier area.

4 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Reaction to Tibetan Situation

Afro-Asian reaction to events in Tibet continues to be strongly opposed to Communist China. Statements by the press and by important personages concentrate on Peiping's ruthless suppression of the Tibetan people, on China's new form of imperialism, and on its attack on the Buddhist religion.

Indian public opinion is still running well ahead of the government in condemning Chinese actions. In Indonesia, the next largest neutralist country, the press is concerned with the fact of "Asians kicking Asians around" and feels that Peiping may lose most of its friends. In Buddhist Ceylon, where comment has been sparse, former Prime Minister Dudley Senanayake said on 3 April that two lessons were to be learned from Tibet--the danger of a new imperialism and the recognition of how the Communist world treats religion. The first editorial reaction in Egypt says that the Tibetan revolt is against subordination and imperialism in a new form. As far away as Tunisia, official reaction is that the Tibetan affair is "shocking" and recalls events in Hungary.

Among those Asian nations which have ties with the West, Taiwan has reacted most strongly. It is attempting to create the impression that it is aiding the Tibetan rebels, and has suggested taking the issue to the United Nations. The South Korean foreign minister has extended his sympathy to the Tibetans in their fight against Communist tyranny. Manila continues to deplore the savage methods used by the Chinese in suppressing the Tibetan revolt.

Throughout the Asian world there is speculation regarding the future of Sino-Indian relations and the extent to which

4 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Peiping has destroyed impressions it had attempted to create by giving widespread publicity to the five principles of peaceful coexistence.

The Yugoslav press says the Tibetan revolt indicates serious "deficiencies" in the policies of Chinese leaders. Belgrade feels that the uprising has dealt a "heavy blow" to China and to the struggle for socialism. Peiping, in turn, has accused Yugoslavia of "distortion" and referring to Tibet as a separate "country."

4 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR Military Concerned Over Nasir-USSR Conflict

the UAR's "extremely critical position" prevented Cairo from furnishing Indonesia with French AMX tanks purchased prior to the Sinai hostilities in 1956.
Cairo itself needed more tanks,
Indonesia might want to act as an intermediary for purchases from France. Any Egyptian requests for armaments would be viewed cautiously in Paris, since the French still consider Nasir the chief threat to their interests in Africa. UAR officers in Syria are also reported to be checking the possibility of securing arms from Belgium.

While there is no indication that Moscow is considering any major withdrawal of bloc aid to the UAR, the regime may have undertaken the approach to Indonesia as a means of reassuring officers who fear Nasir's attack on Communists has gone too far.

4 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 10]
