[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 December 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communist China probably has MIG-19 supersonic fighters in at least regimental strength.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan--Reaction to disorders of 27 November likely to hurt leftist efforts to rally support against US-Japanese Security Treaty.
Indonesia--Communist party's support of Peiping policies has placed it in embarrassing position.
Nationalist China plans to airdrop small-arms ammunition to KMT irregulars in northern Burma.
Nepalese prime minister to visit New Delhi and Peiping.
Greece declare Soviet second secretary persona non grata; warns ambassador.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Communist China: a number of Farmer (MIG-19) jet fighters participated at the 1 October celebration in Peiping. 25 of these supersonic aircraft took part in a fly-by which also included Frescos (MIG-17s) and Beagle (IL-28) jet light bombers. The presence of this many Farmers indicates that these aircraft may be in China in at least regimental strength. ten Farmers at Tsanghsien, near Peiping. This had been the highest number previously observed[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: There has been widespread unfavorable public reaction in Japan to the serious disorders which occurred on 27 November in Tokyo during leftist-sponsored demonstrations against the US-Japanese Security Treaty. This is discrediting the leftists and may impair their ability to rally support for their campaign against the treaty. Ambassador MacArthur reports that there is near unanimity of public comment that a basic threat to Japanese democratic institutions now exists and should be curbed; Moderate elements among the Socialists and in labor circles are also expected to gain vis-a-vis the extreme left.

Indonesia: Divergence between government policies and Indonesian Communist party interests, evidenced in the party's support of Peiping on major current issues, has placed the party in an embarrassing position. The party is the only significant political element in Indonesia opposing the ban on alien retailers in rural areas. It has also revealed itself as being out of
[PAGE 05]
step by its reluctance to approve a parliamentary recommendation for a second Asian-African conference which was heartily endorsed by all other political factions. Communist party leader Aidit--in an obvious effort to prevent Indonesian participation in a conference which will discuss Chinese Communist disagreements with other Asian nations--stated on 23 November that this is not the time for such a conference in view of the controversies among Asian countries. (Page 2)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Nationalist China: Chiang Ching-kuo, Nationalist China's security chief, told an American official on 27 November that he had decided to airdrop small-arms ammunition to Kuomintang irregular forces in northern Burma. Chiang alleged his decision was based mainly on positive indications that the Burmese Army is preparing another offensive against the irregulars. Although Chiang asserted no weapons would be dropped, several recent reports indicate the Nationalists have been dropping supplies, possibly including rifles, mortars, and machine guns, to KMT troops during the past month[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]. (Page 3)

Nepal: Prime Minister Koirala informed the press on 29 November that he will visit Communist China in February or early March. The Chinese had invited Koirala to come to Peiping to conclude arrangements on their recent cash offer of $8,000,000 in new economic aid. Koirala probably will use the opportunity to try to commit Peiping to recognition of the "traditional" Sino-Nepalese border. The prime minister also announced that in response to Nehru's invitation he would visit India late in January, apparently in an effort to reassure New Delhi and to coordinate the two governments' positions on the border problem. Koirala referred to Nehru's recent reaffirmation that India would resist any aggression against Nepal as an "expression of friendship," but noted that Katmandu "would decide if there were aggression"--a statement probably designed to underline Nepal's independence and its publicly neutral position on the Sino-Indian dispute. (Page 4)
[PAGE 06]
Greece-USSR: The Greek Government has declared Second Secretary Mayorov of the Soviet Embassy in Athens persona non grata and has warned Ambassador Sergeyev that "certain activities," involving himself as well as Mayorov and others, will no longer be tolerated. The Greek action is in line with other government moves indicating adoption of a firmer attitude toward the USSR following recent rejection of Soviet bloc overtures to improve relations. (Page 5)
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Farmers (MIG-19s) Displayed in Communist China

a number of Farmer (MIG-19) jet fighters were included among 155 aircraft in a fly-by.

25 of the supersonic planes had objects resembling cannons protruding from beneath the wings. A non-Communist military attache commented that these objects looked like Sidewinders.

The Chinese Communist People's Daily of 2 October referred to ". . . the new-type faster-than-sound jet interceptor manufactured by our country,. . . ." which took part in the fly-by.

a plant in Shenyang was being prepared for production of MIG-19s, and it had been generally estimated that some would be completed late this year.

The nature of the objects under the wings of the aircraft cannot be established. They may be wing tanks or unguided rockets rather than Sidewinder-type air-to-air missiles. There is no evidence, at present, that China has the latter weapon, although the Soviet Union may have made some available to the Chinese.

Farmers were reported in China as early as February 1958, ten of these aircraft on the ground.

Communist China's possession of a significant number of Farmers would greatly diminish the advantage the Nationalist Air Force has enjoyed since the air battles in the fall of 1958, particularly if the Farmers are equipped with some form of air-to-air missile.
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]II. ASIA-AFRICA[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]

Support of Peiping Places Indonesian Communists
In Awkward Position

Divergence between Indonesian Government policies and Indonesian Communist party interests has placed the party in an increasingly embarrassing position as the party persists in supporting Peiping on major current issues. The Communists are the only significant political element in Indonesia to oppose the government's ban on alien retailers in rural areas, and their approval of a parliamentary recommendation for the speedy convening of a second Asian-African conference to discuss disputes in the area came only after considerable objection. In addition, the Communists obstructed a parliamentary resolution calling for the peaceful settlement of the Chinese-Indian border problem, finally approving it only with the assertion that Peiping was in no way at fault.

Communist opposition to the ban on alien retailers has been vigorous and persistent, culminating on 22 November in a special politburo statement which denounced the ban as "reckless and chauvinistic" and a means of undermining Sino-Indonesian friendship. The Indonesian Department of Foreign Affairs replied on 25 November that the government's decree will be implemented despite Communist party objections and that "it is a secondary question whether the government is assisted in this task by any party or not."

Communist party Secretary General Aidit, commenting on the suggested Asian-African conference, stated on 25 November that such a conference should not be held at this time since "many contradictions now exist among the Asian-African countries!" He said currently strained relations should be settled bilaterally.

The principal significance of the Indonesian Communist party's current role is its possible effect on President Sukarno. Sukarno, although aware of the Communist threat to his own position, has been reluctant to challenge the party openly or to regard it as instructed by Moscow and Peiping. He has given his full support to the ban against Chinese retailers but is not known to have commented on Communist party opposition.
[PAGE 09]
Nationalist China Decides to Resupply Nationalist Irregulars
In Burma

Chiang Ching-kuo, Nationalist China's security chief and son of President Chiang Kai-shek, told an American official he had decided to airdrop small-arms ammunition to the Nationalist irregular forces in northern Burma. Chiang alleged his decision was based on positive indications that the Burmese Army is preparing another offensive against the irregulars.

Although Chiang asserted no weapons would be dropped, recent reports indicate that in October the Nationalist Intelligence Bureau was planning an aerial resupply operation called "Black Flag" and had packaged 200 tons of arms and ammunition for airdrop to the irregulars in the Burma-Thailand-Laos border area. The weapons included 2.36- and 3.5-inch rocket launchers, 60-mm. and 81-mm. mortars, 75-mm. recoilless rifles, 400 machine guns, and 5,600 rifles. These weapons have been stored at Hsinchu air base on Taiwan. Other sources have recently reported several flights of P4Y aircraft operating from this field.

Chiang asserts that he has received reports that the Burmese are rehabilitating two airfields in northern Burma, rotating their troops, and reinforcing them with an unknown number of tanks. There is no confirmation of these reports and the reported army activities could be related to general security measures taken against insurgent groups, particularly the Shans.

The Burmese Government fears that the Chinese Communists may take action against the irregulars and has protested vigorously against the presence of these forces inside its borders. Rangoon continues to assume that Washington can effectively control Chinese Nationalist activities.
[PAGE 10]
Nepalese Prime Minister Plans Official Visits to India
And Communist China

Nepal's Prime Minister Koirala told a press conference on 29 November that he will visit Communist China in February or early March. Peiping had extended an invitation in September, and the Chinese ambassador to Nepal recently suggested that Koirala go to Peiping to work out final details of China's offer to expand its economic aid with a grant of $8,000,000 in cash. This grant, which would boost Chinese aid to Nepal to more than $20,000,000, apparently is designed to speed construction projects under Peiping's 1956 grant and to provide a timely demonstration of Chinese "good will" in dealing with neighboring states.

During his visit, Koirala probably will press for a joint declaration accepting the "existing" border between Nepal and Tibet. He apparently feels that such a commitment would stave off incidents like those which have occurred recently along the Indian-Chinese frontier. Peiping refused in September to agree to a declaration along these lines proposed by a visiting Nepalese delegation, and will almost certainly do so again. The Chinese, however, will want to reassure Katmandu that there will be no incursions and may agree to "negotiations" which Peiping will prolong and use for propaganda purposes without coming to a definitive settlement.

Koirala also announced on 29 November that in response to Prime Minister Nehru's invitation he will make a state visit to India late in January. The Nepalese leader apparently intends to reassure Nehru and to coordinate his government's views on the border problem in advance of his trip to Peiping, while at the same time maintaining an independent position with regard to the Sino-Indian dispute. In referring to Nehru's reaffirmation of 27 November, that any aggression against Nepal would be considered an attack on India, Koirala described this as an "expression of friendship," but commented that Katmandu "would decide if there were aggression." Koirala also denied rumors that an Indian Army division was being sent to Nepal to strengthen border defenses.
[PAGE 11]
Greece Expels Soviet Diplomat

Soviet Ambassador to Greece Sergeyev has been warned by a Greek Foreign Ministry official that certain Soviet Embassy "activities" will no longer be tolerated. He was informed that Soviet Second Secretary Ivan Mayorov has been declared persona non grata, Second Secretary Vassily Vorobev is under observation, and that certain of his own activities are unacceptable. Sergeyev, according to a Greek report, engaged in considerable bluster when his subordinates were named, but became "grimly silent" when his own name was mentioned. The Greek Government does not intend to make public the action taken against Mayorov, who recently left Athens on vacation and will not be permitted to return.

Both Mayorov and Vorobev are believed to be Soviet intelligence officers; Mayorov has been particularly active in internal Greek politics during his five years in Athens. The Greek Government considered expelling the two men last spring but postponed action--reportedly on direct orders from Premier Karamanlis.

The Greek Government's present action is in line with recent negative responses from Athens to persistent Soviet bloc efforts to promote better relations with Greece with a view to neutralizing it. Greek Foreign Minister Averoff has pointed out that increasingly serious economic problems make the country potentially vulnerable to Soviet moves, particularly in the economic field. The Greek Government, however, has recently re-emphasized its close ties with the West and increased pressure on internal Communist-front elements, and now apparently is seeking to reduce the possibility of subversive activities by the members of the Soviet Embassy in Athens.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
