[PAGE 01]
27 May 1951
Copy No. U-9
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

FAR EAST
2. Communists claim Chinese Nationalist troops are in Korea (page 3).
4. Agreement between Tibetan delegation and Peiping is expected soon (page 5).
5. Indonesia prompted by UN embargo to request additional US exports (page 5).

NEAR EAST
6. Comment on Anglo-Iranian Oil Company's request for arbitration (page 6).
8. Friction inside Libya threatens UN plan for independence (page 7).

SCANDINAVIA
10. Finland plans locally-made radar warning system to avert Soviet aid (page 8).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

FAR EAST

2. Communists claim Chinese Nationalist troops are in Korea:
Comment. Communist propaganda has already begun to exploit the alleged presence of Chinese Nationalist forces in Korea: a Peiping broadcast of 26 May claims that "30 Kuomintang
[PAGE 04]
soldiers" were among the UN prisoners captured during the recent Communist offensive. North Korean propaganda, alleged earlier that Japanese units were fighting with UN forces in Korea. Chinese Nationalist order of battle does not list the units named in the North Korean message.
[PAGE 05]
4. Agreement between Tibetan delegation and Peiping is expected soon:
US Emb London
25 May 51
SECRET

The UK High Commissioner in New Delhi, quoting Indian Foreign Office sources, reports that an agreement between the Tibetan delegation and the Peiping regime is expected in the "next few days." These sources anticipate that Peiping will assume responsibility for Tibet's defense and foreign relations. They claim that India advised the Tibetan delegation that Tibet "would not be justified in resisting such terms," but also encouraged the delegates to seek an agreement that Chinese Communist troops would not be stationed in southern Tibet in the absence of a "threat from Nepal or India."

Comment. The head of the Tibetan delegation, which arrived in Peiping in late April, publicly stated that he intended "to negotiate a successful liberation" of Tibet. While India has hoped for a semi-autonomous Tibet under Chinese suzerainty, it is expected that the Communists will exercise effective control over Tibet just as they do over any other "liberated" area populated by an ethnic minority. Peiping's propaganda has already perceived a "threat" from territory bordering Tibet.

5. Indonesia prompted by UN embargo to request additional US exports:
The Indonesian Government has officially stated that it will honor the UN embargo of strategic materials to Communist China by adhering to the trade pattern that existed before the embargo was recommended. According to Foreign Minister Subardjo, this pattern included no rubber shipments to China. However, both Subardjo and Indonesian Ambassador to the US Ali stressed to the US Ambassador in Djakarta the unhappy results that the embargo would have on Indonesia and stated that a new approach would be made to the US for consumer goods. Ambassador Ali stated that he feared Communism would grow in Indonesia as a result of the drop in rubber prices and the consequent lowering of living standards. The US Ambassador replied that Indonesia had done almost nothing to suppress Communism since its achievement of sovereignty and the disorders had
[PAGE 06]
reached their height during the past few months when the greatest profits were being obtained from rubber and when economic prosperity was generally increasing. He added that everything possible was being done to justify legitimate and reasonable Indonesian requests for US products.

NEAR EAST

6. Comment on Anglo-Iranian Oil Company's request for arbitration:
The Anglo-Iranian Oil Company has asked the International Court of Justice to appoint an arbitrator to help settle its dispute with Iran over oil nationalization.

Since the Iranian Government turned down a British request for arbitration on 20 May, this latest action is probably designed to make clear the AIOC's legal position before it agrees to enter into any discussions which start from the premise that the principle of nationalization is now accepted by the British. This maneuver may somewhat improve the British position in international public opinion but will be only additional irritation as far as the Iranians are concerned.
[PAGE 07]
8. Friction inside Libya threatens UN plan for independence:
According to the US Consul General in Tripoli, political troubles within Libya threaten the implementation of the UN-sponsored plan to set up an independent Libya with Emir Sayed Iddriss, the Cyrenaican Senussi chieftain, as King. The current crisis results from the recent bombing attempt against the Emir's life as well as from the generally hostile reception he received in Tripolitania during the early stage of his tour throughout Libya to show himself to "his people." The Consul General reports that, for the moment, Sayed Iddriss has apparently decided to attempt to finish his trip through Libya, and warns that his failure to do so would strike a serious blow at the UN-sponsored plan for an independent Libya under the Emir's leadership.

Comment. The appointment of the aging Sayed Iddriss as King Designate of the UN-sponsored independent Libya is popular only in Cyrenaica, where he heads the Senussi tribes. The internal troubles accompanying the formation of an independent Libya are further complicated by the opposition of Arab League countries, particularly Egypt, to the creation of an independent Libya on 1 January 1952.
[PAGE 08]
SCANDINAVIA

10. Finland plans locally-made radar warning system to avert Soviet aid:
According to a Finnish army officer, the Government of Finland is planning to install a Finnish-manufactured radar early warning system in order to preclude "any further" Soviet request to set up such a system. The radar network will include at least eight stations along the western border of Finland. A Finnish-manufactured experimental model is already in production, although certain complicated parts are still being obtained from The Netherlands.

Comment: This report tends to confirm the USSR had approached Finland regarding the installation of an early warning radar system in Finland and that the Finnish Government had decided to establish such a net in order to avoid Soviet pressure. Available information indicates that the Finnish radar will have an effective range of 110-125 miles. The first working model is expected to be completed in the fall of 1951, or in early 1952.
[PAGE 09]
