Japanese Leftists Continue Antitreaty Demonstrations

Japan's largest postwar demonstrations and work stoppages were staged on 4 June to protest the new US-Japanese security treaty and Prime Minister Kishi's refusal to resign. Although the turnout was smaller than extreme leftist sponsors had predicted, the relative orderliness of the participants and the lack of adverse public reaction--even to the railway strike, which actually was illegal--have encouraged the leftists to plan even larger performances.

Kishi's argument that a government surrender to violence and illegal tactics would be a serious blow to democracy in Japan has had considerable effect, however. The press, which has been vilifying him, now is showing uneasiness over the leftist attacks. All but a small minority in the ruling Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) have suspended the intraparty move to oust Kishi and are rallying to his plan to complete ratification of the treaty in time for President Eisenhower's arrival on 19 June. Whether or not the Socialists implement their decision to resign en masse from the lower house of the Diet, passage is expected to be completed as planned.

Kishi's prospects for retaining office for long thereafter remain uncertain. Intraparty rivals, tacitly backed by business interests who finance the LDP, are certain to intensify their revolt against him because of his handling of the treaty issue and because he stands in the way of their aspirations for power. Most informed observers doubt that Kishi will be able to withstand the pressure.

Meanwhile, the three major leftist groups--the radical Zengakuren students' federation, the Sohyo labor federation, and the Japanese Communist party--are planning demonstrations during the Presidential visit. All three, however, apparently have recognized the overwhelming public opinion in favor of the trip and have withdrawn threats of violence. Japanese security authorities nevertheless have indicated some uneasiness about the possibility that minor extremist elements may resort to such action.

8 June 60
Page 4
