[PAGE 01]
18 February 1961  
Copy No. C Ed-8

CENTRAL  
INTELLIGENCE  
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Ghana may ask Soviet assistance for Volta River project. (Page ii)

5. King Savang will reaffirm Laotian neutrality in broadcast on 19 February. (Page iii)

6. Demonstration against US - South Korean aid agree- ment scheduled for 19 February in Seoul. (Page iii)

7. West Berlin officials skeptical on new East German pass procedures. (Page iv)

8. Liberal ministers resign from Belgian cabinet. (Page iv)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Ghana: Nkrumah's regime is reported to be so aroused against the West that it has decided to issue a public state- ment inviting the USSR to finance and supply technical as- sistance for the huge Volta River power-aluminum project. The report went so far as to state that the Nkrumah regime would reject any further technical aid from the United States.

it acquires some plausibility in view of Nkrumah's highly emotional and anti-American ap- proach to the Congo situation. Soviet President Brezhnev now is in Ghana on a visit arranged on short notice as an addendum to his state visit to Guinea. Nkrumah may make some announcement on the Volta project during his sched- uled appearance before the Ghanaian parliament on 21 Feb- ruary. A Western consortium's negotiations concerning the project now are in the final stages.

18 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Laos: King Savang will make a broadcast on 19 February reaffirming Laos' neutrality and appealing for internal unity and noninterference from abroad, according to General Phou- mi. Formal invitations to Burma, Cambodia, and possibly Malaya to form a neutral nations commission in Laos will either be contained in the King's speech or issued at a follow- up press conference to be held on the same day by the Boun Oum cabinet. General Phoumi's mission to Phnom Penh to consult with Prince Sihanouk and to induce Souvanna Phouma to return presumably will be undertaken within a few days of the King's speech. Whether Souvanna can be persuaded to be- come associated in any capacity with the Boun Oum government is doubtful.

South Korea: Growing domestic criticism of the recently negotiated US - South Korean bilateral aid agreement is be- coming a serious problem for the Chang Myon government. Charges of American interference in South Korean internal affairs are being fanned by the conservative opposition, left- ist groups, nationalistic student elements, and some sections of the press. Student opposition to the agreement appears to be led by a small group which has sponsored public forum dis- cussions on unification with the North and a neutralist solution to Korea's difficulties. A large-scale student demonstration

18 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
against the aid agreement is reportedly scheduled for 19 Feb- ruary in Seoul. Such activities may improve the climate for North Korean overtures for the withdrawal of American troops from the South and unification on terms favorable to Pyong- yang.

Berlin: West Berlin government officials are taking a skeptical view of the new, "simplified" procedures--announced by the East Germans on 15 February--for the issuance of passes to West Germans entering East Berlin. The officials point out that while the new procedures mean less inconven- ience for the individual, the East Germans are continuing to exercise illegal controls over free movement within the city and in effect to demonstrate sovereignty over East Berlin. Mayor Brandt announced publicly on 16 February that any pass requirement is incompatible with four-power Berlin agreements. The change in procedures was only a minor technical concession in response to Bonn's insistence that the East Germans fulfill their commitment to relax the intersec- tor travel controls in return for Bonn's agreement on 29 De- cember to reinstate its trade agreement with East Germany. The West German cabinet met on 16 February to consider the situation.

Belgium: Resignation of the Liberal party ministers from Premier Eyskens' Social Christian (Catholic) - Liberal coali- tion government appears to be a tactical move in preparation for the national elections expected to take place on 26 March. Eyskens' cabinet would have resigned next week in any case, but by this move the Liberals may hope to avoid the onus of recent developments in the Congo and thus enhance their electoral prospects. The Liberals, who represent conservative busi- ness interests, had demanded cuts in the social welfare serv- ices as part of the government's recently enacted austerity program, a move which would also have been embarrassing

18 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]
to Eyskens and the Social Christian party, which includes a large Catholic labor organization. Both the Social Chris- tians and the Liberals are expected to make gains in the elections at the expense of the Socialist party, which has lost popular support as the result of the recent strike vio- lence.

18 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    v
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]
Ghana's Neutralism Increasingly Favorable to Communist World

(Although there has been no change in Ghana's estab- lished policy of "positive neutrality," the Nkrumah regime has over the past 18 months moved away from exclusive reliance on the West and become progressively more re- ceptive toward contacts and tactical collaboration with the Sino-Soviet bloc. Since last summer this shift has accel- erated greatly as a result of what Nkrumah and other top Ghanaian leaders regard as Western--especially US--re- sponsibility for the frustration of Accra's pro-Lumumba Congo policy. Following the ousting from the Congo of Ghana's chief diplomatic representative and the seating of the Kasavubu delegation in the UN last November, Nkrumah was reliably reported as being in a "rage" against the US, which he then, for the first time, publicly accused of abet- ting Belgian "attempts to regain control over the Congo." A vitriolic, anti-American campaign drawing heavily upon bloc propaganda materials was launched by the government-controlled press and continued at a high pitch until just prior to the inauguration of the new US administration. At the same time, more extreme Ghanaian leaders--such as labor chief John Tettegah--in- stituted a policy of shunning contacts with American repre- sentatives in Ghana.)

(Meanwhile, Nkrumah, encouraged by influential leftist officials in his own regime, has become increasingly re- ceptive toward involvement with the bloc. Since last Au- gust, Ghana has accepted a $40,000,000 Soviet economic aid credit, purchased Soviet IL-18 aircraft on favorable terms, and entered other agreements providing for trade, technical assistance, and cultural cooperation with the USSR and some of its European satellites. In December a protocol was signed with the USSR specifying a wide range of develop- ment projects to be carried out by the Soviet Union over the next several years. In addition, various plans for Soviet- Ghanaian cooperation in the military field reportedly are also under active consideration. As a result of these arrangements, the number of Soviet technicians in Accra has already risen

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 12]
above 100 and more are expected as individual projects get under way. That these expanded ties reflect a basically softer attitude toward the USSR is strongly suggested by such private Nkrumah statements as his recent assertion that there is more "democracy" in the USSR than in any other country.)

(The recent announcement of Lumumba's death has again provoked bitter and unrestrained denunciations of Western "imperialists" in Ghanaian newspapers, but at least initially specific attacks were focused on Belgium, Hammarskjold, and NATO with little reference to the US except for an un- complimentary allusion to former President Eisenhower. In fact, President Kennedy's and Ambassador Stevenson's ex- pressions of regret were given greater prominence than Mos- cow's.)

(On the other hand, Nkrumah did name the US as one of Belgium's allies which "must answer questions" regarding the arming of Lumumba's adversaries, and the US Embassy was a principal target of the regime-sponsored demonstra- tions in Accra on 15 February. On 16 February Nkrumah presented Ambassador Russell with an aide-memoire taking strong exception to President Kennedy's press conference interpretation of the constitutional role of Congolese Presi- dent Kasavubu. These developments may presage an early revival of an all-out campaign against the US. However, the aide-memoire and the related press announcement released on 17 February were couched in essentially legalistic terms and neither they nor the atmosphere of the ambassador's in- terview with Nkrumah contained any hint of an impending major shift in Ghana's aid policies such as would be involved in the substitution of Soviet for Western aid in connection with the $350,000,000 Volta project.

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]
LAOS

Government Forces  
Government  
Antigovernment  
Antigovernment concentrations  
Kong Le/Pathet Lao forces  
Main route number  
Road  
Trail  
Chinese Nationalist Irregulars

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page
[PAGE 16]
Situation in Laos

General Phoumi, in outlining to Ambassador Brown on 16 February plans for the King's speech and his own mis- sion to Phnom Penh, stated that the question of reorganiza- tion of the government had not yet been decided. Much ap- parently depends on whether Souvanna agrees to participate in an expanded government. Numerous politicians from var- ious geographic regions of Laos stand ready to participate.

Tension between the French and Laotians arising from the incident in Vientiane involving the AFP correspondent who has been hiding out in the French Embassy appears to be abating. Laotian troops which had surrounded the em- bassy have been withdrawn, and Boun Oum has expressed re- gret for this diplomatic impropriety. However, a new and possibly more serious incident may develop at Seno military base. In a follow-up to its "symbolic take-over" of Seno earlier in the month by occupation of two vacant buildings, the Laotian Government, through local military authorities, has requested the French commander at Seno to yield cer- tain other buildings. Paris has instructed the latter to re- fuse and to oppose force by force. Although expressing will- ingness to negotiate with Laotian officials on differences concerning the Seno base, the French have stated they will not do this under duress.

Kong Le - Pathet: Lao forces defending the western approaches to the Plaine des Jarres area reportedly have forced the retreat of forward elements of the government force inching its way along Route 7 a few miles from the Phou Khoun crossroads. Enemy tactics still appear in gen- eral to be defensive, but the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces might exploit any significant local success to regain con- trol of the junction with Route 13.

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 17]
Opposition to South Korea - US Aid Agreement

(The April revolution generated national pride in South Koreans, particularly among young people who expected a quick improvement in their political and economic situation. Although the ouster of Rhee improved United States - South Korean understanding, the new nationalism is sensitive to any alleged infringements on Korean sovereignty. South Koreans have been particularly sensitive over the adminis- tration of the United States aid program and over the lack of a status-of-forces agreement which would give them ju- risdiction over off-duty American military personnel.)

(Much of the criticism by students, opposition legisla- tors, and the press appears to be based on misinformation. Ignoring the existing situation, one legislator has argued that free import privileges for US aid mission personnel would permit a flood of foreign luxury goods that could dis- rupt the nation's economy. Another has speculated that a secret annex to the agreement contains terms more disad- vantageous than those made public. A leftist politician, prominent in the most extreme overt political opposition, has led the formation of a "joint struggle committee" to op- pose the agreement. Although there is no evidence as yet that student opponents of the agreement are Communist di- rected, they are an obvious target for Communist subver- sive efforts, particularly where, as in the present instance, their activities can be disguised as nationalistic protests.)

(Prime Minister Chang has publicly expressed his con- fidence that the legislators will agree there are no unfavor- able aspects in the agreement once they fully understand the situation. However, should public opposition to the aid agree- ment continue to increase, Chang might become reluctant to force the assembly to ratify it. Chang's party has a major- ity, but many members are reluctant to support what they feel to be an unpopular measure.)

(Since the revolution and the almost total demoralization of the national police, any public agitation raises the pros- pect that demonstrations will get out of hand. Although the

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 18]
police promptly dispersed a small group of students who as- sembled in Seoul's Pagoda Park on 14 February to debate the assistance agreement, it is questionable how effective they would be against a large demonstration.)

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 19]
THE PRESIDENT  
The Vice President  
Executive Offices of the White House  
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs  
The Scientific Adviser to the President  
The Director of the Budget  
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization  
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities  
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State  
The Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State  
The Director, International Cooperation Administration  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration  
The Counselor  
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning  
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department  
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense  
The Secretary of Defense  
The Deputy Secretary of Defense  
The Secretary of the Army  
The Secretary of the Navy  
The Secretary of the Air Force  
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)  
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)  
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff  
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy  
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force  
Chief of Staff, United States Army  
Commandant, United States Marine Corps  
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO  
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe  
Commander in Chief, Pacific  
The Director, The Joint Staff  
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff  
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army  
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy  
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Department of Justice  
The Attorney General  
The Federal Bureau of Investigation  
The Director

The Atomic Energy Commission  
The Chairman

The National Security Agency  
The Director

The United States Information Agency  
The Director

The National Indications Center  
The Director
[PAGE 20]
TOP SECRET
