West German Interzonal Trade Negotiator to Resign

West German interzonal trade representative Kurt Leopold has submitted his resignation to Chancellor Adenauer in protest over revelations by Bonn officials of the West German negotiating position in forthcoming talks to renew the abrogated trade agreement with East Germany. Leopold told American officials in Berlin that Bonn had shown "its trump cards" to the East, which now has the Federal Republic "eating out of its hand." He attributes the East Germans' recent uncooperative attitude on trade matters to these disclosures. In a press interview on 12 November, Adenauer had stated that Bonn would be flexible on new negotiations, which if conducted intelligently might achieve some advantage for Berlin access. The West German press has since reported Bonn's fears that a break in trade would give the Ulbricht regime a pretext to move against Berlin access and Bonn's eagerness to resume negotiations without necessarily making the lifting of East German restrictions a precondition of a new agreement.

Leopold has also had sharp differences of opinion with officials of West Germany's Economics Ministry and he may resent the presence in Berlin last week of certain of these officials who reportedly made informal contact with their East German counterparts. He foresees that negotiations will be handled by the Economics Ministry at a higher level than his Trusteeship Office. The American Embassy in Bonn was advised on 23 November, however, that the Trusteeship Office would initiate negotiations with the East Germans on 29 November, but with two high-ranking Bonn officials "sitting in the next room" to give advice to the West German negotiators, presumably Leopold or his deputy.

An "economic committee" of the cabinet advised Adenauer last week that the time has come to start negotiations immediately. Adenauer has deferred his decision until 28 November, when he is scheduled to see Leopold in Bonn to discuss trade problems and Leopold's resignation and at which time a decision will probably be taken on proceeding with the negotiations.
