The UAR Anniversary Celebration in Syria

The crowds at the UAR anniversary parade and for Nasir's speeches in Damascus on 22 February were smaller and less demonstrative than in previous years despite perfect weather, the mobilization of all school children, and the importation of people by truck and bus. While the Moslem fast of Ramadan, television coverage of the parade, and the diminished novelty of Nasir's presence after six previous visits partially accounts for this, disillusionment with the regime is certainly another factor. Nasir antagonized the business community by his exchange control decree of 5 February and many businessmen were notably absent from the parade. According to the consulate general, a current joke has it that some Damascenes hung out black crepe on "Unity Day," and when accused of being unpatriotic, they protested that the crepe was for Lumumba.

Probably the most important reason for Nasir's visit to Syria is the high-level political dissatisfaction that has developed in the Northern Region, including wrangling within the Syrian Executive Council over the dictatorial behavior of the Council's president, Abd al-Hamid Sarraj. There have been reports that Nasir was going to remove Sarraj from direct control of affairs in Syria, possibly by transferring him to a position in Egypt. However, Nasir, in his first speech upon arriving at Latakia on 20 February, labeled such reports as "nonsense." Sarraj's firm control of the Syrian internal security apparatus is especially needed now when the exchange controls are being imposed.

Nasir has vigorously defended the exchange controls in his speeches and has attacked those who oppose them as "exploiting capitalists" whom he accuses of transferring their profits abroad. "Who of the people here transfers 1,000 liras abroad," he asked the crowd at Latakia. "Nobody," was his own answer. He also made reference to the Koranic injunction against usury.

There have been other Islamic overtones to Nasir's current visit and he has made no overtures to Syria's Christian minority, which is well-known to be largely unsympathetic to the regime. On the other hand he accused Lebanon's Phalange party, a Maronite

27 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
