Situation in the Congo

The Stanleyville forces apparently have operated with relative freedom for at least a month in northern Kasai, whose population--which includes Lumumba's own tribe, the Batatela--is generally either politically apathetic or pro-Gizenga. The Gizenga force which took Luluabourg evaded the "Nigerian international police" and continued their advance to the provincial capital without opposition. On their arrival, Mobutu's soldiers laid down their arms and the Gizenga forces seized the arms and ammunition.

Gizenga has also received expressions of support from Leopoldville. Eastern Leopoldville Province is the Stanleyville leader's home bailiwick, and his African Solidarity party (PSA) controls the provincial government. Some PSA members have been cooperating to a limited extent with Kasavubu and his associates, but they probably would realign themselves with Stanleyville if they believed that the tide was running strongly in favor of Gizenga.

Congolese officials in Leopoldville apparently are making frantic attempts to put together a force with which to oppose Gizenga. Acting Defense Minister Kazadi, a tribal relative of Albert Kalonji, reportedly has asked Kalonji to send his two battalions of poorly trained troops against Luluabourg--a request which was reported to the UN command and drew a protest from chief representative Dayal objecting to Kalonji's "aggressive postures." If Kalonji should move north, there is likely to be a renewal of the tribal warfare between Balubas and Luluas.

Kazadi reportedly is also trying to raise two battalions of volunteers in the Leopoldville area. The principal body of regular troops in the province, meanwhile, has indicated that it will occupy key road crossings but will avoid battle with the Gizenga forces. The commander of the camp at Thysville reportedly stated that the problem was a political rather than a military one.

Violence is continuing in outlying areas of Orientale Province, despite the efforts of

27 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
