Guatemalan Government Threatened

President Ydigoras, who has ruled in a relatively benevolent manner since his election in early 1958, has survived numerous efforts to unseat him that would have defeated a man less adroit in manipulating his enemies against one another. His judicious distribution of graft and political favors has given his regime a semblance of organized political support. However, the constantly shifting political alignments offer him no real security, and the military remains the key to the survival of his administration, as it has of all previous Guatemalan governments.

In recent years, the Guatemalan armed forces have shown themselves notably responsive to what they interpret to be public opinion--which is often, in fact, merely the agitation of an irresponsible opposition and of the highly articulate and radically inclined students. In view of the highly agitated state of "public opinion" at the moment, and the fact that numerous army officers may be reaching the climax of long-standing resentment over what they consider the President's favoritism toward certain "political" officers, Ydigoras may shortly be facing the gravest threat to his continuation in office.

Ydigoras in the past two weeks has strongly pressured a recalcitrant congress for passage of two laws, both of which have aroused stormy protests. Congress on 21 February passed a watered-down version of Ydigoras' proposed legislation to replace an expiring decree for controlling Communist activity. University students are in the forefront of a strong campaign protesting the law as an infringement of civil rights, and Communists and pro-Communists are actively encouraging them. Ydigoras' proposed income tax law now before congress has also aroused bitter protests from monied interests as well as from leftist groups who claim that the passage of the law would serve only to increase sources for government graft. Guatemala now has no personal income tax and the proposed legislation would tend to lessen the burden of indirect taxes on those least able to pay, but this argument is apparently obscured by the political agitation.

a leader of the party on 21 February

27 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 11
