Ethiopian Government's Position Still Precarious

Although all the leaders of the attempted coup against Emperor Haile Selassie now are reported to have been killed or captured, considerable sympathy for the coup effort persists, and the Imperial Government's position may still be precarious. Apprehension within the American community has abated, and Addis Ababa now is much calmer.

Elaborate security precautions, however, are considered necessary to protect the Emperor. The palace in which he is residing is under heavy armed guard, and army troops are preparing entrenchments. For security reasons the royal family did not attend the funerals of government ministers who were killed by the rebels. Sympathy for the objectives of the coup is reported still to be strong in some government ministries.

The Emperor reportedly decided on 21 December to reconstitute the Imperial Bodyguard, and some junior officers and men have already been released from custody. If the Bodyguard is reorganized as a large, elite corps, the army, which crushed the coup, will be seriously antagonized. Army leaders reportedly favor rotating army divisions to serve as a guard for the Emperor, and fear that Haile Selassie may try to exploit the traditional hatred between the army and the Bodyguard to maintain his own position.

Officials of the government claim to have captured documents at the headquarters of the Imperial Bodyguard which, they say, clearly indicate Soviet and Czech participation in the coup effort. They have not produced this evidence, but the Soviet ambassador was reportedly seen at the rebel foreign ministry and Bodyguard headquarters during the coup, the Soviet Embassy was reported stocking up on food prior to 14 December, and a Soviet ship off the Ethiopian coast acted in a suspicious manner during the coup. The actions of individual Yugoslavs were reportedly also open to question, but the embassy apparently remained neutral.

27 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
