3. French military chiefs visiting Saigon take defeatist attitude:

The American embassy in Saigon reports that members of the French joint chiefs of staff now visiting Indochina took a disturbingly defeatist attitude toward the Indochina war. General Fay, head of the French air force, obviously regarded continuance of the French effort as futile. General Le Blanc, chief of staff of the French army, stating that France should use its officers and troops for NATO, appeared even eager to sum up reasons why the war could never be won.

Comment: American field observers recently commented that it is apparent that a negotiated peace is now regarded by the French as the inevitable solution to the war, and the only question remaining is the timing of negotiations.

4. Increase in number of Viet Minh trucks reported:

Although Chinese aid figures are incomplete for recent months, the Viet Minh has received "many" new trucks and now has between 1,000 and 1,500.

Comment: During the past year there has been a considerable improvement in Viet Minh transport capabilities, with the number of trucks rising from an estimated 450 in mid-1953 to about 800 toward the end of the year. The continuing increase in the number of trucks received from Communist China will enable the Viet Minh to handle greater amounts of Chinese aid, which is still estimated at the relatively low rate of 1,000 tons monthly.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iran's new oil adviser optimistic over Abadan production facilities:

Torkild Rieber, newly appointed oil adviser to the Iranian government, reports after a visit to Abadan that the equipment there is in surprisingly good condition and that Iran's oil production could exceed the prenationalization level in two years. The cost of restoring the Abadan plant is placed at between $25,000,000 and $30,000,000 over a two-year period. From 400 to 500 foreign technicians would also be required. Rieber was impressed with the Iranian technicians and believes that a substantial number of them could be used in high positions.
