[PAGE 01]
25 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
1. Peiping's domestic propaganda reflects opposition to Moscow's approach to the US.
2. Communist bloc continues efforts to establish closer ties with Guinea.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
3. Laos--French military attache in Vientiane tells Argentine member of UN subcommittee there is no foreign military intervention.
4. Indonesian Foreign Minister to visit Peiping to discuss Djakarta's restrictions on Chinese merchants.
5. India--Krishna Menon may lose post of Defense Minister.
6. Japanese Prime Minister threatens to dissolve Diet over disagreement on revision of US-Japan Security Treaty.
7. Yemeni Crown Prince may go to West Germany for reasons of "health."
8. Moroccan Crown Prince attempting to suppress left-wing elements.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - USSR: Peiping's domestic propaganda
continues to reflect a degree of opposition to Moscow's more
moderate approach to the United States. An article in the current issue of the Chinese theoretical journal Red Flag implicitly
criticizes Moscow by attacking "Chinese bourgeois elements"
who had been reluctant to continue "sharp struggles against
US imperialism" and by condemning the "heinous US aggressor" as
a threat that must be destroyed. The article reaffirms Peiping's
determination eventually to "liberate" Taiwan but it does not
threaten immediate action. (Page 1)

Communist bloc - Guinea: Continuing efforts by the Communist bloc to cater to Guinea's desire for international status
and to establish close political and economic ties were reflected
in the speeches and display of friendship by the bloc delegates at
the recent congress of President Sekou Touré's Democratic party--
Guinea's only political party. The absence of Western delegates
enabled the specially invited bloc delegations to further the impression that achievements by the Touré regime during Guinea's
first year of independence have been largely due to bloc assistance. One member of the Soviet delegation is planning to remain in Conakry as TASS correspondent to establish an office for news-gathering throughout West Africa.
(Page 2)

II ASIA AFRICA

Laos: The Argentine representative on the UN subcommittee, General Ahrens, has been advised by the French military
attache in Vientiane that there has been no real foreign military intervention in Laos and that Laos' appeal to the UN was possibly inspired by the policy aims of "a certain large power". The Laotian
[PAGE 05]
Government's mounting dissatisfaction with the French is reflected in Premier Phoui's bitter complaints about France's
attitude and the "do nothing" performance of French military
advisers with the Laotian Army.

The Laotian Army commander may have taken the first
step in a plan to redeploy some units from Sam Neua Province
to Luang Prabang in the belief that the rebels may shift their
operations from the border areas to the Laotian interior. According to late press reports, the airlift of a paratroop battalion
from Sam Neua to Luang Prabang now is in progress.
(Page 3)

Indonesia: Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio will
visit China, possibly in October, at Peiping's invitation, to
discuss Djakarta's recently imposed restrictions on Chinese
business. Although Indonesia has received two strong protests
from Peiping regarding the treatment of local Chinese merchants,
Subandrio says the Indonesian Government will not retreat from
its position.
(Page 4)

Krishna Menon: Top government leaders in New Delhi are
continuing to press Nehru to dismiss Defense Minister Krishna
Menon. Nehru reportedly has told his cabinet colleagues he will
respect their desires that Menon be removed from the Defense
Ministry, and President Prasad has stated that Menon's chances
of continuing to hold his post are nil. The subject of Menon's dismissal recently became a burning issue when army commander
General Thimayya charged Menon with interfering in army affairs for personal and political reasons and with countermanding
military measures ordered by Thimayya in defense of the Indo-Tibetan border. There is some possibility of a general cabinet
shuffle within the next few months which would retain Menon in
a less critical post.

Japan: Japanese Prime Minister Kishi has warned factional
leaders in his Liberal-Democratic party that he will dissolve the
Diet if the party cannot agree on terms for revising the US-Japan
Security Treaty. Recent attempts by anti-Kishi conservative leaders to undermine Kishi on the treaty issue have not succeeded, but
the treaty question has been revived following the visit of former

25 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Japanese Prime Minister Ishibashi to Peiping. Ishibashi agreed
with the Chinese leaders that the treaty is an impediment to closer
Sino-Japanese relations. Kishi apparently is confident that the
financial strain of an election and the probability that the electorate would support him on the treaty will keep his party in line.
(Page 5)

UAR-Yemen:
"the Imam is destroying everything which
Badr did," and it is expected that the Yemeni military schools
will be closed and the Egyptians sent home. The UAR deputy
stated that the Crown Prince will go to West Germany, allegedly
for reasons of health, from where he will contact President Nasir.
The Imam has carried out several executions and mutilations of
dissident individuals, reportedly to the disgust of some of the populace, but no one has yet dared oppose him.

Morocco: Crown Prince Moulay Hassan
he is attempting
to goad left-wing elements into violence so that the army, which is
being deployed, can suppress them. The prince, who has been
unsuccessful in persuading the King to act against the left, may
be taking advantage of the King's uncertain health. Right-wing
Moroccans, also urging the King to suppress the leftists, claim
that Cairo is subsidizing the leftists to promote a revolution.
(Page 6)

III. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Outlook for Afghanistan. NIE 53-59. 22 Sept 59.
Situation in Laos. SNIE 68-2-59. 18 Sept 59.

25 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping Concerned Over Implications of Current Soviet Policy

An article in the mid-September issue of Red Flag, top
Chinese Communist theoretical journal, provides further indication that Peiping is concerned over Moscow's current
posture on relaxation of international tension, symbolized by
the exchange of visits with President Eisenhower. Peiping
probably fears Chinese objectives in both foreign and domestic
policies will be undercut. The Red Flag article demonstrates
the high value the Chinese Communists place on using the
threat of US "aggression" to goad their people into ever greater
efforts toward internal development. The article implicitly
criticizes Soviet policy by attacking "Chinese elements of the
bourgeoisie" who were afraid of sharp and continued "struggle"
to destroy imperialism.

Warning the Chinese against using any signs of improved
Soviet-American relations as an excuse to relax, the article
states, "Face to face with the US aggressor, the Chinese people
are forced to intensify their work and build economically backward China into an advanced, industrialized, and socialist power."
Red Flag cited Peiping's action in the Korean hostilities as an example of how to defeat "imperialism" with "sharp struggle," pointing out the internal progress made as a result of the attendant
"despise America" campaign.

The condemnation of the US as a "heinous aggressor" incapable of "repenting" suggests the Chinese are convinced that
unremitting political opposition to the United States is the only
means of reducing US influence in the Far East. Red Flag reaffirmed Peiping's determination eventually to "liberate" Taiwan,
but it made no threat of immediate action. The article suggested
"liberation" might be "detoured" for some time, as the US was
still a "real tiger" capable of inflicting injury.
[PAGE 08]
Soviet Bloc Delegates Prominent at Guinea Congress

Delegations from the USSR, Eastern European countries,
and the French Communist party were particularly prominent
at the annual congress of President Sekou Touré's Democratic
party which was held in Conakry during mid-September. The
"especially invited" delegations attempted through speeches and
displays of "friendship" to strengthen the bloc's recent economic
and political gains in Guinea and to further bloc influence in
other African states. Efforts to consolidate the impression that
achievements during the Touré regime's first year of independence have been largely due to assistance from the bloc were facilitated by the absence of Western delegates. Most of the independent African states were represented, but invitations apparently were not extended to Western countries.

The American Embassy in Conakry believes that the invitations--a departure from Guinea's professed policy of neutrality--
resulted from Touré's gratitude for aid from bloc countries, as
well as adroit maneuvering by the bloc. The UAR ambassador
to Guinea expressed serious concern to US officials in early September over the degree of influence the bloc had attained there.

A Guinean Foreign Ministry official recently stated that Communist China may establish an embassy in Conakry before the end
of 1959. The USSR, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria now have diplomatic missions in Guinea.

One Soviet delegate will remain in Conakry to establish a TASS office for news-gathering
throughout West Africa. Pravda's correspondent and Peiping's
NCNA representative in Accra are both accredited to Guinea.
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

French Official in Laos Questions Foreign Intervention

There has been no real foreign
military intervention in Laos and that Laos' appeal to the UN was
possibly inspired by the policy aims of "a certain large power"--

The US, France, and Britain should do
their utmost to maintain a united front and avoid giving conflicting opinions to subcommittee members.

Action runs counter to assurances of French Embassy members that they would do everything possible to help the Laotian Government present its case to the subcommittee.

Joint efforts by the West to strengthen Laos against the threat
of a Communist take-over have for some time been hampered by
the widening gulf between the Phoui Sananikone government and
French representatives in Laos. The situation has been aggravated by the openly skeptical attitude taken by the French toward
Laotian Army reports on the fighting and on the degree of North
Vietnamese involvement, and by the French tendency to blame
Phoui and his colleagues for the current crisis.

Overriding concern with East-West relations generally and
with developments in Algeria have all but eliminated high-level
French comment on the Laotian situation. Paris apparently accepts French Ambassador Gassouin's analysis of internal political difficulties in Laos and his denial of evidence of real foreign
military intervention, but does not comprehend the extent to
which French-Laotian relations have deteriorated. Foreign Minister Couve de Murville, however, recently said that Gassouin
would be replaced by the end of the year in what may be an attempt to remove one of the major causes of friction.
[PAGE 10]
Sino-Indonesian Discussions Pending on Overseas Chinese

Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio plans to visit
China possibly in October--at Peiping's invitation--primarily
to discuss Djakarta's recently imposed restrictions on Chinese
business but with possible mention of the dual citizenship treaty
and Chinese credits to Indonesia. Subandrio told the American
ambassador he had received two strong protests from the Chinese Communist Government against treatment of local merchants.
He said the second protest was very sharply worded. The Soviet
ambassador had also protested, and the Indonesian Communist
party secretary general had asked the government to modify its
anti-Chinese measures.

The subject of protest is a ban on alien retail businesses in
rural areas effective 1 January. These businesses have until 30
September to file their intention to close, to transfer to Indonesian
nationals, or to move to urban areas. It is estimated that approximately 25,000 businesses--most of them Chinese--will be affected.

The ban
must be enforced. He told the American ambassador on 21 September that although Djakarta does not wish a showdown with
Peiping at this time, it cannot retreat. He is considering future
anti-Chinese measures, such as closing the Djakarta branch of the
Bank of China, and has advised President Sukarno that, in view
of Communist China's growing strength, the Chinese problem
in Indonesia must be "solved" within five years.

Other aspects of Sino-Indonesian relations are the agreement
abolishing dual citizenship which, although signed in 1955 and ratified by both governments, has yet to be implemented, and a $30,000,000 Chinese credit to Indonesia. In mid-September the Chinese promised speedy settlement of a drawing on this credit for a textile factory.
[PAGE 11]
Kishi Calls for Conservative Unity on US-Japan Security
Treaty Revision

Japanese Prime Minister Kishi has warned factional
leaders in his Liberal Democratic party (LDP) that he will
dissolve the Diet and call a parliamentary election unless
they maintain unity on terms for revising the US-Japan Security Treaty.

Kishi, well aware that rivals within the party would
like to unseat him by undermining his position on a major
policy issue, is attempting to minimize the effect of a joint
communique issued in Peiping by former Japanese Prime Minister Ishibashi and Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai.
Ishibashi agreed with Peiping leaders that the security treaty
is an impediment to closer Sino-Japanese relations.

The revised security treaty is still under negotiation,
but it is expected to be submitted to the Diet for ratification
sometime after the regular session convenes in December.
Kishi said he would proceed with the Diet deliberations even
if the Socialists boycott the proceedings, but he probably is concerned over a possible conservative split and coalition with the
Socialists which could block ratification.

Kishi told the LDP leaders that Japan "stands at a crossroads between neutralism and freedom and must clearly align
itself on the side of the free world." He said he would take full
responsibility for unifying public and party opinion and would
not hesitate to stake his political life on ratification. Kishi
apparently is confident that the financial strain of an election
and the probability that the electorate would endorse him on
the treaty issue will keep his party in line.
[PAGE 12]
Moroccan Leftists May Be Goaded to Violence

Moroccan Crown Prince Moulay Hassan
he is attempting
to goad left-wing elements into violence so that he can use carefully deployed units of the Royal Army, of which he is Chief of
Staff, to suppress them. King Mohamed V has heretofore refused to permit suppression, but now he is very sick. The
prince may be taking advantage of this to create a situation serious enough to warrant suppression of the newly organized
National Union of Popular Forces (UNFP).

Adherents of the Istiqlal party, which has refused to participate in the Ibrahim government, have also urged the King to repress the leftists.
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
