[PAGE 01]
16 August 1952
Copy No. 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Comment on Soviet note regarding Austrian treaty (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. (page 3).
3. Iranian General Staff recommends request for US financial aid (page 4).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]4. Turkish Foreign Ministry favors American and British support for Mossadeq[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).
5. General Nagib suspects Wafd implication in recent Egyptian mill riot (page 5).
6. Yugoslav official says no Greek-Yugoslav naval maneuvers contemplated (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Communists warn Sweden to avoid maneuvers with NATO (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA
8.
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Comment on Soviet note regarding Austrian treaty:

The USSR's note of 14 August to the Western powers rejecting the proposal for an abbreviated Austrian treaty again demonstrates that the Soviet Union has no intention of altering the status quo in Austria.

While the Soviet Government reiterates its readiness to conclude an Austrian treaty on the basis of the 1946 Foreign Ministers meeting and the Potsdam agreement, it continues to couple the Trieste and Austrian issues, making any agreement unlikely.

Apparently believing that the British, French and Austrian Governments will settle on the basis of the treaty drafted in 1949, the Soviet Government indirectly places the blame for delay in concluding an agreement on the United States.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 04]
3. Iranian General Staff recommends request for US financial aid:

The Iranian General Staff plans to recommend that the government request financial aid from the United States in order to maintain the strength of the army.

The General Staff believes the United States would favor such a request because of Iran's strategic position. The General Staff is considering plans to reduce the size of the army if aid is not forthcoming.

Comment: National Front leaders have been demanding a reduction in the size of the armed forces. The General Staff may hope that there would be less opposition to maintaining the present army strength if it were not a drain on the Iranian budget.

4. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Turkish Foreign Ministry favors American and British support for Mossadeq:

The Turkish Foreign Ministry believes that the United States and Great Britain must support Mossadeq. The Ministry considers Mossadeq the only leader who has public opinion behind him and is not pawn of the Tudeh, and hopes that the United States will ignore his demagoguery and continue its aid. The acid test of British and American high policy will be "patience and tact," particularly in handling the oil issue.

Comment: The Turkish Ambassador in Tehran had reported enthusiastically on Qavam's appointment as Prime Minister and even claimed some responsibility for it. Mossadeq's rapid return to office apparently has convinced Turkish officials that there is now no alternative[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 05]
5. General Nagib suspects Wafd implication in recent Egyptian mill riot:

Military leaders believe the Wafd was implicated in the 13 August cotton mill riot and have told American officials: "This does it as far as top Wafd leadership is concerned; we are going to get them."

Secretary General Serageddin of the Wafd Party, the Embassy has learned, is in Cairo secretly endeavoring to convince Nagib that the Wafd was not involved in the disturbance and to suggest Wafd-army cooperation in Egypt.

Comment: In connection with the riot, the army set up a special military court, with powers of summary judgment and sentence without appeal.

6. Yugoslav official says no Greek-Yugoslav naval maneuvers contemplated:

Admiral Manola, has advised the US Naval Attache in Belgrade that no Greek-Yugoslav naval maneuvers are scheduled or contemplated.

Comment: The original proposal for joint maneuvers was made by the Yugoslav Minister in Athens, according to the Greek Defense Minister. Either he acted without the authority of his government, or the Yugoslavs have reneged because of internal political opposition to any act which would make it appear that Yugoslavia is tied in with the area NATO command.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Communists warn Sweden to avoid maneuvers with NATO:

A Swedish Communist protest at the scheduling of Swedish military maneuvers next month in the Baltic at the same time as NATO maneuvers in adjacent waters may have been drafted in Moscow as a serious warning to the Swedish Government, in the opinion of Ambassador Kennan.

The statement, which was carried in Pravda, pointed out that these maneuvers could lead to "frontier violations and new incidents of the nature which caused such alarm among Swedish people in June."

Comment: Soviet sensitivity to what it considers Sweden's growing Western orientation has been demonstrated by press accusations that Sweden is secretly agreeing with the US to cooperate with NATO.

Pravda has also criticized the Danish Government for allegedly granting the United States facilities on Bornholm in the forthcoming Baltic maneuvers.

LATIN AMERICA

8.
[PAGE 07]
