[PAGE 01]
6 March 1957
Copy No. 131

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. NASIR INSISTS ON EGYPTIAN ADMINISTRATION OF GAZA STRIP (page 3).

2. ISRAELIS SCHEDULED TO WITHDRAW FROM GAZA THIS WEEK (page 4).

3. FRANCO-ITALIAN CONSORTIUM MAY FINANCE TRANS-ISRAEL PIPELINE (page 5).

4. EGYPTIANS TRY TO PREVENT EXECUTIONS AND COUP IN SYRIA (page 6).

5. SUKARNO REPORTEDLY OFFERS COMPROMISE TO ANTI-COMMUNISTS (page 7).

6. THAI ARMY CHIEF REPORTEDLY DEMANDS PHAO OUSTER (page 8).

7. CHOU EN-LAI'S FOREIGN POLICY STATEMENT (page 9).

8. CHINESE COMMUNISTS AID PROGRAM IN CAMBODIA GETS UNDER WAY (page 11).

9. CONFUSION AND DISSENSION APPARENT IN RUMANIA (page 12).

10. CONTINUED ABSENCE OF TOP SOVIET LEADERS AT PUBLIC FUNCTIONS (page 13).

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. NASR INSISTS ON EGYPTIAN ADMINISTRATION OF
GAZA STRIP

Comment on:

Nasr told Egyptian foreign minister
Fawzi "For your information we will not accept, now or in the future, any non-Egyptian administration of the Gaza strip!" This position, which Nasr apparently intends to maintain, is in direct conflict with Israel's stand that Egypt can never be allowed to return to the Gaza strip.

Fawzi suggests also that Egypt intends to insist that the waters of the Gulf of Aqaba are not international but belong entirely to the Arab states which border the gulf--a position which is supported strongly by Syria and Saudi Arabia.

In both Gaza and Sharm al-Shaikh, the next Egyptian objective following the Israeli withdrawal will probably be the evacuation of the UN Emergency Force or limitation of its functions to patrolling the 1949 Egyptian-Israeli armistice lines.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. ISRAELIS SCHEDULED TO WITHDRAW FROM GAZA
THIS WEEK

Israeli military forces and civilian administrative personnel are scheduled to leave the Gaza strip on 7 March and to withdraw from Sharm al-Shaikh on 8 March, according to information received by the UN secretary general from General Burns, commander of the UN Emergency Force. A small group of Israelis will remain at Sharm al-Shaikh, however, to supervise shipment as soon as possible of Israeli equipment there. General Burns asked that these dates not be made public, since to do so in advance of the action might lead to rioting in the Gaza strip.

Comment  The abruptness of the Israeli withdrawal from the strip after several months of almost complete integration of its political administration and economic life with that of Israel may well lead to disorganization and disorders. The 210,000 refugees in the strip, as well as its 65,000 permanent residents, may welcome the UN initially as a possible source of largess,, but they probably will soon begin to blame the UN for their chronic difficulties.

At Sharm al-Shaikh there is no local population to create such problems.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. FRANCO-ITALIAN CONSORTIUM MAY FINANCE TRANS-ISRAEL PIPELINE

The American embassy has been informed that a group of large Italian companies is forming a consortium to finance, build and operate a 30-inch crude oil pipeline in Israel connecting the Gulf of Aqaba with the Mediterranean. A line about 125 miles long with a capacity of about 350,000 barrels a day is under consideration. The cost of the project is estimated to be approximately $50,000,000.

The embassy understands that negotiations with French interests are already under way.

Comment  While no Arab crude oil is likely to be available for transit through Israel for the foreseeable future, Tel Aviv evidently believes it can receive sufficient Iranian--and possibly other--crude to make the line profitable. Before the shutdown of the Suez Canal, Iran shipped about 300,000 barrels a day of crude through the canal. Transit costs through an Israeli pipeline would be lower than Suez Canal charges, which would improve the competitive position of Iranian crude. Iran would therefore not be likely to object on economic grounds to using the Israeli route. Tehran, which until recently supplied up to 60 percent of Israel's crude oil needs, would probably have no political objection.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. EGYPTIANS TRY TO PREVENT EXECUTIONS AND COUP
IN SYRIA

Egypt is bringing strong pressure to bear on the Syrian government against carrying out the death sentences imposed in the recent treason trials of rightist leaders.

leftist army officers led by Colonel Sarraj, the to stage a coup if the death sentences are not carried out by the present civilian leaders. The coup was originally scheduled for 0300 on 3 March, but was delayed for unknown reasons, among them possibly Egyptian pressure. The plotters intend to abolish the civilian government and parliament and establish a revolutionary council composed of six army officers and six civilian members of the Arab Socialist Resurrection Party.

Comment  While Nasr has previously indicated he opposes the executions, he has also warned Sarraj against attempting any coup. Sarraj and the leftists who were instrumental in carrying out the trials wish to capitalize on the executions in order to strengthen their position. The government, however, would like to find a way to commute the sentences.

Nasr would look with disfavor on any coup in Syria because he fears that a revolutionary council would be less amenable to Egyptian guidance than the present ruling clique. Egyptian pressure may forestall the executions and a coup.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. SUKARNO REPORTEDLY OFFERS COMPROMISE TO
ANTI-COMMUNISTS

President Sukarno has capitulated in his demand for Communist participation in any new Indonesian cabinet, a reliable source in Djakarta. Following his return from Surabaya on 4 March, Sukarno was ready to limit Communist representation to the proposed national council and agreed to the NU leader's insistent demand that the council be strictly advisory.

Both the Masjumi and the NU are inclined to accept this compromise and let Sukarno save face, since they feel he and former vice president Hatta are the only men able to unite Indonesia again. The army chief of staff, meanwhile, has taken a letter from Sukarno to Hatta reportedly inviting him to discuss restoration of the "duumvirate," (NOFORN)

Comment  Sukarno's reported capitulation would be the result of opposition by the Moslem and Christian parties and by the army leaders in Central Sumatra and East Indonesia. He undoubtedly is aware that Central Sumatran leaders have been laying plans to unite all opposition elements under Hatta and were considering the use of force if Sukarno's original plans were put into effect.

Although the Communist Party has threatened a national strike if it is barred from the cabinet, it is more likely to limit its actions to vigorous protests and to settle for participation in the council. The council's function allegedly will be strictly "advisory," but the Communists will have significantly advanced their position by participation in the government's formal apparatus. In addition to gaining increased prestige, they will probably be able to exert significant influence on Sukarno and government policy.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7

[PAGE 09]
6. THAI ARMY CHIEF REPORTEDLY DEMANDS PHAO OUSTER

General Sarit, the Thai army chief, has confronted Premier Phibun with a demand that Police Director General Phao and three of Phao's cabinet supporters be dismissed from all responsible positions in the government.

Sarit maintained that the people obviously did not like the Phao faction and that many of the police had contacted Sarit to transfer their support.

Sarit is reported to have threatened Phibun that if he did not acquiesce to army demands, he would be replaced as premier by Deputy Premier Worakan Bancha. Sarit is under great pressure from the army to effect Phao's removal, by force if necessary.

Comment  Sarit may have emerged from the postelection turmoil in Bangkok as the dominant figure in the Thai government. In such case, Phibun would appear to be in no position, at the present time, to resist should Sarit continue to press for the removal of Phao and his supporters. It is unlikely that Phibun will resign. In the past he has successfully balanced the Phao and Sarit factions to maintain his own position, and in the present situation he may continue the same maneuver.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8

[PAGE 10]
7. CHOU EN-LAI'S FOREIGN POLICY STATEMENT

Comment on:

Premier Chou En-lai's 15,000-word speech on 5 March is the first major Chinese Communist foreign policy statement in 1957. Discussing intrabloc relations, Chou asserted his confidence that differences could be resolved by "comradely discussion and consultation." In an oblique criticism of recent polemics in the bloc, Chou asked that, in the interests of bloc solidarity, issues not be forced where unanimity of views was temporarily lacking.

In his survey of relations with the free world, Chou excoriated American "colonialist" goals, especially among the Arab nations. Charging the United States with desiring to supplant Britain and France in the Middle East, Chou portrayed the United States as an unreliable ally.

On the matter of American-Chinese relations, Chou offered no new proposals but attempted to show that here, too, the United States was preparing to abandon its Chinese Nationalist ally. He accused the US of trying to overthrow the authorities on Taiwan--a theme recently developed in Peiping broadcasts charging US support for liberal elements on Taiwan critical of the Nationalist government. In an effort to lend plausibility to reports of negotiations between the Nationalists and Communists, Chou declared that prospects for "peaceful liberation" have improved with "more and more" officials on Taiwan agreeable to a negotiated settlement.

Chou's remarks suggest that Peiping will continue its "soft" approach toward most nations and intensify its overtures to those countries in the Far East which have not

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 9

[PAGE 11]
recognized Communist China. He referred specifically to the desirability of improved relations with Japan, Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore, and Malaya. Chou reaffirmed Peiping's willingness to extend economic aid with no conditions attached.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 10

[PAGE 12]
8. CHINESE COMMUNIST AID PROGRAM IN CAMBODIA
GETS UNDER WAY

Communist China's $22,400,000 two-year aid program negotiated with Cambodia last June is about to be put into effect, the American embassy in Phnom Penh has been reliably informed. The initial project calls for the construction of buildings to house various Cambodian government ministries and agencies. Meanwhile, arrangements are being made for the initial importation of nearly $6,000,000 worth of Chinese Communist goods to create counterpart funds to finance the aid program.

Comment  A Chinese Communist economic mission at Phnom Penh has been discussing details with the Cambodian government since last September. Peiping's program calls for "unconditional" assistance in the fields of agriculture, light industry, communications and transportation, health and education, and power.

A Soviet economic mission has also been in Cambodia since last November drawing up a similar "unconditional" aid program. The goal of Sino-Soviet economic aid to Cambodia apparently is to derive maximum political returns from selected popular targets while not attempting to match the scale of Western economic assistance.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 11

[PAGE 13]
9. CONFUSION AND DISSENSION APPARENT IN RUMANIA

The Rumanian regime's recent unprecedented withdrawal of a decree issued by the Council of Ministers on 22 February demonstrates confusion and dissension at the highest levels of authority, according to the American legation in Bucharest. The legation also noted that this episode revealed a seeming difference of opinion between the party and the government.

the decree, prepared by the government, had been suppressed by party first secretary Gheorghiu-Dej on grounds that it was unworkable.

The decree, a drastic measure which reportedly stirred up vigorous worker complaints, limited each wage earner and family group to only one source of income. A great number of Rumanians depend on second sources of income and most Bucharest families are able to subsist only on the earnings of both husband and wife.

Comment  Differences concerning possible courses of action in regard to deteriorating economic conditions apparently have led to official confusion. One recent unconfirmed report reaching the legation, for example, claimed that the Rumanian army has been receiving conflicting orders from top government authorities. Worker reaction may have been sufficiently strong to cause the regime to withdraw its decree.

The Rumanian regime was forced late last year to announce the overhaul of a large part of its economic plans and methods, a change which apparently has already resulted in the firings of surplus state officials and workers in certain industries.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 12

[PAGE 14]
10. CONTINUED ABSENCE OF TOP SOVIET LEADERS AT
PUBLIC FUNCTIONS

Reference:

Two top Soviet leaders, Nikita Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, have not appeared in public since 21 February. Since that date, Khrushchev has missed more functions attended by other presidium members than at any other time since Malenkov's ouster in February 1955. The most recent occasion on which one or both normally would have appeared was on 4 March.

Their absence may be explained by their attendance at some unpublicized meeting within the bloc, or they may merely be on vacation. Both men have appeared to be firmly established in their positions in the hierarchy.

6 Mar 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 13
