Antiregime Activity in Turkey

UAR reports of serious localized incidents in southern Turkey remain unconfirmed and Turkey has denied that clashes took place.

the Turkish-Syrian border was closed.

antiregime demonstrations in three separate districts of southern Turkey had resulted in "many killed and wounded." One report placed the figure at 120 killed; another referred to 100 killed or wounded when the Turkish Army intervened. The alleged demonstrations were said to be in protest against increased taxes and increased military salaries.

The military regime in Turkey, which ousted the Bayar-Menderes regime almost a year ago, is subject to popular criticism from various groups--including retired military officers, political dissidents, and economic critics--but it apparently faces no serious threat. There has been no indication of any significant military disaffection, and no nonmilitary group could stage a successful coup without substantial military support or assured neutrality.

Turkish security forces, however, have reported an increase in cooperation among the former members and friends of the banned Democratic party, whom they regard as having a potential for swift action of an undisclosed nature. In recent weeks a slogan predicting a "new revolution" has appeared in several provinces, accompanied by security reports that people have been removing weapons from caches to their homes. The gendarmerie has been confiscating unauthorized weapons, and the government may decide to undertake a general search.

The Turkish National Security Service has foreseen the possibility of popular demonstrations but has not suggested anything as serious as the alleged incidents in southern Turkey. Members of the military Committee of National Union (CNU), however, have indicated the government's readiness to suppress any threat to domestic security.

In recent weeks Turkish officials have indicated a growing concern over Communist propaganda broadcasts that

11 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
