[PAGE 01]
17 February 1960
Copy No. C 67

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
17 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's formula for solution of German problem calls for signing of separate treaties with two German states; Communists claim it would eliminate "objections" to signing of single treaty.

Chinese Communists and Nationalists in air clash above Taiwan Strait; Communists showing increased confidence in ability to engage Nationalists.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel's boycott of UN Mixed Armistice Commission meeting concerning fighting along Israeli-Syrian border may lead to UN Security Council consideration of border dispute.

Belgian Congo--Brussels’ announcement of 30 June independence for the Congo may lead to substantial exodus of Congo's 100,000 Europeans.

Communists in Iraq receive another jolt in cabinet shake-up.

III. THE WEST

US Embassy sees Castro's agreements with Mikoyan as long step toward Cuba's joining Soviet camp.

LATE ITEM

New Soviet proposal for temporary standards for detecting underground nuclear tests is designed to undercut US proposal for limited test ban; USSR still aims at ban on all tests.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
17 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Germany: At the recent meeting of bloc leaders in Moscow, Khrushchev is reported to have put forward a new formula--subsequently outlined publicly by East German Premier Grotewohl on 10 February--calling for two basically similar German peace treaties, one between the Western powers and Bonn and the other between bloc governments and East Germany. Grotewohl explained that this procedure would "do away with objections" to signing a single treaty with both German states and lead to the "same results." Khrushchev may elaborate on this modification at the May summit meeting. The Soviet premier defended his free-city proposal for West Berlin and reaffirmed his intention to sign a separate treaty with East Germany if the West does not respond to the Soviet proposal to negotiate a German treaty.
(Page 1)

Taiwan Strait: The attack on a Chinese Nationalist routine air patrol by Chinese Communist jet fighters over the Taiwan Strait on 16 February was ordered by Communist ground control and was carried out despite the fact that Sidewinder air-to-air missiles are usually carried by the Nationalist aircraft. Sidewinders were fired but no aircraft were destroyed. Communist aircraft have been active over the strait recently and have shown increased confidence in their ability to engage the Nationalists.
(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel-UAR-UN: Israel's boycott of the UN Mixed Armistice Commission meeting on 16 February, which dealt with recent fighting along the Israeli-Syrian border, may lead to UN Security
[PAGE 05]
Council consideration of the border dispute. Israel's antagonism is directed toward the UN Truce Supervision Organization as well as the UAR in this case because both oppose Israel's claim to sovereignty over the demilitarized zone in which the fighting occurred. A clash with Syrian forces in the central sector of the zone on 12 February, when two Israelis were killed, has again raised the prospect of Israeli reprisal action.
(Page 4)

Belgian Congo: Brussels’ recent announcement that independence with full sovereignty will be granted the Congo on 30 June has caused widespread anxiety among the Congo's 100,000 Europeans, and may lead to a substantial exodus. Europeans feel that Brussels is surrendering to virtually every African demand in the current round-table talks, and fear that Belgium will be unprepared to protect its nationals in the Congo during the post-independence period, which may well be chaotic. The prevailing feeling could strengthen secessionist sentiment in mineral-rich Katanga Province, where the Europeans are politically well organized. The Consulate General in Leopoldville observes that an orderly transition period after 30 June will depend on the retention of a substantial cadre of Belgian civil servants. The maintenance of the Force Publique at its present strength would also be essential.

Iraq: A cabinet change announced in Baghdad on 16 February appears to be a jolt for Communist influence in the Iraqi Government. Following a struggle of some weeks over control of the agrarian reform program, the anti-Communist minister of interior, Brigadier Yahya, has been made acting minister of agrarian reform in addition to his other duties, while the pro-Communist former minister, Ibrahim Kubbah, has been relieved. Kubbah has also been dismissed from his post as acting oil minister, but in this case another extreme leftist, Minister of Planning Shaybani, has taken over the portfolio on an acting basis.

17 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Cuba: The American Embassy in Havana believes that the most serious results of Mikoyan's visit to Cuba are the expressed intention of the Soviet and Castro governments to collaborate actively in the UN and the offer of technical assistance by the USSR. Embassy officials state that the Cuban Government has taken a long step toward putting itself definitely in the Soviet camp, that there is little possibility that the United States will reach a satisfactory relationship with the present regime, and that "time is working against us" as Castro's control over Cuban public opinion tightens.
(Page 6)

LATE ITEM

USSR - Geneva Test Talks: The Soviet offer on 16 February to accept a set of temporary standards for detecting underground nuclear explosions, provided the West agrees to Khrushchev's plan for a fixed number of on-site inspections each year, is designed to further the USSR's objective of a treaty banning all tests and to undercut the recent American proposal for a limited treaty. An obvious move to divide the Western delegations, the Soviet plan adopts suggestions along these lines put forward by the British delegation on 15 January. An agreement on temporary control measures, which would obtain during the "approximately two- to three-year" period while a permanent control system was being installed, would also include a joint research program to perfect methods of detecting underground explosions. Moscow probably believes that this new concession, which in effect accepts the Western contention that almost any unidentified seismic event should be eligible for an on-site inspection, will make it increasingly difficult for the United States to continue its opposition to the Soviet scheme for an annual quota of inspections--a concept first advanced by Prime Minister Macmillan.

17 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Meeting of Bloc Leaders Discusses Pre-Summit Strategy

During the recent meeting of bloc leaders in Moscow, Khrushchev reportedly made several proposals designed to strengthen Soviet efforts at the summit to persuade the West to negotiate a German peace treaty.

In a move to make less distasteful to the West the standard Soviet proposal for a peace treaty with both German states, the Soviet premier put forward the formula--subsequently outlined publicly by East German Premier Grotewohl on 10 February--calling for two basically similar treaties, one between the Western powers and Bonn and the other between bloc governments and East Germany. Grotewohl explained that this procedure "would lead to the same result" and "do away with objections raised by some governments." Pravda emphasized these aspects of Grotewohl's speech on 11 February.

Khrushchev and Ulbricht are reported to have agreed on a peace treaty which would legalize the division of Germany as one of their basic objectives in forthcoming East-West talks. Ulbricht was to take the initiative in proposing that the four powers establish a commission to negotiate a treaty.

Khrushchev plans no basic concessions on Germany or Berlin at the summit, but will urge that the West agree to all-German negotiations.

Khrushchev took this approach in his talks with Italian President Gronchi. In defending his proposal for creating a free city in West Berlin, Khrushchev termed his agreement to an interim settlement a "real concession" to facilitate all-German talks. He reaffirmed his intention to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany if the West did not agree to begin negotiations on a treaty.

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
The Soviet leader linked this threat specifically to the results of the May summit meeting. In his previous public and private warnings, however, Khrushchev has carefully avoided tying unilateral action on a peace treaty to the May summit.

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Taiwan Strait Air Clash

An attack on a routine Nationalist air patrol by Communist jet fighters over the Taiwan Strait near the China mainland on 16 February.

Sidewinder air-to-air missiles were carried by the Nationalist aircraft.

Approximately 18 Communist aircraft were in the area of the engagement, although only four of these were seen by the four F-86 pilots of the Nationalist patrol. One of the Nationalist aircraft attempted to fire Sidewinders but was unable to because of malfunctions; another fired two, but missed. An F-86 was slightly damaged by enemy fire and one of the Communists appeared to have been hit, but apparently no aircraft were destroyed.

The large number of Communist flights over the Chinmens and over the Taiwan Strait, along with the 16 February battle, suggests that the Communists now feel that they can cope with air-to-air missiles, and hence are less reluctant to engage the Nationalist F-86s.

The Nationalists fly this route twice daily, and this patrol appeared to be normal in every respect. The Chinese Nationalists have carefully observed their pledge to American officials on Taiwan to avoid any provocative actions, and probably will continue to exercise restraint as long as they believe unilateral action would hurt relations with the United States.

At a recent briefing for Hong Kong Communist newspapermen, a Communist editor stated Peiping's current line is to "carefully refrain" from creating military tension in the strait because the Communists feel this might increase US influence on Taiwan to the detriment of "peaceful liberation."

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israeli-Syrian Border Dispute May Go to UN Security Council

Israel's boycott of the meeting on 16 February of the Israeli-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) to consider recent fighting in the demilitarized zone along the Israeli-Syrian border may lead to UN Security Council consideration of the dispute. UN Secretary General Hammarskjold has expressed readiness, if necessary, to call a council meeting on his own authority. Prior to such a meeting, however, there probably would be a "reaffirmation" of the UN position regarding the status of the demilitarized zone, perhaps in the form of a stern letter from Hammarskjold to Israel and the UAR.

The Israeli claim to sovereignty over the demilitarized zone has become a central issue in the dispute and was the reason for Israel's refusal to attend the MAC meeting. The Israelis deny that the MAC has any authority to discuss an issue involving Israeli sovereignty. The UN and the UAR, as well as the US Government, hold that the 1949 General Armistice Agreement between Israel and Syria left the status of the zone in abeyance pending a final Arab-Israeli settlement.

Israel has offered to meet separately with the Arab inhabitants of Tawafiq, the focal point of recent fighting within the zone, to discuss measures to enable them to cultivate the land they claim. The Israelis also have said they are willing to meet the Syrians "anytime and anywhere" to discuss peace and means of preserving order along their common border, while insisting that there be no discussion of the demilitarized zone.

A clash on 12 February in the central sector of the demilitarized zone, 25 miles north of Tawafiq, has again

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 11]
raised the prospect of Israeli reprisal action. The Syrians apparently fired first, and two Israelis reportedly were killed in the two-hour fight. Israeli Chief of Staff Laskov is quoted as threatening new reprisals if the Syrians "start anything else."

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Cuban-Soviet Relations

The American Embassy in Havana believes that the most significant results of Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan's trip to Cuba are the expressed intention of the Castro government to collaborate actively with the USSR in the UN and the offer of Soviet technical assistance in the building of Cuban factories. The commercial agreement may eventually be proved disadvantageous to Cuba, but meanwhile it adds to the propaganda benefits the USSR is deriving from the visit.

The new rapport with the USSR has apparently received enthusiastic support from the majority of Cubans. However, considerable booing of Mikoyan's appearance on theater newsreels indicates that opposition exists.

Embassy officials believe that the closer ties with the USSR, viewed in conjunction with other recent Cuban developments, are a long step toward putting the Castro government in the Soviet camp. They feel there is little possibility that the United States can reach a satisfactory relationship with the present regime and that, as Castro's control over Cuban public opinion tightens, the possibility of agreement will become "even more remote."

Diplomatic relations between Cuba and the USSR will probably be resumed shortly.

Castro is also making overtures toward diplomatic relations with Rumania, Hungary, and Bulgaria.

17 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
