[PAGE 01]
10 March 1951

Copy No. C1-1

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. About sixty Soviet-type jet aircraft sighted over Korea (page 3).

2. Possible attempt at coup d’etat reported in Thailand (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Yugoslavia charges USSR with applying military pressure (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. About sixty Soviet-type jet aircraft sighted over Korea:

The US 5th Air Force has announced that on 9 March American Sabre jet fighters sighted a total of “about sixty” MIG-type jet aircraft in flights over northwest Korea. According to the 5th Air Force report, MIG’s were seen on three separate occasions in groups of twenty-five, twenty and fifteen. The enemy planes reportedly refused combat, flying back across the Yalu River into Manchuria when challenged.

Comment: If the press report is true, this is the largest number of Soviet-type jet aircraft seen over Korea in one day. During the past week, there has been an increase in enemy jet activity over Korea: seven engagements with MIG-15’s were reported, as compared with three the previous week.

2. Possible attempt at coup d’etat reported in Thailand:

A Bangkok radio broadcast has announced that on 6 March the Thai Police Department ordered the arrest of Rear Admiral Taharn Kamhiran (former Thai Marine Corps commander) for “planning the overthrow of the government.” According to an intercepted Reuters dispatch, the Bangkok correspondent of the Singapore Straits Times has reported that “a revolt against the military regime in Thailand by disgruntled Police, Army and Navy officers” has taken place, that “a number of Police officers have been detained and many more arrests are being made,” and that a warrant has been issued for Admiral Taharn’s arrest.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: Plots against the Phibun Government are constantly being reported. Admiral Taharn was relieved of his Marine Corps command following his participation in an unsuccessful coup in February 1949. Recent reports have claimed that Chinese Communists and Russians are conniving with various Thai military cliques in such plotting; former Thai Premier Pridi and Admiral Taharn have often been rumored as central figures in the alleged plots. Several reports have claimed that Pridi, who was rumored to have returned to Bangkok early in March, has been converted to Communism since his exile from Thailand in 1947. Chinese Communist and Viet Minh propaganda blasts at the Phibun regime have accelerated recently and have included hints of imminent “changes” in Thailand. There is, however, no firm evidence to support rumors of Communist involvement in various plans to overthrow Phibun.

The reports (now on hand) suggest that a plot of this kind has been uncovered in its incipient stages and that the Phibun regime is taking strong measures to suppress it. If this is correct, it is probable that the attempted coup will be successfully thwarted.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Yugoslavia charges USSR with applying military pressure:

The Yugoslav Foreign Office has issued a lengthy White Paper accusing the USSR of applying military pressure against Yugoslavia and supplying the Satellite armies with arms and troops for the purpose of overthrowing the Yugoslav Government. A government spokesman has stated that the document will be forwarded to the UN.

Comment: This is another indication that the regime is concerned about an attack this year and is attempting to forestall it. In his recent Reuters interview, Tito asserted that the question of rearmament of the Satellites in violation of their peace treaties should be discussed at a Council of Foreign Ministers and indicated that, if
[PAGE 05]
the problem was not solved, it might be brought before the UN. By issuing the White Paper at this early date, the Yugoslav Government may be attempting to put pressure on the Soviet Union to discuss the problem in a Council of Foreign Ministers meeting. On the other hand, this move may indicate that the Tito regime believes that a Big Four solution to the problem is impossible and therefore is filing its case with the UN now in order to facilitate UN action in the event of an attack.
