[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet Union plans termination of fishing agreement with Britain (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

2. USSR reportedly planning microwave communications system (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Yoshida-Rhee meeting in Tokyo inconclusive (page 4).
4. Peiping's attitude toward Indians and Pakistanis shows "complete mistrust" (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Burma may end military pact with Britain (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Comment on deteriorating Syrian-Lebanese relations (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

9. Britain sees need for closer study of West's cooperation with Tito (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Complete split of East and West Berlin may occur before spring (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet Union plans termination of fishing agreement with Britain:

The Soviet Government has informed the British Embassy in Moscow that it intends to terminate a 1930 agreement which permits British fishing in the Barents Sea area outside a three-mile territorial limit.

The reasons cited for this action were lack of reciprocity, in that Soviet fishermen did not fish off the British coast, and numerous violations of the three-mile limit by British fishermen.

The British Embassy expects London to protest the termination, but doubts that the protests will be effective.

Secondly, the Kremlin may also consider that any exception to its announced policy defining territorial waters as extending 12 miles from its shores might undermine its efforts to force Scandinavian acceptance of the 12-mile limit in the Baltic.

SOVIET UNION

2. USSR reportedly planning microwave communications system:

the USSR is planning a microwave communications system.

Comment: Establishment of such a multi-channel system would be the most important recent development in Soviet bloc telecommunications. It can carry simultaneous transmission of many telephone and telegraph circuits.

East German factories producing mobile, fixed and portable types of radio relay equipment have been given increasingly higher priorities since 1949.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Yoshida-Rhee meeting in Tokyo inconclusive:

Ambassador Murphy reports that the meeting between President Rhee and Prime Minister Yoshida on 6 January was marked by ostensible cordiality. The conversation, however, was largely inconclusive, with Yoshida remaining extremely tight-lipped and noncommittal.

Murphy reports that there were no definite indications that the talk would lead to a resumption of negotiations for normal relations between the two countries.

4. Peiping's attitude toward Indians and Pakistanis shows "complete mistrust":

The Pakistani Ambassador to Communist China, who has just returned to Karachi for consultation, describes the Chinese Communist attitude toward both the Indians and Pakistanis as one of "complete mistrust." He told the American Charge that, despite Peiping's professions of the mutual interests of Asians, the Chinese regard the Indians and Pakistanis as "spies for the Anglo-Americans."

The Chinese Communists have been able to exploit the Indian desire for friendship, but apparently have been unsuccessful with the Pakistanis.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Burma may end military pact with Britain:

Burmese Army Commander Ne Win informed the American Army Attache on 7 January that he favors the procurement of military equipment from the United States after Burma's military agreement with Britain expires on 1 January 1954.

Comment: Although Burmese authorities have never been satisfied with the British agreement, they have adhered to it as the sole means of obtaining essential military supplies.

Since, according to the British Foreign Office, Ne Win in early December indicated a desire for expansion of the British mission, he may still renew the agreement if he does not receive sufficient aid from the United States.

[PAGE 06]
7. Comment on deteriorating Syrian-Lebanese relations:

Press and radio reports from Syria and Lebanon on the cancellation of economic talks, the closing of the border, and the banning of Lebanese newspapers in Syria emphasize the sudden deterioration in relations between the two countries.

Present tension was caused by Shishakli's efforts to apprehend prominent Syrian political leaders who failed in a coup on 19 December and then sought refuge in Lebanon. Their attacks on Shishakli have been widely publicized in the Lebanese press, which reflects suspicion of the Colonel's intentions toward Lebanon.

Business leaders in Lebanon are now strongly opposed to any economic union between the two countries because they feel it would be adapted to Syria's policy of self-sufficiency.

[PAGE 07]
EASTERN EUROPE

9. Britain sees need for closer study of West's cooperation with Tito:

The British chiefs of staff believe that General Handy's report on contingent military planning with Yugoslavia does not distinguish sufficiently between the possibilities of a general war and one localized in the Yugoslav area. They believe that the build-up of Satellite military forces has overtaken their own estimate, and have ordered a study of the Yugoslavs' capability of repelling a Satellite attack. with the West and the USSR each supplying military equipment and logistic support but no troops.

The Foreign Office considers it essential to clarify American, British, and French views regarding some form of political commitment to Yugoslavia before Marshal Tito visits London in March. The British are thinking in terms of a "limited political re-assurance" rather than an outright guarantee which is precluded by NATO commitments.

[PAGE 08]
WESTERN EUROPE

10. Complete split of East and West Berlin may occur before spring:

The American High Commissioner's office in Berlin interprets current propaganda in the East Berlin press as suggesting that West Berlin may be completely cut off from the eastern half of the city in the "not very distant future," possibly even before West Germany ratifies the Bonn and Paris treaties. Heretofore, evidence generally indicated that a separation of the city was not likely until the other EDC signatory members were ready to ratify the treaty.

HICOG officials note that some residents of West Berlin have already received "special type" passes.

Comment: A division of the city would heighten West Berlin's acute unemployment problem. Except for the disruption of the elevated system, however, all public utilities would probably be able to continue almost normal operations.
