the emancipation of women. Moreover, the Nationalists insist that
nationalization be applicable throughout Iran; Tudeh would not oppose
an oil concession to the USSR.

Comment: The Tudeh Party, with its allegiance to the USSR, has made common cause with religious fanatics and
extreme nationalists in their desire to nationalize the Iranian oil industry. This temporary alliance appears now to be breaking up. While
the antipathy demonstrated by the recent clash may result in a temporary lessening of the clamor for nationalization, the component elements
have not altered their viewpoints and it may be anticipated that nationalization will continue to be urged.

5. UN authority in Palestine area reported inadequate:

In commenting on the general Israeli-Arab
frontier problems, the US Minister to Lebanon
reports that considerable criticism has been
voiced over the fact that the several Mixed
Armistice Commissions (a separate MAC is organized for each Arab
state which has a common frontier with Israel) have no machinery to
impose their decisions, with the result that no reliance can be put on the
Commission in the event of a serious situation. The Minister believes
that much of this criticism could be avoided if the chairman of the UN
Truce Supervision Organization, which controls the MAC's, could count
on prompt and forceful support in the event that either side disregards
its decisions. The Ministry states that disrespect for the authority
of the MAC's increases with each incident and that complete backing
for the Truce Supervision Organization seems the only way to avoid
(1) an increasing number of appeals to the Security Council, (2) complete loss of confidence in the UN as an effective body, or (3) an ultimate outbreak of hostilities.

Comment: The urgent need for definitive UN
authority so that recurrent incidents along the entire Israeli-Arab
frontier may adequately be handled has been previously stressed by US
and French diplomats in Tel Aviv, Amman and Damascus, as well as
by the reports of UN observers and US press correspondents in the area.
Apparently opinion is nearly unanimous that a strengthened Mixed Armistice Commission organization is urgently needed in the Palestine area.
