II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Communist bloc propaganda continues to emphasize the "willingness" of the Laotian dissidents to negotiate a settlement with the Laotian Government on the basis of "respect for the 1954 Geneva and 1957 Vientiane agreements." By placing the onus for continued fighting on the Phoui government, the Communists probably hope not only to exploit existing differences within Laos, but also to divide free world attitudes on the situation. Laotian officials, while admitting the possibility of some unintentional exaggeration in communiqués on the fighting to date, express confidence that the four-nation UN fact-finding team about to arrive on the scene will bear out Laos' charges of North Vietnamese involvement in the rebel activity. Laotian Army sources report small-scale military action continues in the northern provinces.
(Page 4)

Sudan: The Sudanese Army command declared a communications alert on 11 September. This is a precautionary measure by the Abboud military government, which is aware of coup plotting by a new group of dissident junior officers. The government anticipates a strong popular reaction to its announcement in the near future of courts-martial verdicts and sentences against the officers implicated in the abortive coup attempts of 22 May.
(Page 6)

Israel - Arab States: With Arab-Israeli differences likely to be aired early in the United Nations General Assembly session beginning 15 September, tensions between Israel and the Arab States have been heightened by new incidents. On 10 September the Jordanian defense minister protested to local UN officials against Israeli military patrolling activities in the Mount Scopus area and warned that if such patrols do not cease immediately, the Jordanian Army will take "direct action" beginning 18 September. He implied that by "direct action" he meant firing on the Israeli patrols. During the past few days, the Israeli Government has made a special point of publicizing recent violent border

14 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
