[PAGE 01]
29 June 1960
Copy No. C 51

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
29 JUNE 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Bucharest communique does not resolve Sino-Soviet dispute, but conflict may be muted. (1)
Moscow designates Central Pacific impact area for tests of "multistage carrier rockets" in July. (2)
Peiping informs Katmandu that Chinese troops engaged in quelling rebel disturbances have been sent into demilitarized zone on Nepalese-Tibetan border. (3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Ceylonese prime minister's illness likely to damage conservative party's prospects in 20 July elections. (4)
Mozambique tribesmen attacking Portuguese administrative posts. (5)

III. THE WEST
British Labor party's "softer" stand on defense will not satisfy left-wing extremists. (6)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
29 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - Communist China: In the communique signed in Bucharest on 24 June the Soviet Union and Communist China reached back to 1957 for an authoritative statement of Bloc policy which both could still accept. The communique merely outlined broad principles in very general lines, leaving specific issues open to varying interpretations. For the most part it expressed Soviet views, but Chinese reservations received some consideration. Such an arrangement, by itself, does little to resolve underlying differences between Moscow and Peiping, but the two powers in private talks probably examined ways of easing their (Page 1)

*USSR: The Central Pacific impact area designated by Moscow for tests between 5 and 31 July of "new types of powerful multistage carrier rockets" is about half the size of the 45,000-square-mile impact area used for extended-range tests this past January, and is centered on the southeastern edge of that area. In January, there were two 6,500-nautical-mile launchings from Tyura Tam to the Central Pacific, as well as one additional test vehicle which failed in flight. The Sibir-class instrumentation ships, which participated in the January tests and which left Petropavlovsk about two weeks ago, heading toward and within a few hours' sailing time of the newly designated impact area. The Sibir-class ships have recently been noted in practice countdowns with the Tyura Tam rangehead.

*Communist China - Nepal: The Nepalese government has announced receipt of a note from Peiping stating that Chinese troops engaged in quelling rebel disturbances have been sent into
[PAGE 05]
the demilitarized zone along the Nepalese-Tibetan border. The Chinese note was probably intended mainly to forestall unfavorable Asian reaction which might result from the presence of Chinese soldiers in the border area, or from any resulting border incidents. A demilitarized zone 25 miles wide was provided for in the Sino-Nepalese agreement signed in March 1960. Sporadic, small-scale guerrilla activity has continued in Tibet since the major revolt there in the spring of 1959.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Ceylon: Prime Minister Senanayake, the UNP's nationally popular leader, because of an aggravation of his chronic illness, he is considering resigning in the event his party is returned to power in the national elections of 20 July. He resigned for a similar reason in 1953. Voter confidence in the UNP would drop sharply if--as seems likely--Senanayake's condition or intentions become publicly known. (Page 2)

Mozambique: The American Consulate General in Lourenco Marques has received reports of native attacks on Portuguese administrative posts in the remote northern districts of Mozambique. African tribesmen, some of whom are said to be armed, have reportedly come under the influence of agitators from neighboring Tanganyika. The Portuguese have moved some troops north, and a Portuguese official in Lisbon has reaffirmed Portugal's readiness to react with force to infiltration of its overseas possessions from neighboring areas. (Page 3) (Map)

III. THE WEST

Britain: The Labor party's new statement on defense is much softer than last year's. While it goes far toward advocating unilateral nuclear disarmament for Britain, it stops short of the extreme measures for which trade union leader

29 June 60  DAILY BRIEF  ii
[PAGE 06]
Frank Cousins and other left-wingers have been clamoring. The ambiguously worded statement proposes that the United States provide the strategic deterrent but reaffirms the party's support for fulfilling NATO obligations. The unilateralists will try to soften the policy further when it comes up before the trades unions' governing council on 1 July, and at the trade union and party conferences in the fall. (Page 4)

29 June  60  DAILY BRIEF  iii
[PAGE 07]
Communist Bloc Attempts to Restore Unity

In the communique signed in Bucharest on 24 June by all bloc nations, the Soviet Union and Communist China reached back to 1957 for an authoritative statement of bloc policy which both could still accept, but did little to resolve the dispute in which they are engaged. During the steady development of the controversy in public statements and the equally steady deterioration of the much-vaunted "unity of the socialist bloc," both sides have consistently cited the 1957 declaration in substantiation of their own positions.

The 1957 declaration was drawn up to overcome the confusion in the international Communist movement that was created by Khrushchev's de-Stalinization campaign. It was a carefully worded document which emphasized the necessity for unity under the leadership of Moscow but allowed for a limited degree of independence in action and thought. Recently, however, the Chinese Communists, who apparently played an important role in the drafting of the declaration, have been pushing their independence to the point where it challenged Soviet leadership.

The communique signed in Bucharest on 24 June endorsed the Soviet views on the noninevitability of war and the possibility of peaceful Communist take-over in non-Communist countries. However, it also took account of Chinese views by acknowledging that war is still possible as long as imperialism exists and that, in certain cases, violence would be necessary to accomplish a revolution.

By merely outlining broad principles in very general terms, it still leaves specific issues open to varying interpretations. Soviet and Chinese editorials and statements since 24 June suggest that the two countries will continue to uphold their divergent concepts. The publication of the communique, however, suggests that the conflict now may be muted, at least in public, in the interests of "socialist unity."
[PAGE 08]
Election Prospects of Ceylon's Leading Conservative
Party Threatened

Prime Minister Senanayake, in commenting on his health, is considering resigning in favor of the capable but unpopular finance minister, J. R. Jayawardene, if his United National party (UNP) wins the Ceylonese national elections on 20 July.

As Senanayake is the UNP's only nationally popular leader, voter confidence in the party will drop sharply if the state of his health becomes public knowledge. This seems unavoidable in view of his absence from several campaign rallies and his reportedly unhealthy appearance. Senanayake's resignation because of a chronic stomach ailment during a wave of antigovernment agitation in 1953 has long been exploited by the opposition as proof of his inability to handle critical situations. This charge was successfully countered by Senanayake's energetic campaign for the elections last March. His present condition, however, provides the opposition an excellent opportunity to reopen the issue.

UNP leaders thus far have managed to keep the opposition parties on the defensive by playing on two strong sentiments of the Singhalese-Buddhist community--anti-Communism and a deep-rooted antagonism to the Tamil-speaking minority. Certain sections of the moderate-socialist Sri Lanka Freedom party (SLFP) are increasingly concerned over the UNP's attacks on the SLFP's electoral pact with a Trotskyite party and the orthodox Communist party. The UNP's allegations of a "Marxist plot" involving the SLFP may become more convincing as a result of publicity concerning a recent conference between two Trotskyite leaders and local Soviet officials. Continued intensive UNP campaigning on this issue might serve to divert public attention somewhat from the issue of Senanayake's health.
[PAGE 09]
BELGIAN CONGO
TANGANYIKA
UNCLASSIFIED
ANGOLA
FEDERATION OF RHODESIA AND NYASALAND
SOUTH-WEST AFRICA
BECHUANALAND
SWAZILAND
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA
BASUTOLAND
MOCIMBOA DA PRAIA
PORTO AMELIA
MALAGASY REPUBLIC (MADAGASCAR)
MOZAMBIQUE
LOURENCO MARQUES
SOUTH ATLANTIC OCEAN
[PAGE 10]
Unrest Reported in Mozambique

The American Consulate General in Lourenco Marques has received reports of native attacks on Portuguese administrative posts in northeastern Mozambique. African tribesmen, influenced by agitators from neighboring Tanganyika, reportedly have staged large demonstrations in the Mocimboa da Praia and Porto Amelia area. Some of the natives are said to be armed, and some Portuguese troops reportedly have been moved north. The Mozambique provincial secretary told the American consul general that the activity was a "minor police action only"; however, reports from Lisbon tend to confirm the existence of unrest.

Northern Mozambique's remoteness and the sparseness of the European population cause security problems for the province's Portuguese administrators. In some areas, more than half the population is Moslem, which provides a link with countries to the north. Direct external interference may increase as Tanganyika and Nyasaland approach self-government.

Portugal has reacted to these threats by increasing its military garrison and by encouraging European settlement in the border areas. A high Portuguese military official has reaffirmed Portugal's intention to react with force to any infiltration of its overseas possessions from neighboring areas.

High-level consultations reportedly have taken place recently among the three military services in order to plan for countermeasures to control unrest in Portuguese Africa.
[PAGE 11]
British Labor Party Statement on Defense

The statement on foreign policy and defense issued by the British Labor party on 22 June shows that the party's general position is much "softer" than a year ago, in the view of the American Embassy in London. Without specifically advocating British unilateral nuclear disarmament, the long-awaited statement asserts that there no longer exists any basis for an independent British nuclear deterrent, and says that Britain should contribute only conventional weapons and forces to Western defense. The statement advocates unilateral British cessation of nuclear weapons tests, but avoids saying that Britain should stop manufacturing such weapons, or suggesting what should be done with the stockpile. It opposes American Thor missile bases in the United Kingdom.

By reaffirming Labor's support of a nuclear-armed NATO, the statement is designed to counterbalance the strong drift in the Labor movement toward a policy favoring unilateral British nuclear disarmament. Even so, the party calls for the "radical" reform of NATO in order to ensure the "political control of all kinds of nuclear weapons"--necessarily American weapons, since the party opposes creation of a European deterrent.

Although this statement goes a long way toward advocating Britain's withdrawal from the field of nuclear defense planning and commitment, it will not end the Labor party's bitter argument over defense policy. Frank Cousins, leader of Britain's largest trade union, believes this new position does not go far enough and will fight it when the General Council of the Trades Union Congress meets on 1 July to vote on it. The statement faces further attack at the annual conference of the Trades Union Congress in September and at the Labor party conference in October.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
