II. ASIA-AFRICA

Africans Critical of French Nuclear Tests in Sahara

French plans to hold nuclear tests in the Sahara are arousing a growing storm of criticism among African leaders who profess fear of the effects of radiation. They also probably see in the issue a popular subject for anticolonialist propaganda. Several nations have already lodged official protests, the press has given increased coverage, and labor unions have called for mass protests. In early August, a conference in Monrovia of nine independent African states is expected to pass a resolution condemning France.

In the most recent action, Morocco--where the prospective tests will almost certainly heighten agitation for the evacuation of foreign forces--last week lodged a strong note of protest with the French Embassy in Rabat. In Libya the prime minister's press bulletin has condemned the French, and the Libyan press appears unanimous in its criticism of Paris. Tunis is also deeply concerned, and the local American Embassy believes the foreign secretary will push the matter at the August conference in Monrovia.

Ghana and Liberia made official protests to France earlier in July, and the subject of nuclear testing was discussed at the recent meeting at Sanniquellie of West Africa's three leading spokesmen. The topic is already on the provisional agenda of the Monrovia conference, and a critical resolution will probably be supported by all the participants with the possible exception of Ethiopia. The subject was given attention in April 1958 at the first conference of independent African states at Accra and was on the agenda of the Accra meeting last December.

The issue has attracted considerable popular attention, aroused in part by extensive press treatment. In early July, after university studies on the possible effects of nuclear blasts were released, crowds, stimulated by government officials, demonstrated in front of the French Embassy in Accra. Similarly, in Nigeria the press has developed a strong campaign and the leading university has published studies on the dangers of radiation.

28 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
