Abdul Gamal Nasr formalize a situation which has existed for several months. This development is not likely to bring any immediate significant changes in internal affairs or in foreign policy, since Nasr has practically controlled both while the ill and discontented Nagib served as the popular figurehead.

Nasr has been involved in the day-to-day negotiations with Britain on the Suez issue. He believes that the present regime has already gone further in making concessions to Britain than any previous Egyptian government. It is doubtful that he will yield any more in the absence of new British moves, but he will not necessarily be more difficult. He may be expected to maintain internal order, preferring political and diplomatic measures to guerrilla warfare as a means of bringing about a Suez settlement.

Without Nagib as a front, the military dictatorship may appear more starkly to be what it is. The absence of Nagib may deprive the regime of considerable genuine popular support and necessitate greater reliance on police measures. Lacking a counterbalance, Nasr may become more arbitrary in his internal and external relations, and there may be more friction within the governing army clique.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment: Although Italian Foreign Ministry officials recently told the American embassy that Scelba planned to present the EDC draft bill to parliament "within three or four weeks" after receiving a vote of confidence, Zoppi's statements reported above are more in line with Rome's past and possibly current position on this issue.

LATIN AMERICA

8. Plans for disturbances during Caracas conference reported:

Representatives of the four largest Venezuelan political parties opposed to the present regime met to discuss plans for disturbances and propaganda activities during the Inter-American Conference. Among the projects discussed was a general strike "if conditions permit." The two of the groups, the outlawed Democratic Action and the Communists, may attempt to create a "second Bogotazo" even though this apparently was not discussed at the meeting.

The government is confident, however, that it can thwart any of these plans. Police and army leaders reportedly met to discuss preventive measures, including the disposition of tanks and automatic weapons.

Comment: Representatives of these four groups reportedly failed at a meeting to agree on a joint attitude toward the Caracas conference. Since these four parties include the moderate Christian Socialists and the Republican Democrats, who together won a majority of the popular vote in the November 1952 elections for the present Constitutional Assembly, agreement among them now on a joint position would create a situation potentially much more explosive than would be likely from any plans for violence by the Communists or the Democratic Action Party alone.

The security precautions taken by the government for next month's conference far exceed those taken for the 1952 election and for the attempted general strike last year.
