[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

3 March 1960

Copy No. C 68

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 March 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Berlin Air Corridors: Moscow's immediate denuncia-
tion of reports that the United States will resume flights to
Berlin above 10,000 feet suggests that the USSR hopes to ex-
ploit differences among the three Western powers by warn-
ing that unilateral action would have an adverse effect on the
May summit meeting. A Soviet spokesman in East Berlin has
declared that, in the absence of an agreement with both the
USSR and East Germany, such flights would be regarded as a
"unilateral violation of East German air sovereignty" and ex-
isting four-power agreements. The statement was probably
intended to induce the Western powers to postpone such flights
and agree to technical discussions on flight procedures with
East German participation.

Communist China - USSR: The Chinese Communist press
and radio in contrast to other bloc media have virtually ig-
nored Khrushchev's trip through India, Burma, and Indonesia.
This sparse coverage supports other suggestions of a continu-
ing coolness between Peiping and Moscow and may reflect irri-
tation at Khrushchev's failure to support Peiping in its disputes
with India and Indonesia. Communist China could feel that the
trip, coming at a time when it had begun to make gestures toward
easing strains with these Asian countries, gives Khrushchev a
large measure of the credit Peiping had hoped to gain solely for
itself.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: Baghdad radio on 1 March carried a statement by
Aziz Sharif, secretary general of the Peace Partisan movement,
announcing that a mass meeting of the Partisans in Baghdad dur-
ing late March would again, like last year's, be under Qasim's
[PAGE 05]
patronage and would be addressed by the Iraqi premier.
Qasim's strategy seems to be to treat the Peace Partisans
as a nationwide nonpolitical movement in an attempt to un-
dercut Communist control of the Partisans, who have func-
tioned as the principal Communist front in Iraq. Last week
Qasim rejected the application of the orthodox Communists
for legal recognition as a political party.

(Page 2)

Watch Committee Conclusion - Middle East: In the Mid-
dle East present evidence does not indicate that either the
UAR or Israel is deliberately planning to initiate hostilities
in the near future. The disposition and readiness of UAR
forces and precautionary military measures by Israel continue
the risk that any local incidents could reach more serious pro-
portions.

Jordan-Israel: The food-grain crop in Jordan is in danger
of being totally destroyed by drought, and the government as
well as the public is becoming panicky over an already short
supply of drinking water. Similar but less critical conditions
exist in Israel, where drought is likely to result in large crop
and livestock losses. Jordan and Israel are likely to request
emergency American assistance.
*Jordanian Premier Hazza al-Majali issued a defense or-
der on 2 March requisitioning all water resources within Amman
and authorizing the Municipal Council to take all measures neces-
sary to secure Amman's water resources. The premier also
said that the cabinet has decided to waive all taxes on livestock
for this year.

3 Mar 60        DAILY BRIEF        ii
[PAGE 06]
Afghanistan: Foreign Minister Naim, in a press interview
a few days prior to Khrushchev's arrival, said that President
Eisenhower's visit to Kabul had not resulted in any greater un-
derstanding on the part of the West. He also accused the United
States of tying its military aid to membership in military pacts,
a condition unacceptable to Afghanistan. The Foreign Minister
expressed appreciation for American economic aid. However,
he reiterated Kabul's determination on the Pushtoonistan issue
and his intention to discuss economic aid with Khrushchev.
Naim seemed to reflect the opinion that the US should be able
to exercise some control over Pakistani propaganda.

III. THE WEST

Sweden: The US Embassy has described Foreign Minister
Unden's speech of 29 February as a thinly veiled attack on the
Western position in the Geneva talks on nuclear testing. Unden

3 Mar 60        DAILY BRIEF        iii
[PAGE 07]
expressed the belief that the USSR is ready to accept an agree-
ment "which from the point of view of control is still imperfect,
but which is nonetheless relatively satisfactory." He concluded
that such an agreement would be "better than none at all or an
agreement which leaves the field wide open for underground tests
of quite considerable effect." Unden's remarks, although focus-
ing on the need for an international agreement, may stem in
part from domestic political considerations. The governing So-
cial Democratic party is deeply divided on the issue of acquir-
ing a nuclear weapons capability, which Unden opposes, and an
international agreement would enable the party to avoid a deci-
sion.

3 Mar 60        DAILY BRIEF        iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Denounces Reported US Plan to Conduct High-Altitude
Flights Into Berlin

Moscow's prompt and strong reaction to press reports
that the US will resume flights in the Berlin air corridors
above 10,000 feet suggests that the Soviet leaders view this
as an opportunity to test Western unity in the pre-summit
period and, if possible, to inject the East Germans into any
technical discussion on flight procedures. At the time of the
last such flight, in April 1959, the British attitude was that
the flights unnecessarily endangered the prospects for the
Geneva foreign ministers' talks. Moscow's propaganda and
official statements now imply that resumption could have an
adverse effect on summit negotiations.

In discussions preceding the Western decision to resume
such flights, the British argued against making an open com-
mitment to early action because of the sensitivity of the British
public to any seemingly provocative action before the summit.
In the initial editorial response, the pro-Conservative Daily
Mail on 1 March protested against the "provocative" character
of flights at this time and wondered what difference waiting a
few weeks would make.

The warning by a Soviet spokesman in East Berlin that
flights above 10,000 feet in the absence of an agreement with
both the USSR and East Germany would be regarded as a "uni-
lateral violation of East German air sovereignty" and existing
four-power agreements probably is aimed at inducing the West-
ern powers to postpone such flights and agree to technical dis-
cussions on flight procedures with East German participation.
Moscow will probably attempt to increase pressure for negotia-
tions, as it did in 1959, by hinting that possible "incidents"
might result. On the flights in the spring of 1959, American
C-130s were harassed by Soviet aircraft.

3 Mar 60        CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN        Page 1
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

The Iraqi Situation

Prime Minister Qasim has agreed to continue his role of
patron of the Iraqi Peace Partisans, possibly in an effort to
transform this important Communist-front group into a non-
political nationwide movement. Following his ambiguous state-
ment of 23 February when he declared, among other things,
"Henceforth, there will be no society of Peace Partisans,"
Qasim was visited by Peace Partisan leader Aziz Sharif. On
1 March, Baghdad Radio broadcast a statement by Sharif to
the effect that, again this year, a mass meeting of Partisans
will be held in late March under Qasim's patronage and ad-
dressed by him.

This new endorsement of the Partisans may be a stratagem
of Qasim to forestall criticism from the orthodox Communist
group by throwing them a sop, while at the same time working
to dilute the Partisans' leadership with his own supporters.
While he has licensed certain political parties and associa-
tions, Qasim has refused to license the Peace Partisans, claim-
ing that "all Iraqis" are for peace. Thus, the Peace Partisans
will not have legal status as a party or as a society and accord-
ingly exist at Qasim's sufferance. However, Qasim probably
envisages the Peace Partisans as a great mass organization
which can be manipulated much like Nasir's National Union in
the UAR.

The Communist bloc press and radio, while refraining from
any direct criticism of Qasim, have implied dissatisfaction with
his handling of the licensing of Iraqi political parties. Moscow
has given considerable publicity to newspaper attacks by the or-
thodox Communist group on the Saiyigh splinter group which Qasim
licensed as the "Communist Party of Iraq." A quasi-clandestine
bloc station has gone even closer to implying criticism of Qasim
with a broadcast of 27 February to Turkey charging "reactionary
elements" in the Iraqi Ministry of Interior--headed by Qasim's
close associate Brigadier Yahya--with responsibility for refusing
to license the orthodox Communist group.

3 Mar 60        CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN        Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Drought Threatens Jordanian and Israeli Crops

Jordan is threatened with the loss of its entire grain crop,
unless rain falls within the next week. There has been no rain
since 3 February and the cumulative rainfall this season is the
lowest on record. After three years of drought, many springs
are drying up, cisterns and reservoirs are far below normal,
and a severe shortage of potable water is imminent.

The Jordanian Government and public are becoming panicky.
Jordanian officials estimate that even if there is rain this week,
this year's shortfall will be 153,000 tons of wheat, 50,000 tons of
barley, 8,000 tons of sorghum, and 11,000 tons of vetch.

Crop conditions in Israel are similar, but less critical. The
Israeli Ministry of Finance estimates now that at least 60,000 tons
of feed grains and 30,000 tons of wheat will be needed to supple-
ment domestic production. If the drought continues through March,
these estimates will have to be revised upward.

Complicating the drought in the Levant area is the annual
locust threat. Although it is too early in the season to estimate
potential locust damage, large swarms have been observed in
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Lebanon. The Desert Locust Informa-
tion Center in London states that infestation may spread to Israel,
Iraq, Kuwait, and possibly Syria and Turkey. The locust threat
extends as far as Libya, particularly in the Fezzan where all crops
were destroyed. Lesser damage has occurred in the coastal re-
gions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica.

Jordan is likely to request emergency aid soon, and requests
from Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Libya may also be forthcoming.
Israeli Minister of Agriculture Dayan, who will be in the US this
week for an Israeli bond drive, intends to discuss possible drought
relief with Secretary of Agriculture Benson.

3 Mar 60        CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN        Page 3
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Afghan-US Relations Are Affected by Pakistani
Propaganda Attacks

The Afghan Government is adopting a cooler attitude
toward the United States as a result of the increasingly un-
friendly propaganda now being aimed at Afghanistan by
Pakistan. In response to Kabul's Pushtoonistan propaganda
campaign, Karachi has stepped up its radiobroadcasts to the
same level of virulence often found in the Afghan output.

These attacks produced a strong reaction in Kabul, as
shown by Foreign Minister Naim's recent statements in a
press interview. Naim said his January meeting with Pres-
ident Ayub merely convinced him that Pakistan intends to
maintain a hard line toward Kabul. He noted that Pakistani
propaganda and "subversive activities" have recently increased,
and he complained that President Eisenhower's visit to Kabul
last December has not resulted in any greater understanding by
the West of Afghan problems.

Naim reiterated Kabul's long-standing complaint that US
military aid to Pakistan has upset the regional balance of power.
He pointed out that the United States has given no military as-
sistance to Afghanistan and he added that "political conditions"
attached to US military aid would make it unacceptable in any
event. The Afghan foreign minister probably hopes such crit-
icism will persuade the United States to put strong pressure on
Pakistan to adopt a less hostile policy.

3 Mar 60        CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN        Page 5
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 15]
