[PAGE 01]
25 January 1958

Copy No. 137

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 JANUARY 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
New Soviet atomic test in Semipalatinsk area. (1)
Soviet nuclear-powered submarines may be under construction at Severodvinsk. (2)
USSR shows interest in establishing diplomatic contact with Saudi Arabia. (3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Formation of rival Indonesian government in Sumatra still undecided. (4)

III. THE WEST
France expected to press Tunisia for joint controls on Algerian border. (5)
Rapacki plan for neutral zone in Europe receives negative response from North Atlantic Council members (6)
Venezuela - Citizen groups increase pressure on governing junta. (7)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

25 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

The Atomic Energy Detection System has reported a pick-up of fresh debris over Japan by sampling missions flown

Recent circumstances surrounding the closure of Severodvinsk, formerly Molotovsk, the location of the major Soviet Arctic shipyard, suggest the possibility of sensitive naval construction. Several reports during the last year have indicated that this shipyard might be engaged in a nuclear-powered submarine construction program. Except for a few medium-range submarines, known to be under construction at Leningrad, the USSR has drastically reduced its conventional submarine program. (Page 1) (Map)
[PAGE 05]
The USSR has recently shown renewed interest in establishing contact with Saudi Arabia. The Soviet ambassador in Damascus attempted to use a message from Bulganin, probably the 8 January note circulated to all UN members, as a pretext for a personal audience with King Saud. King Saud turned down the Soviet request but a Saudi official hinted that audiences may be granted in the future. The King states that his policy toward Communism has in no way changed.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

The situation in Indonesia remains essentially unchanged. Reports of intentions to set up a rival government in Sumatra persist, but the dissidents are not believed to have come to any decision.

III. THE WEST

Gaillard's and Pineau's strong statements to the French National Assembly on the Tunisian issue coincide with private expressions of French concern over Algerian rebel concentrations in Tunisia. Paris is expected to press Tunisia soon for the creation of some form of joint border controls. If, as seems likely, Tunisia refuses to assent to such controls, French military commanders in Algeria may believe that they would have government backing for actions crossing the Tunisian border. (Page 2)

No North Atlantic Council representatives see any merit in the Rapacki plan as such. However, public pressure on government leaders to offer positive counterproposals continues strong.

25 Jan 58 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
STATUTE MILES 400

OSTROY GOFMANA
FRANZ JOSEF LAND
NOVAYA ZEMLYA

25 JANUARY 1958

BARENTS SEA

MURMANSK
ARCHANGEL
SEVERODVINSK (MOLOTOVSK)
LENINGRAD
MOSCOW

80124-3
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Possible Sensitive Soviet Naval Construction in White Sea Area

the Soviet White Sea port of Severodvinsk, formerly Molotovsk, which has long been denied to Western shipping and travel, was closed to Soviet merchant shipping by decree of the Council of Ministers in mid-October.

This action was probably taken to increase the security of a sensitive naval shipbuilding effort under way in the large Severodvinsk shipyard. Although a Soviet nuclear submarine construction program has not yet been firmly identified, several reports within the last year have suggested that this facility might be engaged in such a program. In addition to its capability to undertake such a project, Severodvinsk has the advantage of convenient air and rail communications with Moscow and Leningrad, where design bureaus, research institutes, and other necessary technical facilities are located.

The tapering off of the last conventional submarine programs in the USSR, with the apparent cessation of W-class construction and reduction of Q-class construction in Leningrad to about 12 units in 1957, probably presages the building of more advanced units.

25 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

No back-up material.

III. THE WEST

Heightened French Concern Over Algerian Rebels
In Tunisia

The strong statements on the Tunisian issue made to the French National Assembly by Premier Gaillard and Foreign Minister Pineau are paralleled by private expressions of anxiety over the problem of Algerian rebel concentrations in Tunisia. Gaillard's military adviser has aired French concern over the presence in Tunisia of armed rebels, believed by the French to number about 7,000, who receive a steady stream of arms from abroad. The argument that Tunisian President Bourguiba is virtually at the mercy of such elements is frequently advanced in France and Algeria. While not confirmed, the rebel strength figure appears reasonable in light of recent developments.

Paris is expected to press Tunisia for some form of joint border control to supplement the new electrified barricade. French military leaders in Algeria, still smarting over the rebels' capture of four French soldiers, may engage in actions across the border on the assumption that they have Paris' implicit backing. Pineau said in the debate that even though the government nominally rejected nationalist Jacques Soustelle's motion calling for military retaliation across the border, Soustelle should not conclude that the government disapproved.

25 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

25 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

The situation in Indonesia remains essentially unchanged. Reports of intentions to set up a rival government in Sumatra persist, but the dissidents are not believed to have come to any decision.
