[PAGE 01]
17 June 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

17 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Soviet delegates at both the disarmament and nuclear test talks in Geneva have issued thinly veiled warnings that the USSR may withdraw from the negotiations and resume nuclear weapons tests if Western concessions are not forthcoming. At the disarmament conference, the Soviet delegate is making a strong effort to exploit differences in Western reactions to Moscow's latest proposals. Soviet spokesmen have hinted that, in view of the "lack of Western cooperation," the USSR may take the issue to the UN General Assembly. Moscow's representative in the nuclear test talks has warned that if the US and Britain go ahead with the experimental underground explosions without accepting Moscow's conditions for Soviet participation, the USSR will consider itself free to resume nuclear weapons tests.

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: Kishi's humiliation in being forced to cancel the President's trip will almost certainly result in his early resignation as prime minister and party chief. An acceptable compromise successor will be difficult to find and extensive political wrangling is likely. The 15 June Soviet note and widespread identification of the Japanese Communist party as the source of the recent violence will tend to focus Japanese attention on the extent of Communist influence over leftist elements. The extremists under Communist leadership, however, now are greatly encouraged and likely to increase their violence in an effort to defeat the ratification of the security treaty. Under these conditions anti-American incidents may occur.

Indonesia: President Sukarno, despite unprecedentedly heavy criticism, apparently intends to proceed with his plan to install a new parliament with strong Communist representation. Sukarno has previously announced that "some improvements," involving the appointment of additional members, will be made, but he has not disclosed how many he will name nor their political orientations. He is expected to confer shortly with political leaders, but it is not expected that he will materially modify his program.

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

France-Morocco: France has made a preliminary offer to evacuate all its bases in Morocco by 1963, and will try for "reasonable" settlements on other disputed questions such as French property holdings and certain border problems. The French are probably willing to concede the evacuation of troops in order to protect their large economic stake in the country--a move that would be consistent with De Gaulle's policy in other new African states. Morocco will probably prolong discussions both to gain maximum concessions from France and to forestall leftist criticism that the King is selling out to the French.

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Situation in Cuba. NIE 85-2-60. 14 June 60.

17 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
USSR Intensifies Pressure on West in Geneva Talks

Soviet delegates at both the disarmament and nuclear test talks in Geneva have stepped up pressure on the West by issuing thinly veiled warnings that the USSR may withdraw from the negotiations and resume nuclear weapons tests if Western concessions are not forthcoming.

Soviet delegate Zorin is making a strong effort in the ten-nation disarmament conference to exploit differences in Western reactions to Moscow's latest proposals. The British, French, Italian, and Canadian delegates have all expressed the view that some modifications must be made in the Western disarmament plan. Zorin has singled out French delegate Moch for special attention, complimenting him on his efforts to bridge East-West differences. He has pressed for a full French reply to the new Soviet proposal to prohibit and destroy all means for the delivery of nuclear weapons in the first stage of a disarmament program--a proposal particularly designed to exploit French insistence on top priority to measures for controlling nuclear weapons delivery systems.

Soviet spokesmen in London have hinted that, in view of the "lack of Western cooperation," the USSR may soon pull out of the disarmament conference and take the issue to the United Nations General Assembly. Zorin has warned that if the West continues to refuse to discuss Soviet proposals for complete and general disarmament, there will be no basis for further negotiations.

These tactics suggest that Moscow's principal current aim at Geneva is to build the strongest possible record for again presenting the Soviet disarmament position to the United Nations General Assembly next fall or, possibly, to a session of the 82-nation UN Disarmament Commission prior to the assembly's regular meeting.

In the nuclear test talks, Soviet delegate Tsarapkin has demanded full Soviet participation in the formulation and

17 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
execution of Western research explosions and has announced that the USSR has no plans to conduct underground explosions of either chemical or nuclear devices. Tsarapkin has warned that if the United States and Britain proceed with underground nuclear explosions for research purposes without accepting Moscow's conditions for Soviet participation to verify that the explosions are not being utilized for military purposes, the USSR will consider itself free to resume nuclear weapons tests "for the purpose of ensuring its security."

17 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
Sukarno Proceeds With Plans to Install Indonesian Parliament

President Sukarno, despite unprecedentedly heavy criticism, is proceeding with plans to install his appointed parliament later this month. He has made the minor concession, however, of promising to name additional members and is expected to confer with selected political leaders before the installation.

Sukarno has not announced how many more members he plans to appoint. Indonesian sources claim the number will total 23 to 25, all of them representatives of Moslem groups. The forthcoming political discussions probably will involve bargaining on the distribution of the appointees, and Sukarno may also find it expedient to make a further slight increase in membership. Of the original 261 appointees, 24 percent are Communist.

The Democratic League, which led criticism of Sukarno during his absence on a world tour during April and May, has renewed its charges that non-Communist elements are underrepresented and that parliament is unconstitutional. Significant factions in the National party and the orthodox Moslem Nahdlatul Ulama oppose the parliament, although the national leadership of both parties supports Sukarno. Apparently in reply to these criticisms, a cabinet spokesman announced on 13 June that Sukarno and the cabinet would not be intimidated on the parliamentary issue, although they were ready to entertain constructive suggestions,

17 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
France Makes New Settlement Offer to Morocco

The French ambassador in Morocco has resumed "serious discussions" with King Mohamed V on outstanding French-Moroccan problems, according to a senior French Embassy official. On 13 June he made a preliminary offer providing for France to give up its military bases in Morocco, not excepting its major naval and naval air installations at Kenitra (Port Lyautey) and Agadir, when evacuation of American Air Force bases is completed in 1963. Paris probably will concentrate on obtaining a "reasonable settlement" of the extensive property claims of French nationals in Morocco. It would prefer to let the frontier questions wait, pending Mauritania's anticipated accession to independence and clarification of Algeria's future status.

This new French move appears consistent with De Gaulle's general policy of physical French withdrawal from Africa in exchange for good relations with the new states there. In Tunisia, France has already withdrawn from all military installations except the base at Bizerte, which it maintains is essential for the defense of French interests in the Mediterranean. There have been intermittent negotiations on French property in Tunisia, but no settlement has yet been reached, although the French holdings there are smaller and less complex than those in Morocco.

Although French officials expect the King's government to be more tractable than that of former left-wing Premier Abdullah Ibrahim, the King will seek maximum French concessions in line with his proclaimed policies of obtaining commitments during 1960 for the evacuation of all foreign troops, Moroccanizing the administration and economy, and "regaining lost territories." The King will be especially wary of giving the nationalists a chance to charge him with having sold out to France. A French official in Rabat claims that the King asked that talks not proceed too rapidly "lest the opposition be encouraged to attack the results solely on the grounds of undue haste," and anticipates that several months will pass before results become apparent.

17 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
