Congo Policy of Probable New Belgian Government

The general opinion in the Belgian press is that the appointment of Theo Lefevre, president of the Social Christian (Catholic) party, to negotiate with leaders of the other parties means that a Social Christian - Socialist coalition is almost certain. The Socialist Party Bureau and Socialist leaders have urged the speedy formation of such a coalition. The Catholic party, however, is handicapped by the opposition of its right-wing elements, which were shocked by the violence of the recent Socialist-instigated general strike and are insisting on a guarantee of law and order as the price of an alliance with the Socialists. The Liberal party appears willing to enter into another coalition with the Social Christians, but its sabotage of numerous socio-economic issues in the last government have made the party unacceptable to left-wing Catholic labor elements.

Lefevre is faced with the possibility of a split in his party, no matter which partner he chooses. A tripartite coalition of all three parties does not appear a likely solution.

Many government leaders fear that advocacy of a bolder Congo policy would jeopardize the prospects for domestic reforms in which the electorate is primarily interested. Any government, therefore, will have to make a difficult decision with regard to how far it is willing to compromise on the Congo. The Social Christians lost heavily in the 19 March elections to small extremist parties largely on this issue, and they are less inclined than Spaak and the Socialists to meet the UN demands for further disengagement in the Congo. Reforms in this direction will be fought by powerful industrial interests like the Union Miniere, the right-wing press, and possibly the royal family, whose influence in Congo affairs has always been extensive. Moreover, many Belgians in the Congo will continue to act in a manner that will complicate the efforts of any government to reach a satisfactory solution.

Hammarskjold's personal representative has been having

10 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
