Situation in the Congo

Hammarskjold said that he is coming to the conclusion that Tshombé is "simply a criminal and outlaw," and that the element of force on Tshombé's side in diplomatic bargaining with the UN must be removed. Hammarskjold believes Tshombé's recent military moves in northern Katanga were made to undercut his rival, Jason Sendwe, and to increase his own prestige so that he could dominate a conference of Congolese leaders apparently to take place in late April in Katanga. The danger of spreading the civil war in Katanga arises from Sendwe's announcement in Leopoldville on 7 April proclaiming himself chief of the Luluaba state and calling on its people to resist Tshombé's invaders.

Kabalo was reported calm on 9 April, with UN troops holding the railway station and airport. However, there have been clashes between UN Ethiopian troops and Tshombé's forces which have resulted in casualties on both sides, and further violence could occur at any time.

Elsewhere in Katanga, Tshombé's government is removing restrictive measures against UN troops, but gradually so as not to lose face with the public. UN troops on 8 April had water and electricity in all installations, but food supplies were still low. The UN commander in southern Katanga stated on 8 April that continuation of the relatively relaxed attitude depends on events at Kabalo, reaction to the airlift of Indian troops to Kamina, and the ability of the Swedish and Irish UN forces to maintain order in Elisabethville.

As a result of last week's transfer of the Irish battalion to Elisabethville, according to Hammarskjold, the Indian contingent in Kamina is sufficient only to hold the airfield. The secretary general thinks the arrival of additional well-disciplined Indian troops in Kamina, where they would be less than an hour away from Elisabethville, would greatly strengthen his hand in dealing with Tshombé. The UN commander in Elisabethville has warned, however, that the appearance of

10 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
