[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

25 October 1957
Copy No. 138

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. USSR SUGGESTS THAT HAMMARSKJOLD ENTER SYRIAN SITUATION

3. TURKS REGARD DANGER IN SYRIAN CRISIS GREATER THAN EVER

6. FRENCH POLITICAL CRISIS

7. MILITARY JUNTA TAKES CONTROL IN GUATEMALA

8. SOVIET UNION REPORTEDLY RELUCTANT TO RESUME DISARMAMENT SUBCOMMITTEE TALKS

9. INDIAN CONGRESS PARTY AGAIN SUFFERS SERIOUS DEFEATS IN LOCAL ELECTIONS

10. UNREST IN SPAIN

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence Advisory Committee

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
2. USSR SUGGESTS THAT HAMMARSKJOLD ENTER
SYRIAN SITUATION

UN Under Secretary General Dobrynin,
a Soviet national, suggested to Secre-
tary General Hammarskjold on 23 Octo-
ber that as secretary general he might
take a hand in the Syrian situation.

Hammarskjold has
concluded that his involvement would
not be unpalatable to the Russians, but he told Dobrynin
that to become involved too early would be unfortunate.
Al-Hawrani, speaker of the Syrian Assembly, had said
the day before that a visit by Hammarskjold to Syria would
be welcome on the condition that he visit Turkey and Israel
as well.

The USSR's primary purpose in the cur-
rent session of the United Nations appears to be to inhibit
any Turkish or Western action against the pro-Soviet Syrian
regime. Presentation of the Syrian complaint to the General
Assembly on 16 October resulted from Soviet prodding at the
UN and in Damascus. Gromyko on the same day backed the
Syrian complaint with a letter to UN General Assembly Pres-
ident Munro urging the UN to assist Syria immediately with
armed forces in the event Turkey breaks the peace. His state-
ment to Munro that the USSR "is prepared to take part with its
forces in suppressing aggression and punishing the violators
of peace" is the only public commitment the USSR has made in
the Syrian crisis.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
3. TURKS REGARD DANGER IN SYRIAN CRISIS GREATER
THAN EVER

Turkish leaders assured Ambassador
Warren on 22 October that Turkey will
make no move "without closest consul-
tation with Washington." The Turks are
looking to the US in particular for leadership in handling
Syrian and Soviet charges in the UN. Ankara considers the
danger in Syria greater than ever and continues to maintain
a state of military readiness in the vicinity of the Syrian
border.

Prime Minister Menderes is aware of
the dilemma which the situation poses for the other Arab
states and has indicated a willingness to visit King Saud af-
ter the 27 October Turkish elections if he is invited

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
6. FRENCH POLITICAL CRISIS

Premier-designate Guy Mollet's chances
of winning French National Assembly ap-
proval early next week appear to depend
largely on his ability to neutralize the op-
position of the Independent and Peasant
party's rank and file who might reject
Pinay's agreement with Mollet to accept
Robert Schuman's financial and economic
report as the basis for future government
action. The Popular Republicans, whose support is essential,
have already decided to participate in a government headed by
Mollet.

If labor's response to the strikes scheduled
for 25 October is widespread and effective, it may induce most
conservative deputies to support Mollet in order to achieve at
least a temporary solution, although some of them may become
even more reluctant to accept a Socialist government. Mollet's
reported reiteration of willingness to negotiate a cease-fire
with the Algerian rebels may revive conservative fears of losing
Algeria. The assembly is also likely to be cool to Mollet's pro-
posed constitutional reforms which would limit its control over
the government.

Mollet's Algerian policy could provide an
opening for the Communists to offer their support as they did
at the start of his previous government, in hopes of furthering
their Popular Front campaign. Mollet is unlikely to accept an
investiture in which Communist votes would be the decisive fac-
tor.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
7. MILITARY JUNTA TAKES CONTROL IN GUATEMALA

Guatemala is likely to be ruled by
military government for some time,
following the coup of early 24 October
when a three-man military junta took
power. The coup, which followed two
days of rioting in the capital and in sev-
eral provincial towns over the disputed
20 October presidential election, re-
moves from power the followers of the late president Cas-
tillo Armas and has probably moved the country toward a
rightist dictatorship. The congress is likely to be dissolved,
and new elections, though promised, are probably distant.

The junta is composed of colonels who
have not been prominent in army or political affairs for sev-
eral years. Their selection is probably a compromise by
cliques of the faction-ridden army. The head of the junta is
the conservative-minded 40-year-old Colonel Oscar Mendoza,
former army chief of staff who lost the trust of Castillo Armas
and was demoted to under secretary of defense in early 1955.
Mendoza received military training in the United States and is
considered capable and pro-American. Other junta members
are Colonel Roberto Lorenzana, commander of an outlying
military district, and Colonel Gonzalo Yurrita Nova of the air
force.

Colonel Juan F. Oliva, former army strong
man and defense minister, apparently lost out by resisting what
seems to have been virtually solid army desire for a military
junta. With Oliva's moderate and unifying influence in the army
considerably weakened if not destroyed, the army will be even
more vulnerable to internal factionalism. It is strongly anti-
Communist, however, and will probably be able to suppress
any further agitation by leftists and Communists, who joined
in the violent demonstrations of 21 and 22 October.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]
8. SOVIET UNION REPORTEDLY RELUCTANT TO RESUME
DISARMAMENT SUBCOMMITTEE TALKS

A member of the Soviet UN delegation
recently told a Western delegate that the
USSR is reluctant to resume disarmament
negotiations until "at least a few months"
after the current General Assembly ses-
sion is over. He reportedly also implied that, if the disarma-
ment debates in the United Nations ended in a deadlock, the
Soviet government might favor "intervention" by UN Secretary
General Hammarskjold.

During the closing stages of the five-power
Disarmament Subcommittee talks in London last summer, the
Soviet representative appeared eager to transfer the discussions
to the General Assembly. Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko's
opening speech before the General Assembly on 20 September
also indicated a preference for an "atmosphere of wide publicity"
for further disarmament discussions, as opposed to the "seclud-
ed character" of the subcommittee.

Moscow obviously would like to keep the
disarmament question in open discussion before either the Gen-
eral Assembly or the Disarmament Commission, particularly
if the latter were expanded according to the Indian resolution,
for which the USSR has indicated support. It is unlikely, how-
ever, that the Soviet Union would refuse to resume negotiations
if the General Assembly again referred the problem to the
Disarmament Subcommittee.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11
[PAGE 13]
9. INDIAN CONGRESS PARTY AGAIN SUFFERS SERIOUS
DEFEATS IN LOCAL ELECTIONS

The provincial organizations of Nehru's
Congress party, on whose rejuvenation
the future political complexion of India
depends, apparently have as yet made no
progress in overcoming serious weak-
nesses uncovered in the national elections seven months ago.
In statewide municipal elections on 16 and 18 October in Uttar
Pradesh State in North India, the Congress party's most im-
portant stronghold, preliminary returns show the Congress
suffered crushing defeats exceeding the 25-percent losses it
experienced in the national elections last March. Socialists
and independents, many of them former Congress party mem-
bers, made the greatest gains. The Communists maintained
their former strength. Factionalism, lack of discipline, and
loss of morale, evident in the Congress party throughout India,
apparently were largely responsible for its losses.

The Congress party high command is deeply
worried over its loss of popular support and has drawn up de-
tailed plans for regaining contact with the people. Provincial
party leaders, however, seem still unaware that they may
eventually be ousted from office. Opposition groups, on the
other hand, are becoming increasingly conscious that the
once-monolithic Congress party is now susceptible to defeat.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
[PAGE 14]
10. UNREST IN SPAIN

Popular dissatisfaction in Spain is wide-
spread as the result of a cost-of-living
increase amounting to about 20 percent
since last November. Strikes and stu-
dent disturbances are possible this fall.

Industrialists in Barcelona now are dis-
posed to collaborate with anti-Franco elements who plan to
organize student disturbances at Barcelona University about
1 November. Barcelona textile manufacturers apparently
disillusioned with the government's failure to check inflation,
and to make good its February promise to grant them a meas-
ure of regional autonomy in economic matters. Their finan-
cial support could provide the means for opposition elements
to develop some organized effort toward an effective policy.

Conservative groups are apprehensive
over the failure of Franco, now 64, to provide for a succes-
sor. Franco may decide to reshuffle the cabinet again to keep
his supporters unsure of their positions. The government can
at present, suppress any challenge to its authority.

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 13
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
ANNEX

Watch Report 376, 24 October 1957
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the
Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostil-
ities against the continental US or its possessions in
the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities
against US forces abroad, US allies or areas peripheral
to the orbit in the immediate future. Although Soviet
statements have strongly implied that the USSR might in-
tervene with its own forces in the event of a Turkish at-
tack on Syria, available evidence indicates that the USSR
had not yet made military preparations on the scale which
would be anticipated for dealing with the broader contin-
gencies resulting therefrom.*

25 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 15
[PAGE 17]
