[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

28 April 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. COMMENT ON LATEST SOVIET DISARMAMENT PROPOSAL (page 3).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]2. DEVELOPMENTS IN JORDAN[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]3. HONDURAN-NICARAGUAN BORDER DISPUTE ERUPTS AGAIN[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 7).
[PAGE 04]
1. COMMENT ON LATEST SOVIET DISARMAMENT PROPOSAL

The USSR's latest disarmament proposal, presented in a bilateral discussion with the US on 26 April in London appears, according to the preliminary impression of the US delegate, to be "the beginning of hard, difficult negotiating in a genuine attempt to put together a limited partial agreement." As such it may be a Soviet effort to force negotiations to a higher level with the addition to the agenda of such other subjects as European security and the Middle East.

The Soviet proposal for a partial disarmament agreement is less conciliatory than the Western delegates had expected, than Soviet delegate Zorin had hinted before his recent trip to Moscow, and than Soviet propaganda had suggested. In general the USSR proposes more disarmament and less inspection and control than the Western powers have indicated would be acceptable.

Zorin explained to the US delegate that cessation or suspension of nuclear tests and a pledge not to use atomic and hydrogen weapons of any type is prerequisite to any partial disarmament agreement. Implicit in the wording of a declaration proposed by the USSR is the intention of all signatories eventually to eliminate all such weapons from their arsenals.

With regard to conventional weapons, the USSR proposes a 15-percent reduction in armaments and defense budgets instead of the US proposal of 10 percent, and a commitment to proceed from Western force level proposals of 2,500,000 for the US, USSR and China and 750,000 for the UK and France to a second stage of 1,500,000 and 650,000. Claiming "that Soviet forces have been reduced by 1,840,000 in the past year and a half," the Soviet proposal contrasts the geographical size of the US and the USSR and their length of borders, and concludes that the USSR "is therefore unable to agree to an equal level of forces if there is no substantial reduction."

On inspection and control of the proposed disarmament measures, Moscow's proposal appears to regress. The inspection functions would be handled "within the framework"
[PAGE 05]
of the Security Council, with its built-in great-power veto, and during the first stage would include only "receiving and examining" the information provided by those states disarming. Moreover, during this stage, control posts at key points would not include airports and would be limited to the western border regions of the USSR, the territories of France and Great Britain and other members of NATO and the Warsaw treaty as well as "the eastern part of the US." Inclusion of airports as key control points would come with reduction to 1,500,000 in the armed forces but must also "be related to the complete prohibition of atomic and hydrogen weapons and their elimination from national armaments."

Responding to the US proposal for aerial inspection and photography, the USSR modifies the zones suggested by the US both in Europe and the Far East. In Europe, the Soviet proposal includes a much smaller section of Soviet territory than the US had proposed. In the Far East, the Soviet proposal substantially expands the area suggested by the US so as to include approximately equal areas of each country, including better than two thirds of the continental United States.

SOVIET AND US AERIAL INSPECTION PROPOSALS
[PAGE 06]
2. DEVELOPMENTS IN JORDAN

Comment on:

No significant demonstrations occurred in Jordan over the week end, and the curfew restrictions have been eased slightly. King Hussain, accompanied by Foreign Minister Rifai, left Amman on 28 April to visit Saudi Arabia in an attempt to counter any doubt that may have been planted in King Saud's mind by Syrian president Quwatli and the Egyptian officials who talked to Saud on 25-26 April. Hussain's specific object is to convince Saud of the reality of Egyptian and Syrian participation in the plots against the Jordanian crown.

A banal communique from Damascus following Quwatli's return there suggests that the Syrian-Egyptian mission did not make much headway with King Saud. The communique states merely that Syria, Egypt and Saudi Arabia will "continue to be in constant contact in order to watch events in Jordan" and to take "sound steps." During his stay in Cairo before seeing Saud, Quwatli reportedly expressed fear that if Hussain wins out in Jordan the present Syrian government will collapse "even without US interference." Egyptian president Nasr attempted to calm Quwatli, but the news of the sailing of the United States Sixth Fleet aggravated the Syrian president's nervousness.

As of 28 April, King Hussain had not yet requested the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Jordan, although consideration had been given to such action. Hussain and his advisers believe that the Syrian cabinet has a withdrawal under review
[PAGE 07]
and that it would be preferable to have the move made on Syria's initiative if action is taken within a reasonable time.

Internally, Hussain has moved in several ways to strengthen his position. A decree proroguing the lower house of the Jordanian parliament was issued on 28 April, possibly as a first step toward eventual new elections. An investigation reportedly is under way of the activities of the dissolved political parties. The search for unapprehended political leaders continues; ex-prime minister Nabulsi is said to be staying inside his house, and the government has so far been unwilling to send police inside after him. The king is also continuing to try to rally personally the support of army officers.
[PAGE 08]
3. HONDURAN-NICARAGUAN BORDER DISPUTE ERUPTS AGAIN

Comment on:

Renewal of the border dispute between Honduras and Nicaragua, a volatile issue in both countries, has seriously exacerbated relations between the two governments. Honduras was reported moving troops to the border on 27 April after Nicaragua rejected its energetic note protesting alleged depredations by Nicaraguan troops in the disputed area. The Honduran ambassador in Nicaragua has been recalled "for consultation."

The Honduran military junta is apparently being pressured into strong action by the strength of military and popular feeling on this issue and by the plotting of a military clique which may be attempting to oust moderate junta member Roberto Galvez. This clique may have incited the mob of youths which invaded the Nicaraguan embassy in Honduras on 27 April.

Nicaragua, in the midst of preparations for the 1 May presidential inauguration, fears that Honduran moves may be co-ordinated with revolutionary plans of Nicaraguan exiles in Honduras.

many members of the opposition in Nicaragua believe that exiles are plotting an assassination attempt during the inaugural ceremonies.
