[PAGE 01]
30 January 1958

Copy No. 137

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
30 JANUARY 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet bloc supplying Indonesia with 30 MIG-17's and possibly army equipment.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Nasir may postpone announcement of Egyptian-Syrian union.
Syrian Communist leader Bakdash remains suspicious of Egyptian-Syrian union proposal.
Indonesia - Communists call for suppression of Sumatran dissident movement.
Yemen - Britain and US blamed in coup attempt against Imam.
Breakdown in functioning of Cyprus police force poses new problem for Britain.

III. THE WEST
Guatemala - Agreement between presidential aspirants Ydigoras and Cruz Salazar reduces danger of violence.
French-German-Italian defense ministers did discuss cooperation on nuclear weapons at Bonn meeting.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
DAILY BRIEF
30 January 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bloc arms for Indonesia: The Indonesian military mission seeking arms in Europe purchased 30 MIG-17's during its recent visit to Prague, and may have contracted for army equipment as well. Arrangements are being made with Egypt for the training of Indonesian pilots and technicians. In Indonesia a Soviet vessel has delivered more jeeps along with spare parts and elements of a mobile repair shop.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Egyptian-Syrian union: Nasir may be considering postponement of the announcement of Egyptian-Syrian union, but Syrian President Quwatli is still scheduled to arrive in Cairo on 1 February. Nasir is troubled by indications that the Soviet Union opposes the move, and he has second thoughts on the union's proposed parliamentary structure.

Syria: Syrian Communist Party leader Bakdash has clearly implied in a public statement that his party will not be dissolved voluntarily despite the fact that dissolution of all Syrian political parties is one of the conditions Nasir has set for Egyptian agreement to union with Syria. The Egyptian military attache in Damascus has sought to overcome Bakdash's suspicion of the union proposals with

[PAGE 05]
the argument that union would strengthen Egypt's and Syria's ability to work against "the machinations of the imperialists."

Indonesia: The Indonesian Communist party continues its attempts to equate patriotism with support of the Djuanda government. It is simultaneously urging the intensification of the drive for West Irian and calling for the forcible suppression of the dissident movement based on Sumatra. Surreptitiously the party is moving to consolidate and extend its recent gains, particularly through a scheme of enhancing its role in the management of property seized from the Dutch. (Page 1)

Yemen: The Yemeni Government has apparently thwarted a coup attempted against the Imam on 22 January. Widespread arrests have followed, accompanied by bazaar rumors that the revolt was sponsored by the British and Americans. The British charge in Yemen and a visiting American official are under close surveillance, while Soviet officials are permitted to move freely. Yemen has requested that the British minister be recalled. (Page 2)

Cyprus: The recent disorders involving the Turkish minority resulted temporarily in a breakdown in the functioning of the local police force, 80 percent of which is Turkish Cypriot. This poses Britain with a new dilemma in terms of its relations with the Turks, and may force it to rely increasingly on the 23,000 British troops on the island for routine police activity.

III. THE WEST

Guatemala: The 27 January agreement between General Ydigoras and Cruz Salazar has reduced but not eliminated the danger of postelection violence. If disturbances do occur, Provisional President Flores may continue in office to maintain order. (page 3)

30 Jan 58 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
French-German-Italian talks on nuclear weapons:

Despite previous official denials from Paris and Bonn, it is clear that the French, West German, and Italian defense ministers did discuss cooperation on nuclear weapons production at their 21 January meeting. While the French Foreign Ministry maintains that France has nothing to gain now by sharing its relatively advanced nuclear program, there are numerous indications that an agreement on such cooperation has already been reached between France and West Germany and possibly Italy. (Page 4)

30 Jan 58 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

No back-up material.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Communist Party Tactics in Indonesia

Indonesian Communist party propaganda is trying to make the preservation of the Djuanda cabinet a question of "patriotism", and is increasingly contrasting Communist "concern" for national unity with alleged efforts on Sumatra to create a separate state. The Communist press claims Sumatran preparations have reached an advanced stage but can succeed only with US and other "imperialist" support. The party suggests that the army can and should crush any separate regime in Sumatra.

The Communists are urging continued pressure in the drive for West Irian (Netherlands New Guinea) and party participation in all Indonesian "assistance teams" which are overseeing seized Dutch enterprises. Party directives to subordinate Communist officials call for intensified activity within the assistance teams to ensure Communist control of them within six months.

When President Sukarno returns from his rest in Japan in late February, the Communist party can be expected to urge him to resist pressure for moderation on the issues of West Irian and Indonesian national unity. If it is successful, an early Communist effort to seize control of the Indonesian Government is unlikely.

30 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Conspiracy in Yemen Being Exploited Against Western Interests

Fragmentary reports indicate that the Yemeni Government thwarted a coup attempted against the Imam on 22 January, when 30 northern tribesmen attempted to enter the Imam's palace at Taiz. The rebels were said to be supported by a group of Yemeni patricians and merchants and two local governors, all of whom oppose the claim to succession by the Imam's son, Crown Prince Badr. Widespread arrests have taken place, accompanied by a wave of terror.

Bazaar rumors that the plotters were backed by the British and the United States may indicate that the Yemeni Government is trying to exploit the incident to further reduce western influence in Yemen. The British charge in Yemen and the visiting American consul from Aden are under close surveillance, while Soviet bloc officials are permitted to move freely. Yemen has officially requested the recall of the British charge, but London is attempting to stall his departure. The probable result of these developments will be to strengthen Soviet-Egyptian influence in Yemen; it is also possible that Yemen may use them as an excuse for not permitting establishment of a resident American diplomatic mission at this time.

Widespread opposition to the Imam and his son flared into open rebellion in eastern Yemen last October, which the Yemenis claim was instigated by the British. Renewed Yemeni hostility to the British has also been evident in more serious clashes along the Aden Protectorate frontier and in spreading subversion within the Protectorate.

30 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Threat of Violence Reduced in Guatemala

The danger of violence in Guatemala over the still undecided 19 January presidential election has diminished but not disappeared as a result of the agreement reached on 27 January between General Ydigoras, who won a clear plurality, and followers of Cruz Salazar, the apparent runner-up. Cruz followers are to concede Ydigoras the presidency, and Ydigoras has promised to accept his erstwhile opponents in an anti-Communist coalition and to give them three cabinet posts.

Pro-Cruz parties control the congress, which began its review of the votes on 27 January and which, since no one won a majority, will be responsible for choosing between the two highest candidates. Congressional leaders expect the process to take at least ten days.

The residue of bitterness between Ydigoras and Cruz partisans is still strong, however, and interim President Flores may use any resulting violence as a pretext to remain in office. There is some suspicion that he may even be spreading the current rumors of impending disturbances along the Mexican and Salvadoran borders in an attempt to accomplish this end. On 28 January, he called military reservists to active duty to prepare for "any eventuality."

30 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 10]
French-German-Italian Talks on Nuclear
Cooperation Now Admitted

Despite previous official denials from Paris and Bonn, it is now clear that cooperation in the production of nuclear weapons was discussed at the 21 January meeting of French, West German, and Italian defense ministers. Italian Defense Minister Taviani has so informed an American official, and a French Foreign Ministry spokesman did not deny that it had been discussed, although he emphasized that no agreement was reached.

The French official insisted France is too far advanced in its own nuclear program to be willing to share with Germany and Italy at this time. There are, nevertheless, numerous indications that plans for such cooperation have already been developed between France and West Germany, and possibly Italy. There is also considerable evidence that France has recently taken the lead in urging such an agreement.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman had admitted that his ministry is not well informed about recent developments in the nuclear cooperation program, which is apparently being handled by a small inner group of the French cabinet--Premier Gaillard, Defense Minister Chaban-Delmas, and Secretary of State for European Affairs Maurice Faure.

30 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 11]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 January 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bloc arms for Indonesia: The Indonesian military mission seeking arms in Europe purchased 30 MIG-17's during its recent visit to Prague, and may have contracted for army equipment as well. Arrangements are being made with Egypt for the training of Indonesian pilots and technicians. In Indonesia, a Soviet vessel has delivered more jeeps along with spare parts and elements of a mobile repair shop.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Egyptian-Syrian union: Nasir may be considering postponement of the announcement of Egyptian-Syrian union, but Syrian President Quwatli is still scheduled to arrive in Cairo on 1 February. Nasir is troubled by indications that the Soviet Union opposes the move, and he has second thoughts on the union's proposed parliamentary structure.

Syria: Syrian Communist Party leader Bakdash has clearly implied in a public statement that his party will not be dissolved voluntarily despite the fact that dissolution of all Syrian political parties is one of the conditions Nasir has set for Egyptian agreement to union with Syria. The Egyptian military attache in Damascus has sought to overcome Bakdash's suspicion of the union proposals with the argument that union would strengthen Egypt's and Syria's ability to work against "the machinations of the imperialists."
