Comment: A report in late February, stated that President Rhee had selected William Glenn as the American adviser to the South Korean delegation. These are the only two reports noted to date that South Korea is making plans to attend.

In view of Rhee's fear that Korea will be abandoned at Geneva, and his sensitivity over foreign "interference" with Korean affairs, South Korea will probably send a delegation regardless of the outcome of the current negotiations with the United States.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Vietnam reported demanding representation at Geneva:

Vietnamese premier Buu Loc, now in Paris, has insisted that the Associated States be represented "as interested parties" at the Geneva conference.

Meanwhile, current French-Vietnamese negotiations in Paris are stalled over Buu Loc's demand for a French declaration of Vietnam's independence, to precede a Vietnamese declaration of adherence to the French Union. French foreign minister Bidault wants both declarations issued simultaneously.

Comment: Pending the outcome of the Paris negotiations, Vietnam has taken no public position on attending the conference. French Foreign Ministry spokesmen oppose having the Associated States at Geneva since their attendance would provide the Communists with a justification for inviting the Viet Minh.

4. Vietnamese official wants US to back no-surrender policy:

Governor Tri of Tonkin told the American consul in Hanoi that most persons with whom he is in contact share his "profound discouragement" with the turn which French-Vietnamese discussions in Paris are taking.

Tri said that without a French affirmation of real Vietnamese independence, the Buu Loc government will be unable to take a firm stand against surrender to the Viet Minh--whether open or disguised. He added that United States support was essential to prevent any sellout at Geneva, or elsewhere.

Comment: In insisting on independence and American, as distinct from French, backing against the Viet Minh, Tri is expressing views long held by most non-Communist Vietnamese.

5. Burmese Communists and Karens planning high-level conference:

Comment: The Karens in eastern Burma, the country's largest insurgent group, have repeatedly rebuffed Communist efforts to promote an alliance. They appear to have changed their attitude because of military pressure from government forces and the evacuation of Chinese Nationalist troops, with whom they had maintained a working relationship.

6. Communists may have ordered surrender of Indonesian insurgents:

The American embassy in Djakarta reports that 164 members of the "Bamboo Spears," a Communist-oriented guerrilla force and the second-largest insurgent group in West Java, surrendered on 17 March. The Indonesian army commander in the area said this was the largest surrender to date and that the strength of the "Bamboo Spears" has been reduced by 80 percent as a result of this and other surrenders.
