New Regime in Turkey

The new government in Turkey, on the basis of additional evidence, is broadening the investigation into illegal activities and alleged crimes of the Menderes regime. A spokesman for the National Unity Committee, which appears to be emerging as the real power in Turkey has reported discovery of the bodies of students killed by police during the demonstrations; of plans for a violent purge of leaders of the Republican People's party, professors, and some army officers; and of large quantities of illegal arms. Arrests have been stepped up and now include about 400 Democratic party deputies, but an initial screening is apparently already under way to determine who can be released immediately. The remainder will be held for trial before civilian courts or, if military personnel, before courts martial. In the light of the alleged murders, extreme penalties probably will be demanded for some of those tried.

The initial report of the committee working on a new constitution appears to be an attempt at legal justification of the coup. The report claims that the former government "had ceased to be a social and national institution and turned into a tool of personal influence and ambition." Although the Democratic party will probably be allowed to participate in the planned election, it will probably be ineffective as a political force.

It is still too early to determine the true power relationships of the interim government. Even the size of the National Unity Committee (NUC) has not been made public. The new minister of foreign affairs recently told the British ambassador in Ankara that the NUC might evolve into something in the nature of a constituent assembly.

The new government, as was the Menderes regime, is apparently concerned over the possibility of disturbances in the Kurdish areas of southeastern Turkey and may be sending troop reinforcements to that area.
Gendarmerie units in southern Turkey have been alerted to disarm the Kurds and make arrests where necessary to forestall "further adverse activities."

4 June 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
