III. THE WEST

West German elections: Election on 1 July of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) presidential candidate, Heinrich Luebke, is in doubt. The government's coalition partner, the German Party, has refused to pledge its 24 key votes to any candidate, and some CDU delegates may be influenced by the Adenauer-Erhard row to vote for the Free Democratic party's nominee, Max Becker, a relatively unknown conservative. The Social Democrats are reported to be considering switching to Becker on the second or third ballot if their support will ensure his election. The decision to count Berlin votes puts the CDU three votes short of a majority, and fear of East German harassments may increase absences, which could also adversely affect Luebke's chances.

Soviet diplomatic notes, Soviet and East German propaganda, and statements by East German leaders and officials do not suggest there are any bloc plans to prevent or seriously interfere with the holding of the election in West Berlin. Minor harassments, such as delaying the electors at checkpoints on their way to Berlin, are still a possibility.
(Page 3)

Greece: The government is concerned over the favorable public attitude in Greece shown toward the Soviet proposal of 25 June that a conference should be held to consider the creation of an atom-free zone in the Balkans and the Adriatic area. Foreign Minister Averoff says the government will therefore avoid a direct and immediate answer to the note, and hopes the West meanwhile will agree on a unified, forceful reply. The American Embassy comments that the public attitude toward Moscow's proposal, together with an undercurrent of uneasiness over establishment of advanced weapons bases in Greece, probably accounts for reports that Prime Minister Karamanlis is still undecided on the base question.

Bolivia: Anti-government violence which broke out on 26 June in the eastern provincial city of Santa Cruz, stronghold of right-wing and regional opposition elements, has been contained by sizable troop reinforcements rushed to the area.
