Support of Peiping Places Indonesian Communists
In Awkward Position

Divergence between Indonesian Government policies and Indonesian Communist party interests has placed the party in an increasingly embarrassing position as the party persists in supporting Peiping on major current issues. The Communists are the only significant political element in Indonesia to oppose the government's ban on alien retailers in rural areas, and their approval of a parliamentary recommendation for the speedy convening of a second Asian-African conference to discuss disputes in the area came only after considerable objection. In addition, the Communists obstructed a parliamentary resolution calling for the peaceful settlement of the Chinese-Indian border problem, finally approving it only with the assertion that Peiping was in no way at fault.

Communist opposition to the ban on alien retailers has been vigorous and persistent, culminating on 22 November in a special politburo statement which denounced the ban as "reckless and chauvinistic" and a means of undermining Sino-Indonesian friendship. The Indonesian Department of Foreign Affairs replied on 25 November that the government's decree will be implemented despite Communist party objections and that "it is a secondary question whether the government is assisted in this task by any party or not."

Communist party Secretary General Aidit, commenting on the suggested Asian-African conference, stated on 25 November that such a conference should not be held at this time since "many contradictions now exist among the Asian-African countries." He said currently strained relations should be settled bilaterally.

The principal significance of the Indonesian Communist party's current role is its possible effect on President Sukarno. Sukarno, although aware of the Communist threat to his own position, has been reluctant to challenge the party openly or to regard it as instructed by Moscow and Peiping. He has given his full support to the ban against Chinese retailers but is not known to have commented on Communist party opposition.

1 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
