French opposition to certain US programs in Indochina and plainly implied that the French suspect the US of intending to supercede France in Indochina. While emphasizing French gratitude for US military aid, this official strongly criticized the ECA program and particularly ECA publicity, which he felt depreciated French contributions to Indochina. He also inveighed against the US information and educational program, describing its publicity as impractical and incomprehensible "unless America expects Vietnam not to remain within the French Union." He stated that many of his associates could see no reason for the large number of Americans in Indochina except as a cover for an espionage organization or as a base for developing Indochina into a US zone of influence at the expense of the French.

US Minister Heath in Saigon comments that these "essentially groundless and unreasonable complaints" represent the attitude and opinions of the majority of French civil officials and very probably those of General de Lattre himself. He adds, however, that because US concern in Indochina is primarily with the country's defense and because that defense is borne solely by the French, concessions should be made to French sensitivities. Otherwise, he states, US-French-Vietnamese relations in Indochina will become harmfully embroiled.

4. Anti-bandit campaign in Malaya makes slight progress. 3.3(h)(2)

Disagreement exists in Singapore over the High Commissioner's recent report claiming that the anti-bandit campaign in Malaya is reaching a "turning point." The favorable comparison that the report draws between the periods from December through February and March through May is based on increased surrenders, on the greater number of bandits killed and on improved intelligence.

The British Defense Coordination Committee for the Far East asserts, however, that there is little ground for the report's optimistic conclusion, and points out that the total number of bandits continues to be between 3,500 and 5,000. The Committee believes that the statistics on bandit surrenders and casualties are misleading and that intelligence has improved only by virtue of the fact that it was previously non-existent.
