Khrushchev Criticizes the USSR Ministry of Agriculture

Khrushchev, referring to agricultural problems during a speech on 11 May in Kiev, charged that the Ministry of Agriculture and its local organs had failed in many ways to meet present day needs. Khrushchev said that the ministry staff must become organizers of production and suggested that the salaries of such officials be according to results obtained at the farms they supervise. He also declared that the time had come to reorganize agricultural research work completely, suggesting that this and other services of the ministry be put on a "commercial basis."

Khrushchev's speech is the latest in a series of recent criticisms directed at the ministry. The Soviet press has carried several articles discussing the advantage of relieving the ministry of its jurisdiction over forestry and the Repair and Technical Stations (RTS), and of reducing its role in administering state farms. "Kolkhoz Unions" have been suggested to replace the ministry in administering collective farms and to become the main organizational link in agriculture, possibly up through the republic level. In the field of scientific technology, the ministry has been scored for failing to encourage initiative on the part of agricultural innovators.

Recent organizational and personnel changes, which also may point the way to extensive agricultural reorganization, were the consolidation of the Agricultural Bank into the new Investment Bank announced on 4 March, the appointment on 16 April of Nikolay G. Ignatov to the post of titular president of the RSFSR, which relieved him of his responsibilities in the agriculture field, and the replacement of Vladimir Mylarshchikov as head of the party central committee's Department of Agriculture for the RSFSR.

It appears probable that the Third All-union Collective Farmers' Congress, originally scheduled for the "beginning of 1959," has been postponed to give the regime more time to resolve questions of agricultural reorganization.
