[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 January 1960
Copy No. C 67

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 JANUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev may use Supreme Soviet session beginning 14 January for major statement on disarmament and conventional armed forces.

Yugoslav politburo member's visit to Moscow is first visit to USSR by high Yugoslav official since 1957; talks may improve relations, although no basic ideological differences are likely to be solved.

New Soviet ambassador to Guinea is Middle East specialist and former ambassador to Cairo.

Chinese Communists try conciliatory approach in Djakarta; may hope to "patch things up" with Indonesia before Khrushchev's visit there next month.

II. ASIA - AFRICA

Question of relations with Peiping expected to become major issue in Japanese politics.

Afghan foreign minister to visit Pakistan next week despite previously reported decision to cancel trip.

Laos--Proposed cabinet includes CDNI members and old-guard politicians; army may object to inclusion of only one general.

Iranian and Iraqi foreign ministers may meet on Shatt al Arab dispute; danger of military involvement now appears remote.

Libyan officials beginning to press Western oil companies for larger revenues.

III. THE WEST

British propose early conference on Cyprus base question in effort to clear way for Cypriot independence on 19 February as scheduled.

Cuba attempting to arrange conference of neutralist, underdeveloped countries for Havana in mid-1960.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Khrushchev may use the Supreme Soviet session beginning on 14 January as an occasion to elaborate on his New Year's Eve hints that if disarmament negotiations do not yield results, the USSR might cut its conventional forces and rely on missiles for defense. The Iranian ambassador in Moscow has gained the impression during recent conversations with top Soviet officials, including Khrushchev, that the USSR is considering some dramatic gesture prior to the summit meeting; the ambassador speculates that this may take the form of a unilateral reduction in conventional forces. The British ambassador also feels that a formal announcement of troop cuts is possible, but doubts that any troop withdrawals from Hungary or East Germany are likely. (Page 1)

Yugoslavia - Soviet Bloc: Yugoslav politburo member and trade union leader Svetozar Vukmanovic-Tempo, during his current visit to Moscow at the invitation of the Soviet Trade Union Council, probably will discuss outstanding irritants in Belgrade's state relations with the Soviet bloc. This visit, the first trip to the USSR by a high Yugoslav official since November 1957, is the latest, and most important in a series of discussions at various levels in Belgrade and Moscow which started last fall. The USSR, in response to probing by Tempo, probably will suggest steps aimed at settling certain outstanding questions with Belgrade in an effort to gain greater Yugoslav support for Soviet foreign policy aims.

[PAGE 05]
Although no basic ideological differences are likely to be resolved, Khrushchev's increasing willingness to pursue policies with which the Chinese Communists are in disagreement--the Chinese were in part responsible for the worsening of Soviet-Yugoslav relations in 1958--has made it possible for him to move toward more cordial governmental relations with Belgrade in the last six months. (Page 3)

USSR-Guinea: The appointment of a leading specialist on the Middle East, D. S. Solod, as the new Soviet ambassador to Guinea reflects the importance the USSR attaches to the bloc's extensive ties with Guinea as a model for other new African states. Solod, who has most recently served as deputy chief of the Near East desk of the Soviet Foreign Ministry and was previously ambassador to Cairo replaces P. I. Gerasimov whose transfer is reportedly due to poor health. (Page 5)

Communist China-Indonesia: The Chinese Communists apparently have decided to try a conciliatory approach toward Indonesia, probably calculating that a continuation of their obviously unsuccessful tough tactics would permanently impair relations with Djakarta. Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio states that the Chinese ambassador appealed to him on 31 December to start the new year with a fresh page and to "let bygones be bygones."

Subandrio believes that Peiping is anxious to "patch things up" with Djakarta before Khrushchev's visit to Indonesia, which now is set for 18 February to 2 March. Indonesia may agree to lift its restrictions on Chinese Communist Embassy personnel, as requested by the Chinese ambassador, but is proceeding to implement its ban against alien traders in rural areas. (Page 9)

7 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: Sino-Japanese relations probably will become a major issue in Japanese politics as Prime Minister Kishi's rivals intensify their efforts to replace him in the top government post. Several aspirants for the premiership have recently emphasized the question of relations with Peiping in calls for Kishi's resignation after the US-Japanese Security Treaty is ratified. (Page 6)

Afghanistan-Pakistan: Afghan Foreign Minister Naim has reconsidered his decision to cancel his visit to Pakistan. Despite the presently strained relations between the two countries, Naim, according to the Pakistani ambassador in Kabul, stated on 4 January that he will visit Pakistan for two to four days, beginning 10 January. Naim's primary objective probably will be to secure recognition of Kabul's interest in the fate of the Pushtoon tribes living in Pakistan. If Ayub makes a favorable impression on Naim, Afghan leaders, who in the past have responded to the force of personalities, may moderate their propaganda attacks on Pakistan. (Page 7)

Watch Committee Conclusions: The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future:

In Iraq, the influence of the Communists continues to disturb Nationalist elements, and a desperate attempt to assassinate Qasim could occur at any time.

In Laos, the militantly anti-Communist young reformists (CDNI) have gained the ascendancy through the resignation of the Phoui government and temporary assumption of control by the army. Despite the fact that the CDNI disclaims any intention to make radical changes in policy, a harder line toward the Communists is possible. This may in turn stimulate Communists both at home and abroad to take countermeasures, perhaps including intensified guerrilla activity.

7 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
Laos: The King has named Nhouy Abhay, an elderly politician who has been in eclipse for the past few years, to form a provisional government. Nhouy has presented the King with a cabinet list including some members of the CDNI, old-guard politicians, and independents. The army may object to this proposal as it includes only one of the five generals who have been in control of the government since the resignation of the Phoui cabinet. (Page 8)

Iran-Iraq: Direct talks between the foreign ministers of Iran and Iraq may be held shortly on the Shatt al Arab controversy. If direct talks fail--and there still appears to be little willingness to compromise--the issue may well be referred to the UN or the International Court. Accordingly, the danger of any Iranian-Iraqi military involvement now appears remote.

Libya: Demands for more revenues for Libya from its oil resources seem likely to become a major theme in the current political campaigning for the 17 January elections to the Libyan House of Deputies. As more and more successful oil wells have been brought in--16 of those drilled to date are of commercial importance and three of them compare favorably with the best in the Middle East--Libyan officials have already begun to press the Western oil companies for larger and quicker revenues than provided for in the national petroleum law. (Page 8)

III. THE WEST

Britain-Cyprus: Britain's invitation to Greek, Turkish, and Cypriot leaders to a conference in London beginning 15 January on the still unresolved issue of the size of British bases represents a last-ditch effort to achieve independence for Cyprus on 19 February as scheduled. Quick agreement is required to allow time to pass the enabling legislation through the British Parliament, which reconvenes on

7 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 08]
January. The parties are also not yet agreed on arrangements for British training facilities outside the base areas.

Cuba: The Castro government is making a strong effort to assume a position of leadership among neutralist, underdeveloped countries by promoting a conference of such nations in Havana in mid-1960. Four teams of Cuban economists and diplomats, one led by Foreign Minister Raul Roa, are visiting "underindustrialized" Mediterranean, Asian, African, and Latin American countries this month to discuss a proposed agenda. (Page 9)

7 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF v

[PAGE 09]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev May Elaborate on Soviet Troop Reductions

Khrushchev may use the Supreme Soviet session begin-
ning on 14 January as an occasion to elaborate on his re-
marks regarding the possibility of cuts in Soviet troop strength.
The Swedish ambassador in Moscow has learned from a Soviet
source that a major foreign policy statement will be made
during the meeting, and the Iranian ambassador has gained
the impression from conversations with Soviet officials--including
Khrushchev--that some dramatic gesture is being consid-
ered prior to the summit. Both the Iranian and British ambas-
sadors feel that a formal announcement of a reduction in the So-
viet armed forces is one of the more probable forms for such a
gesture, although the British ambassador doubts that there
will be any reduction in Hungary or East Germany.

At a Kremlin reception on New Year's Eve, Khrushchev
speculated on the possibility of a further unilateral reduction
in Soviet forces. He posed the question whether the Soviet
Union should not proceed unilaterally if the cold war forces
seek "to drag us into the labyrinths of endless disputation,"
and he concluded that it might be "worthwhile" to reduce con-
ventional forces and rely on rockets for defense. Since Au-
gust 1955 the USSR has announced three troop reductions
totaling 2,140,000 men. A formal announcement of further
cuts would strengthen Moscow's position in pressing its pro-
posal for universal disarmament, which Khrushchev appar-
ently intends to make the central theme of the Soviet line
prior to the East-West meeting. Any reduction of Soviet
forces would be beneficial from the economic standpoint, as
fewer males are reaching working and conscription age and
economic plans require more manpower than is provided by
the natural population increase.

The general trend of Soviet military thinking has been
toward greater reliance on missiles and nuclear weapons in

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 10]
defense planning. This was most recently reflected in
Khrushchev's remarks to the Austrians in October that he
had asked his military advisers for an estimate of the cost
of shifting the Soviet military system from conventional
armaments to missiles. He added that their estimate of
30 billion rubles would be cheaper than the cost of a system
based on conventional weapons.

Khrushchev's remarks on reliance on missiles may also
have been intended to underscore the USSR's achievements in
modern weapons development. His statements were preceded
by glowing references to advances in Soviet rocketry during
1959.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 11]
Yugoslavia to Discuss Differences With the USSR

Yugoslav politburo member and trade union leader
Svetozar Vukmanovic-Tempo left Belgrade on 6 January
with his family, ostensibly to take a vacation in the USSR
at the invitation of the Soviet trade union organization.
However, since Tempo has previously been used by the
regime as a trouble shooter, it is likely that he will dis-
cuss outstanding irritants in the state relations between
Yugoslavia and the Soviet bloc.

This trip marks the first visit to the USSR by a high
Yugoslav official since party secretaries Rankovic and
Kardelj attended the USSR's 40th anniversary celebration
in November 1957. It was preceded by a series of talks
in Moscow between the Yugoslav ambassador and Soviet
officials, including Khrushchev, and in Belgrade between
the Soviet ambassador and Tito.

Since Khrushchev's visit to Albania late last spring,
the USSR has been gradually moving to improve govern-
ment relations with the Yugoslavs--relations which have
been bad since the spring of 1958. At that time the USSR,
apparently in an effort to maintain bloc unity, allowed the
Chinese Communists to take the lead in denouncing the
Yugoslavs and probably was taken further in that direc-
tion than it originally had intended to go. In view of its
developing differences with the Chinese Communists, Mos-
cow apparently now has decided it is no longer compelled
to consider Peiping's feelings in this matter.

It is probable that the USSR has indicated willingness to
resolve some of the outstanding political and economic prob-
lems which have strained state relations. Canceled bloc
credits to Yugoslavia, Belgrade's counterclaims for damages,

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 12]
and an agreement to refrain from polemics will probably
be discussed during Tempo's visit. Rumors of the de-
fection to Belgrade of the Polish Air Force commanding
general are completely unconfirmed. It is unlikely that
Tempo would have gone to Moscow to discuss this subject
even if the report were true.

Soviet leaders probably also hope to induce Yugoslavia
to cooperate more fully with Soviet foreign policy aims,
particularly bloc initiatives to set up a Balkan conference
to discuss an atom-free zone in the area. No basic ideolog-
ical differences are likely to be resolved.

In addition, the Yugoslavs are probably motivated by a
fear that their role in international affairs will be significant-
ly reduced by an East-West detente. By re-establishing high-
level contacts with Moscow, Belgrade would hope to minimize
any possible isolation.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 13]
New Soviet Ambassador to Guinea

The appointment of a leading specialist on the Middle
East, D. S. Solod, as the new Soviet ambassador to Con-
akry reflects the importance the USSR attaches to the bloc's
extensive ties with Guinea in expanding its influence in Afri-
ca. The USSR, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia maintain dip-
lomatic missions in Conakry, and East Germany has a perma-
nent trade representative there. On 31 December Peiping's
ambassador presented his credentials. The USSR in recent
months extended a $35,000,000 economic development credit
to Conakry. There are an estimated 150 bloc technicians in
Guinea, and about 80 Guinean students are at bloc schools on
medical, agricultural, and technical scholarships.

Moscow probably hopes to exploit these ties both as an
inducement and a model for other newly independent African
states--such as Ghana and Cameroun--and with those terri-
tories slated for independence this year--Togo, Somalia, Ni-
geria, and Mali. A Soviet New Year's message to Africa
welcoming Cameroun's independence referred to the USSR's
"selfless economic aid" to Guinea and other African coun-
tries and expressed readiness to extend "great help" to Af-
ricans in their "battle against colonialism." Soviet officials
used President Toure's eight-day visit to the USSR in Novem-
ber to expound on Soviet policy toward emergent and under-
developed countries as a whole and to portray Guinea as a
"mirror to awakening" Africa.

Solod, who has most recently served as deputy chief of
the Near East desk of the Soviet Foreign Ministry and was
previously ambassador to Cairo, replaces P. I. Gerasimov,
who reportedly is being transferred because of poor health.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 14]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese Leaders Will Continue Efforts for Improved Relations With Communist China

Certain leaders of Japan's ruling Liberal-Democratic
party will continue their efforts to promote the normaliza-
tion of relations with Communist China through forthcoming
visits to Peiping. The director of the Japanese Foreign Min-
istry's Asian Affairs Bureau has told the Indonesian charge
in Tokyo that trips by former Prime Minister Tanzan Ishibashi
and party leader Kenzo Matsumura were intended to open the
way for resolving the impasse with Peiping, but that the goal
was unlikely to be achieved as long as Prime Minister Kishi
was in power.

The Japanese official also emphasized that Japanese pol-
icy toward the Communist mainland was contingent on the at-
titude of the United States toward the Peiping regime. He
said that Japan would "continue to follow the policy of the
United States" and that no possibility of a change in the US
attitude was foreseen prior to the next presidential election.

Kishi's political rivals are becoming increasingly restive
over the length of his tenure as prime minister, which normal-
ly would not end until early in 1961. Influential politician Ichiro
Kono, in a call for Kishi's resignation on 4 January, asserted
that Japan should face up to the problem of relations with Com-
munist China and attacked Kishi's position that politics and
trade can be handled separately. A day later, Minister of In-
ternational Trade and Industry Hayato Ikeda, another poten-
tial candidate for Kishi's mantle, stated Japan must make
positive efforts to break the impasse in relations with Peiping.
Kishi's supporters quickly attempted to play down the problem
by issuing a statement that there was little Japan could do uni-
laterally to settle the Communist China problem.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 15]
Afghan Foreign Minister to Visit Pakistan

Afghan Foreign Minister Naim, according to the Paki-
stani ambassador in Kabul, now has agreed to visit Pakistan
for two to four days beginning 10 January.

In mid-December Naim had concluded from Pakistani
President Ayub's speeches deprecating the Pushtoonistan dis-
pute that little progress could be made on that issue, and had
decided not to go to Pakistan. More recently the government-
controlled Afghan press has attacked Pakistani press reports
on the Kandahar riots, complaining that while the Pakistani
authorities speak of friendship with Afghanistan they publish
hostile propaganda.

Afghanistan's primary objective in any meeting at this time
is probably to secure Pakistani recognition of the legit-
imacy of Kabul's interest in the Pushtoon tribes living in
Pakistan. Recent Pakistani assurances that Ayub does not
intend to rule out Pushtoonistan as a subject for discussion
were probably instrumental in persuading Naim to agree to
talks. In addition, Naim may hope to exploit what he considers
a coordinated effort by the CENTO regional members--
Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan--to improve relations with Afghan-
istan. If Ayub makes a favorable impression on Naim, the
Afghan Government may moderate

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 16]
Libya Increasing Demands on Oil Companies

As more oil wells are brought in, Libyan officials are
beginning to press for larger revenues and probably will
urge modifications in interpretation of the existing Libyan
petroleum law to permit this. Campaign activity in connec-
tion with the 17 January elections to the Libyan House of
Deputies can be expected to increase governmental pres-
sures on the oil companies.

Thus far 16 commercially important wells have been
drilled, and three of these have production potentials rival-
ing the best producers in the Middle East. The government
now receives only modest payments from oil companies,
chiefly in the form of "rental payments."

Several companies are planning pipeline construction,
and actual work probably will get under way this year. The
shortest and least costly route would terminate at the Med-
iterranean on the unpopulated southernmost shore of the
Gulf of Sirte. Cyrenaican business and political interests
may, however, seek a longer and more costly route ending
in Bengasi--one of Libya's two capitals--and the construc-
tion of a deep-water port there to be financed by "voluntary
royalty advances" from petroleum companies.

At least one Libyan demand for increased payments is
already being challenged by the oil firms in Libyan courts.
Other demands on the Western companies call for financing
the training of Libyans to replace foreign technicians, con-
struction of unrealistically large oil refineries, and paying
for social-welfare projects. Such demands have been
anticipated, but they are being made considerably sooner
than expected.

Despite its call for accelerated revenue payments, Libya
has not joined with other Arab oil-producing states in demand-
ing abandonment of the 50-50 profit-sharing formula for exist-
ing concessions. It has, however, recently granted new con-
cessions which in one case abandoned the 50-50 formula.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8

[PAGE 17]
III. THE WEST

Cuba Actively Pursuing Neutralist Foreign Policy

The Castro government is making a strong attempt to as-
sume a position of leadership among underdeveloped, neutralist
countries with which it is already strengthening trade and diplo-
matic relations. Foreign Minister Raul Roa has called for a
conference of "underindustrialized" nations in Havana in mid-
1960, claiming that its only purpose would be to unite efforts
by these countries to achieve fulfillment of the UN Charter.
Roa is on a trip to the UAR, Yugoslavia, Greece, Tunisia, and
Morocco, and will discuss a proposed conference agenda with
the governments of those countries.

Three other teams of Cuban economic and diplomatic rep-
resentatives will visit Africa, Asia, and Latin America this
month for exploratory talks. If official support for the Cuban
project is not forthcoming, a conference of "leaders" of spe-
cial-interest groups will probably be substituted.

Castro's determination to follow a third-position foreign
policy is consistent with his claim that the Cuban revolution
is a "humanistic" middle path between capitalism and commu-
nism. Cuba's policies in the UN, OAS, and elsewhere, however,
seem designed primarily to assert defiance of the US. The
acting foreign minister's characterization on 5 January of the
conference participants as "the hungry countries" indicates an
intention to propagandize the moral and economic responsibili-
ties of more fortunate countries, particularly the United States.

The Brazilian foreign minister said on 4 January that he
felt such a conference would benefit only the Communists and
that he hoped Latin American countries would not attend. Bra-
zil believes its own Operation Pan America is Latin America's
best hope for obtaining US economic aid and evidently fears
Castro's activities threaten its success.

7 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9

[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 19]
