III. THE WEST

Greece Fears Rejection of Membership in Common Market

Greek Government leaders have expressed anxiety over reports that Greece's application for association in the European Economic Community (EEC)--the Common Market--is facing new obstacles. Following its confidential application in June for special association with EEC, the Greek Government leaked information to the press regarding the advantages that would accrue to Greece from this association. This has been followed by nationwide speculation regarding the issue, and the general assumption has emerged that the Greek application would be accepted. Failure of the EEC to take favorable action on the application, at a meeting tentatively scheduled for 25 July, would give opposition politicians another opportunity to discredit the government's political and economic policies.

In addition, important segments of the Greek business community are complaining that Greece, plagued with agricultural surpluses and hard hit by the world shipping slump, can ill afford its present "free trade" policy. Continued nonparticipation in the Common Market will place Greek exports at an even greater competitive disadvantage.

Despite a generally favorable reaction to Greek membership, the Common Market may delay taking definitive action for some time. Athens has requested extensive tariff concessions and access to the development funds of the European Investment Bank. Some Common Market officials fear that acceptance of these terms could not be justified under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and are reluctant to establish a precedent for other lesser developed countries.

Moreover, the Greek application comes at a time when the Common Market is divided over the future course of its relations with other countries of Western Europe. Leaders like West German Vice Chancellor Erhard, who advocates a broader multilateral European economic association, probably fear that bilateral Greek association with the Common Market would complicate its
