Dalai Lama to Expand International Campaign to Publicize Tibet

The Dalai Lama has decided to press for submission of the Tibet question to the UN General Assembly this fall. The Tibetan leader is prepared to deliver an appeal to the UN in person if necessary, and is compiling evidence of Chinese atrocities in Tibet to substantiate his case.

Any UN discussion of the Dalai Lama's claim would have the support of many Latin American and Western European members who view the question in terms of human rights. Any of those member countries might sponsor the introduction of the issue in the General Assembly. The Indian Government would be likely to take the position that a hearing would serve no useful purpose and would only heighten tensions. Prime Minister Nehru, in fact, has stated that UN consideration of Tibet would be difficult since Communist China is not represented. However, New Delhi probably would not go to extreme lengths to try to block consideration of Tibet or to prevent the Dalai Lama from traveling to New York, despite its refusal to recognize his claim to leadership of a Tibetan government-in-exile.

The Dalai Lama had received no official invitation as of 17 July to visit any other country, but he still wishes to travel abroad to promote the Tibetan cause. Thailand's King Phumiphon has privately expressed the view that a visit by the Tibetan Buddhist leader might prejudice the King's position in Thailand as "defender of the faith."

The Dalai Lama intends to send two high-level delegations on international tours, one to Southeast Asia, and the other to Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, to publicize the Tibetan plight and to sound out probable reaction to his own projected tour.

The Dalai Lama reportedly is also preparing a message for circulation in Tibet encouraging resistance. The Tibetans remain loyal to their religious leader, and his message will hearten them in their resistance to the Chinese. While most of the dissidence in Tibet has been suppressed, sporadic guerrilla activity is expected to continue for a long time.
