Communist China, Agriculture

In a highly unusual statement Peiping's Minister of Agriculture Liao Lu-yen publicly suggested on 22 May that, because of a reduction in planted acreage, the nation might lose 14,000,000 tons of food crops this year. Describing this as a "lesson we have learned from our failure to plant," Liao urged that commune members utilize "every inch" of arable land for late crops, probably in the hope that the threatened drop in output can be avoided.

This is the first public suggestion from Peiping that the 1959 harvest may not measure up to its expectations. While it is far too early to determine what the year's farm output may be--late crops have not yet even been planted--some of the regime's agricultural policies may backfire. It is possible that Peiping's talk about the feasibility of reducing sown acreage while farming limited areas along the intensive lines introduced last year did lead to a reduction in planted acreage. In addition the authorities have been concerned over the threat of lodging--the inability of plants to stand up during the ripening period. This is usually caused by heavy wind and rain, but it can also be caused by the close planting and heavy manuring encouraged by the regime on small plots.

Among other signs of uncertainty in Peiping about agriculture are two commentaries in the most recent edition of Red Flag concerning the need for realistic farm targets. Targets will be more realistic, Red Flag says, when they are formulated in consultation with the masses and not by a "handful of men behind closed doors." The regime is also trying to increase production of meat by allowing individual commune members to raise hogs for their own profit.

The regime's concern over the farm situation is probably heightened by a tight food situation reportedly plaguing both city and countryside. It is not at all unusual for the peasants to be short of food just before the early harvest, but the shortage this year has apparently been aggravated by transportation and distribution difficulties which accompanied the "giant leap forward" and by increased consumption in the formative days of the communes.
