II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey Faces Dilemma in Relations with USSR

Ankara appears ready to take steps to keep pace with what it regards as a Western movement toward detente with the USSR, but is concerned that any deviation from its basically austere policy toward Moscow may cause apprehension among some of its Middle East neighbors, especially Iran. Prime Minister Menderes, in recently discussing with Ambassador Warren the question of Soviet pressure for an exchange of high-level visits, noted that contrary to the impression gained by some of its Western allies, Turkey is not fundamentally opposed to an East-West detente but merely wants to view the situation realistically.

According to Menderes, Soviet representatives in Turkey are actively contacting various ministries, newspapers, and institutions and expounding the theme "we now are friends with the US, why can we not be friends with Turkey as well." Menderes told Warren that the Russians have been insisting on official exchange visits for years, and now want to follow the recent visit of the Turkish minister of health with other high-level visits as a manifestation of improved relations.

Menderes' allegations of Soviet pressure concerning diplomatic contacts in which Soviet officials have endeavored to exploit the friendly theme of the Camp David talks. On occasion, Soviet representatives as well as the Soviet press have applied the "stick" principle as well as the "carrot."

Moscow's current campaign to expand contacts with Turkish officials is part of its broader effort to exploit the current thaw in East-West relations. The Soviet leaders probably regard Turkey as a major obstacle to the attainment of their objectives in the Middle East.

In line with Menderes' expressed views that East-West exchanges are the "order of the day," there probably will be an increase in exchange visits by Turkish and Soviet delegations during the ensuing months. No basic change in Turkey's pro-Western foreign policy is anticipated, however, although such visits may have a marked impact on Turkey's Middle East neighbors.

18 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
