[PAGE 01]
NOT RELEASABLE TO FOREIGN NATIONALS
20 July 1959
CONTINUED CONTROL
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 17
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2018
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 4/17/98
REVIEWER:

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
20 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR launches 12th successful ICBM on 18 July.
Khrushchev reassures Poles on status quo in Eastern Europe.
Gromyko shows interest in proposal for small subcommittee of UN Disarmament Commission.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Ethiopia receives offer of aid from Czechoslovakia.

III. THE WEST
French claim Algerian rebels using US arms.

LATE ITEMS
Iraq--Kirkuk disorders apparently suppressed; Qasim promises punishment for troublemakers.
Comment on situation in Cuba.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The USSR launched an ICBM on the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at about 1415 EDT on 18 July. From communications radar and telemetry intercepts, the flight is judged to have terminated in the previous impact area--on or near the Kamchatka Peninsula. Three telemetry links were reported from the launch area and two from the terminal area. The countdown was delayed more than an hour for reasons not yet known. This was the 12th Soviet ICBM firing believed to have reached its intended impact area.

USSR-Poland: Khrushchev's pledge at Szczecin on 17 July to defend both the frontier between East and West Germany and the Oder-Neisse line was probably intended to reassure the Poles, during this period of East-West negotiations, that Moscow would permit no change in the status quo in Eastern Europe. He probably also intended to warn the West that any solution to the Berlin-German problem must be based on a "two Germanys" approach in order to put at rest any hope for a reunified Germany which would be either Western oriented or independent. His endorsement of Gomulka and Polish agricultural policies may sharpen the contrast between liberal Polish practices and the increasingly restrictive measures followed in the other satellites.

(Page 1)

USSR: Gromyko has shown interest in suggestions made by Dag Hammarskjold for creating a ten-nation subcommittee of the UN Disarmament Commission to be

[PAGE 05]
composed of five Western, three bloc, and two neutral countries. The Soviet foreign minister observed that agreement could be reached quickly if the matter were raised informally at the foreign ministers' conference. Moscow probably believes that since disarmament can be expected to be on the agenda of any summit conference, such a group would provide a useful forum to which to refer the negotiations at the close of the heads-of-government talks.

(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Ethiopia-Czechoslovakia: Negotiations for Czech economic aid to Ethiopia will begin soon, according to a communiqué issued at the end of Haile Selassie's visit to Prague. Czechoslovakia offered to deliver capital goods on a credit basis and to negotiate economic and technical-cooperation agreements. While in Moscow Haile Selassie sent word to Addis Ababa, according to an unconfirmed report, that he wanted steps taken to cancel the agreement for the US military communications center at Asmara. A number of high-level officials in Addis Ababa alarmed by the Emperor's acts while he has been abroad are rumored to be plotting against him. A coup, however, appears unlikely at the present time.

(Page 4)

III. THE WEST

France: Premier Debré, in a further effort to halt proposed US arms shipments to Tunisia, has charged that arms and ammunition of US manufacture have been found in possession of the Algerian rebels, possibly passed to them by Tunis. Debré told Ambassador Houghton in Paris that shipments of US arms to Tunisia should be held up pending an investigation. Meanwhile, tension is reported building up along the Tunisian-Algerian border, apparently as an aftermath of the 14 July rebel attack on a French outpost.

20 July 59 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEMS

*Iraq: The violent disorders in Kirkuk which began on 14 July apparently have been suppressed. Prime Minister Qasim on 19 July publicly condemned the violence there and threatened "severe punishment" for the instigators, as well as for potential troublemakers elsewhere in Iraq. Qasim stated that the authorities will deal with "enemies of the people." The Communists, acting on the occasion of the celebration of the Iraqi revolution on 14 July, precipitated the outbreak by playing on the traditional hatred between Kurdish and Turkoman elements. Ins subordinate army units joined the Communists in the disorders.

(Page 6)

*Cuba: President Urrutia's forced resignation on 17 July has again demonstrated Fidel Castro's wide support among the Cuban masses. He is expected to use this support to try to isolate his opposition, which he contends emanates largely from a reactionary minority with special interests. Castro's dictatorial action against Urrutia, however, may weaken his position among segments of the important middle class, where respect for democratic forms has always been strongest. Newly appointed President Dorticos, who is likely to be a pliant front man for Castro, has announced that the cabinet will remain unchanged at this time. Communist demands for representation in top government positions are unlikely to be acceded to, at least in the near future. The Communists, however, are doubtless encouraged by Urrutia's ouster, which apparently was brought on in part by the former President's strong anti-Communist statements of 13 July.

20 July 59 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev in Poland

While many of Khrushchev's public remarks since his arrival in Poland on 14 July have been devoted to foreign policy issues, he has chosen topics which are of special interest to the Poles. At Szczecin on 17 July, he avoided direct reference to the talks in Geneva, but reaffirmed that the USSR "firmly defends and will defend" its proposals on Germany and Berlin.

In an effort to reassure the Poles that any future East-West agreements would preserve the status quo in Eastern Europe, he pledged Moscow's continued support for preserving both the frontier between East and West Germany and Oder-Neisse line "as if they were Soviet borders." This statement probably was also intended as a warning to the West that any solution to the Berlin-German problem must be negotiated in the context of "two Germanys" in order to put at rest any hopes for a reunified Germany which would be either Western oriented or independent.

Khrushchev's reiteration of his plea for a Baltic "zone of peace" and warnings against the establishment of Western rocket and nuclear bases on Scandinavian soil were probably in anticipation of a major theme during his forthcoming Scandinavian visit.

The "premier's firm endorsement of Polish party leader Gomulka is the most important development in Soviet-Polish relations to come from Khrushchev's visit, which is his first official one to Poland since the "Polish October" three years ago. Praising Polish developments in general, Khrushchev announced at Poznan on 18 July his support of Gomulka's slow agricultural socialization program; at least, he endorsed Gomulka's concept that socialization can be achieved only by voluntary methods and open peasant support.

Khrushchev thus accepted Gomulka's cautious moves in this controversial field at a time when other satellites are intensifying

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 08]
their programs to achieve a realization of socialism by 1965. The differences in speed of socialist construction among the satellites is a potential source of intrabloc friction.

Khrushchev emphasized repeatedly the strength and industrial power of the USSR in a fairly direct effort to impress the Polish people and leaders with the validity of Soviet policies and the virtues accruing to those who "march along together" on the road to socialism. The latter point implies greater encouragement to the Polish party to speed up its advance to socialism and may have been designed to encourage a narrowing of the differences between Poland and the bloc.

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
Plan for UN Disarmament Commission Subcommittee

UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold on 14 July outlined to Secretary Herter a plan for organizing the Disarmament Commission which he said he had discussed at length with Soviet UN delegate Zorin six months ago. Hammarskjold's proposal would create a bureau to be composed of a chairman and rapporteur from the neutral countries and two vice chairmen, one from a bloc country other than the Soviet Union and the other from a small Western nation. To this group would be added the US, the UK, France, and the USSR to form a subcommittee of the Disarmament Commission. Hammarskjold agreed that one additional representative from each side might be added, making a ten-nation body composed of five Western, three bloc, and two neutral nations.

Hammarskjold approached Gromyko with his proposal but did not mention specific nations. Gromyko viewed the plan with interest, stating he was convinced that if the matter were raised informally among the four foreign ministers, agreement would be reached quickly. He said he favored keeping the forum small and added that parity would not be a necessary ingredient.

Moscow probably believes that, in view of the probability of the disarmament issue appearing on the agenda of any summit conference, a body along the lines of Hammarskjold's suggestion would provide a useful forum to which to refer negotiations on this subject at the close of the heads-of-government talks--in particular negotiations on Soviet proposals for disengagement in Central Europe, atom- and rocket-free zones, and troop and armaments cuts. Moscow might also hope that such a body could exploit the Irish proposal for preventing the further spread of nuclear weapons, which the Czech representative to the United Nations told the Dutch representative Prague would support.

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Further Bloc Aid to Ethiopia

Negotiations for Czechoslovakian economic assistance to Ethiopia will begin soon, according to a communiqué issued at the end of Emperor Haile Selassie's visit to Prague. Czechoslovakia has offered to deliver capital goods on a credit basis and to negotiate economic and technical-cooperation agreements between the two countries. According to an Ethiopian official, the credit will total $20,000,000 and will include the purchase of Czech military equipment. The only previous Czech aid to Ethiopia was a $2,000,000 line of credit extended last year for the purchase of hospital equipment and supplies.

The Soviet Union, under its recently granted $100,000,000 credit, is studying a plan for the construction of a pharmaceutical plant in Ethiopia, as well as plans for training 15,000 retired Ethiopian soldiers in agriculture and establishing the necessary farms to accommodate them. Moscow probably will provide both technical assistance and equipment for the agricultural program. Ethiopia estimates the total cost of that program at about $44,000,000.

Meanwhile, it is rumored in Addis Ababa that a number of high-level officials are alarmed by these agreements and are plotting a bloodless coup to overthrow Haile Selassie and set up a constitutional monarchy headed by the Crown Prince. According to the rumors, the alleged plotters claim support from among high army and church officials--as well as from the Crown Prince. They plan to abrogate the recent bloc agreements and seek additional economic aid from the US. Another unconfirmed report indicates opposition to instructions the Emperor allegedly sent from Moscow, that the Ethiopian Parliament should at its opening session in early November abrogate an agreement permitting US operation of a military communications installation in Asmara, Eritrea.

An attempt to depose Haile Selassie in the foreseeable future appears unlikely, in view of his widespread popularity and close

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 11]
personal control over the country's military forces--especially over the Imperial Bodyguard, which is considered the only effective fighting force.

Ethiopian officials generally have expressed elation over the "successes in Moscow." Although some top officials reportedly feel the Emperor may have gone too far, even the discontented and potential opposition elements apparently believe he gained in stature as a result of the bloc agreements.

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 12]
LATE ITEM

The Iraqi Situation

The violence which began in Kirkuk on 14 July during celebrations of last year's revolution apparently has been suppressed. Local Communists capitalized on the traditional hatred between Kurds and Turkomans to create an incident which developed into widespread street fighting. Armed Communists, heavily armed Popular Resistance Forces, and some army elements killed a number of leading notables and dragged their bodies through the streets.

The acting commander of the 2nd Division, headquarters of which are at Kirkuk, was unable to control his own troops and reportedly was compelled by Communist officers and men to remain in his headquarters. Communist soldiers and Popular Resistance men killed the divisional intelligence officer and several other officers.

A large number of officers of this division were purged following the Mosul rebellion last March and were replaced by reserve officers, many of them Communists. The division's previous, pro-Communist commander had since March--without authority--armed the Popular Resistance with numerous automatic weapons. The combination of these circumstances emboldened the Communists to act.

In a speech on 19 July, Prime Minister Qasim publicly condemned the outbreak in Kirkuk and threatened "severe punishment" for the instigators, as well as for any potential troublemakers elsewhere in Iraq. Qasim warned the Communists and other self-appointed guardians of the state not to take the law into their own hands, stating that the authorities will deal with "enemies of the people." He implied that "naive" soldiers at Kirkuk had been deceived by some subordinate officers and declared, "Soldiers must obey orders issued by their officers and the Supreme Command."

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 14]
