Iranian Security Chief Predicts Revolution

Lt. Gen. Timur Bakhtiar, chief of the Iranian National Intelligence and Security Organization (SAVAK),
believes Iran is headed for revolution,
that the armed forces cannot be relied on, and that he believes the Shah will flee to Europe when he realizes things are out of control. Bakhtiar claims the Shah is turning his property into cash.

Bakhtiar, considered a loyal supporter of the Shah, attempted to resign on 11 August, at the same time warning Prime Minister Eqbal that rigging of the current parliamentary elections and other policies were "leading the country to revolution." He withdrew his resignation after a tense interview with the Shah during which the latter angrily rejected Bakhtiar's suggestion that the elections be declared void and the irregularities blamed on Eqbal. Bakhtiar claims that Eqbal forced him to use SAVAK, which is part of the prime minister's office, to aid in rigging the elections.

orders from Bakhtiar that SAVAK is not to interfere in the elections,

The Shah, preparing for a short trip to Europe in late August or early September, granted Bakhtiar a two-month leave of absence after he returns. Bakhtiar hoped then to leave SAVAK and return to a troop command position, possibly as chief of the ground forces, feeling he would be in a better position to take immediate action if the Shah flees. He is known to have been in touch with other groups for many months engaged in "contingency planning" for just such an occurrence. On 17 August, however, he reportedly resubmitted his resignation.

SAVAK and other security organizations are keeping a close watch on the elections in Tehran. Balloting in the capital has been orderly thus far, but a small disturbance could spread quickly. Clashes over the elections continue in the provinces, and reportedly during one incident in a northwestern constituency about 150 persons were injured when fired on by security forces.

Soviet propaganda attacks on the Iranian Government and the Shah are continuing at a high level.

19 Aug 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
