The Second All-African People's Conference

The second plenary meeting of the nongovernmental All-African People's Conference (AAPC), which convenes in Tunis from 25 to 29 January, may intensify significantly underlying friction between relatively moderate and more radical groups within the African nationalist movement. Exemplified by the personal split which has developed between Kenya's Tom Mboya and Ghana's increasingly militant Nkrumah since the organization's inaugural meeting in Accra in December 1958, this friction could lead to a schism which would further impair the already limited effectiveness of the AAPC--the major organization for expression of African nationalism.

The gathering's Tunisian organizers expect about 125 delegates, representing virtually all major African nationalist organizations. Already concerned about keeping the meeting on an essentially moderate course, they claim to have eliminated "some more Communist organizations" from the invitation list prepared by the AAPC's Communist-oriented secretary general, Abdoulaye Diallo of Guinea. Nevertheless, the radicals, spearheaded by strong and aggressive delegations from Ghana, Guinea, and Morocco, may succeed in dominating the proceedings, especially if moderate African leaders from French Communist states and other areas fail to attend and if Mboya is unable to be present because of the London conference on Kenya's constitution.

A number of observers from Sino-Soviet bloc countries are expected to be on hand and to lobby, as did their counterparts at the 1958 meeting, for extreme resolutions. Nasir's representatives, on the other hand, are reported planning to play a less aggressive role than they did at Accra.

Public presentations by the conferees and final resolutions probably will emphasize commonly held general positions on African independence, solidarity, and economic and social development. They will certainly single out the impending French nuclear tests in the Sahara for particularly violent condemnation. Behind the scenes, however, serious discord may develop over such specific issues as the attitude to be adopted toward the French-sponsored Ahidjo regime in newly independent Cameroun, the French Community, and the continued adherence of many African labor leaders--including Mboya--to the Western-oriented International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.

25 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7
