Dissatisfaction Among Foreign Students at Communist Bloc Schools

The USSR and other bloc countries continue to be plagued by dissatisfaction among foreign students attending advanced bloc educational institutions. While students from Western countries have expressed their frustrations only to other Westerners, those from underdeveloped countries--notably Africans, followed closely by the Arabs--have voiced their irritation on occasion to bloc educational authorities. The bloc's foreign student programs appear to be falling short of their goal of winning "dedicated adherents" to Communism. Accumulating evidence points to hostility on the part of many students toward their host country, and to the development by some of outright anti-Communist attitudes.

UAR student complaints over conditions in the bloc were partially responsible for Cairo's decision this summer to send about 250 students to Western--especially American--schools. Under the Soviet-UAR cultural agreement for 1960, which was concluded on 21 November, approximately 300 UAR students--about half the total of last year--will attend Soviet schools "at UAR request," according to Radio Moscow.

Resentment among the approximately 15 Indian students in Moscow continues over the political atmosphere, educational restrictions, living conditions, and difficulties in learning Russian, according to an Indian student who has furnished reliable information in the past. He claimed that "every Indian student in Moscow has asked his government to recall him to India."

Some 300 Iraqi students arrived in Moscow in early November under the recently ratified Soviet-Iraqi cultural exchange agreement. Most of the group will begin studies on the undergraduate level after six months to a year of Russian-language training, and are scheduled to spend a total of five years. Fourteen Iraqis arrived concurrently in Communist China, some of the group were "in a state of utter despair" and wished to return home.
send no more students until there was assurance that they could "endure the life here."
