[PAGE 01]
20 January 1960

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
20 JANUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR sending Mikoyan to open exhibition in Havana; Cuba and the USSR may be moving toward resumption of diplomatic relations.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Malaya proposes establishment of Southeast Asian cultural and economic organization without political or military aspects.

Cairo apparently backing new Iraqi nationalist plot to kill Qasim; nationalists being supplied with money and arms.

Israel to step up arms purchases.

Tunisia seeking technical aid from Soviet bloc.

Algeria--Leftist militants in stronger position in new rebel cabinet; rebels may plan to move supply operations from Tunisia to Morocco.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR-Cuba: In an effort to focus increased attention on the opening of the Soviet exposition in Havana on 30 January, Moscow plans to send Deputy Premier Mikoyan to the inauguration ceremony and is arranging a number of performances by prominent Soviet artists. The American ambassador in Mexico reports close liaison there between the Cuban and Soviet embassies, with renewal of diplomatic relations a possible early objective.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Southeast Asia: Malayan Prime Minister Abdul Rahman is pushing for a meeting this year of Southeast Asia's political leaders in an effort to organize formally his proposed Southeast Asian Friendship and Economic Treaty Organization (SEAFET). Interest in Malaya's proposals has been expressed by the Philippines, South Vietnam, Thailand, Burma, and Laos. To date, Cambodia has rejected the concept, and Indonesia has been unenthusiastic. Rahman is thinking in terms of a nonpolitical and nonmilitary grouping with economic and cultural aims, including the development of common facilities for transportation and commodity distribution. (Page 1)

UAR-Iraq: Cairo is aware of and may be backing another Iraqi nationalist attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Qasim, according to a recent report from Cairo. Iraqi Baathist refugees in Syria are being used by the UAR as intermediaries with Baathists in Iraq.
UAR intelligence paid out the equivalent of $11,000 to Iraqi Baathists in Baghdad on 16 January, the Baathists requested 100 revolvers on 13 January, and Cairo is considering the delivery of other materiel to them. In addition, the UAR is again furnishing arms and money across the border to dissident Iraqi minority elements.

[PAGE 05]
Israel: Israel has decided that it must step up its purchase of arms and military equipment during the current year in order to "maintain the balance of power in the Middle East in view of the continuous arms flow to Arab countries." While an Israeli Foreign Ministry source refused to say what types of arms will be sought or which sources the Israelis consider most promising, he did indicate that Israel would renew its requests for US arms. Foreign Minister Meir has been in Paris, where she may have sought new French military aid commitments.

Tunisia: The Tunisian Government plans to send a mission to Czechoslovakia and Poland to study the possibilities of technical cooperation. It also approached the USSR for technical and economic aid during renegotiation in Tunis last week of the Tunisian-Soviet commercial agreement. President Bourguiba on 10 December--in a public statement critical of America's economic aid--paved the way for Soviet bloc economic and technical assistance. Despite his interest in such agreements with the bloc, Bourguiba probably intends to maintain a policy of Western-oriented nonengagement. (Page 2)

Algeria: The Algerian rebel Revolutionary Council, meeting in Tripoli, has announced a reshuffling of the rebel provisional government together with the creation of a three-man "war cabinet." Although the influence of leftist militants is increased notably, the moderate Ferhat Abbas continues as premier and the changes appear to have been prompted more by considerations of efficiency than of ideology. Announcement of the reorganization has been followed by a statement keeping open the possibility of cease-fire negotiations with the French, but emphasizing the rebels' willingness to continue the war indefinitely if necessary. The rebels may plan to transfer some of their supply operations from Tunisia to Morocco, where the Ibrahim government seems to be more sympathetic to the Algerians than is President Bourguiba. (Page 3)

20 Jan 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Malayan Proposals for Southeast Asian Friendship And Economic Treaty

Malayan Prime Minister Abdul Rahman is going ahead with his plans to call an early meeting of Southeast Asia's political leaders in an effort to organize formally his proposal for a Southeast Asian Friendship and Economic Treaty (SEAFET).

Malaya's interest in the new grouping stems in part from its marked distrust of the larger Afro-Asian schemes which it sees being exploited by both Communists and Arab extremists. Malayan leaders hope that SEAFET can become an effective counter by limiting its membership strictly to Southeast Asia and by restricting itself to practical economic and cultural activity. The proposals carefully avoid any hint of political and military entanglements and stress instead consultations to promote interregional trade and economic development, including common facilities for transportation and for commodity distribution, educational and technical exchanges, and similar relatively noncontroversial matters.

Rahman apparently anticipates close cooperation from President Garcia of the Philippines and Premier Sarit of Thailand, who have themselves voiced similar ideas. South Vietnam, Laos, and Burma also have unofficially indicated considerable interest in the Malayan proposals, but Burma's position may be altered by general elections now scheduled for 6 February. Rahman, who is reportedly very anxious to encourage Burmese membership, may postpone proposing a firm date for the first SEAFET meeting until after the new government is formed and can be consulted. Cambodia and Indonesia have apparently rejected the proposals, although Rahman is hopeful the Indonesians will join once the organization is established.

Rahman originally proposed SEAFET during a visit to the Philippines in January 1959. Malayan action on the proposal dragged, however, during the extended state and federal election campaigns and the subsequent governmental reorganization.

20 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Tunisian Government Seeks Technical Assistance From Soviet Bloc

The Tunisian Government plans to send a mission to Czechoslovakia and Poland to sound out possibilities for technical cooperation, according to the semiofficial daily press. The Tunisians also approached the USSR for technical and economic assistance during the renegotiation last week of the Tunisian-Soviet commercial agreement concluded on 17 January. The chief Soviet negotiator informed the Tunisian press that this approach would be transmitted to the Soviet Government.

President Bourguiba on 10 December, in a public statement critical of American economic assistance, paved the way for overtures for bloc assistance. He had told a press conference on 12 November that he intended to establish diplomatic relations with the USSR in 1960, a subject which also may have been discussed last week. During commercial negotiations last summer and fall, Tunisia agreed to exchange ambassadors with Czechoslovakia and Poland.

Bourguiba's approaches to the Soviet bloc will to some extent meet the criticism of strongly nationalistic Tunisian officials who have advised that Tunisian national interests suffered as a result of Bourguiba's pro-Western policy. He is also motivated by the need to provide full employment to the chronically underemployed Tunisian labor force and may hope that Western nations will be prodded by these approaches to the bloc to increase economic assistance. Although he apparently has taken the initiative in seeking bloc economic aid, Bourguiba probably intends to maintain his policy of Western-oriented nonengagement.

20 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Algerian Rebels Announce Changes in Government

The Algerian Revolutionary Council, meeting in Tripoli, has announced a reshuffling of the rebel provisional government and the creation of a three-man "war cabinet." The reorganization removes from the cabinet Foreign Minister Lamine Debaghine, Minister of Culture Madani, and Minister of Supply Cherif. The first two have long been unpopular with their colleagues for their pro-Nasir views, while Cherif is generally held responsible for the severe supply shortages recently experienced by rebel forces in Algeria.

Although the changes--especially the staffing of the war cabinet--increase notably the influence of leftist militants, they appear to have been prompted more by considerations of efficiency than of ideology. The three-man "interministerial war committee" will probably play a major role in the supervision of rebel military operations. All three of its members, including Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister Belkacem Krim, were formerly military commanders in Algeria.

Announcement of the reorganization has been followed by a statement keeping open the possibility of cease-fire negotiations with the French but emphasizing the rebels' willingness to continue the war indefinitely if necessary. There are also indications the rebels plan the transfer of certain supply operations from Tunisia to Morocco, where the Ibrahim government appears more sympathetic to the Algerians than Tunisian President Bourguiba and French border barriers are less imposing than along the Algeria-Tunisia border.

20 Jan 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
