[PAGE 01]
4 July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Anti-American posters in Moscow defaced (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Death of Thai Commander in Chief reported (page 4).
4. Tibetan dissatisfaction with Chinese Communists grows (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Mossadeq to present his case to Parliament (page 5).
6. Iraqi Foreign Minister apprehensive over Jordan-Israel tension (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Disruption of De Gaulle’s party may be imminent (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Anti-American posters in Moscow defaced:
Ambassador Kennan in Moscow reports that between 29 June and 1 July nearly all the hate-America wall-posters in Moscow were defaced. The faces of American soldiers and capitalists, which had been drawn as Jewish caricatures, were either torn out or scratched until they were hardly identifiable. The Ambassador considers this an "extremely interesting and curious development" in the anti-American campaign.

The extent and uniformity of defacement, as well as the location of some of the posters involved, leads the Embassy to believe that this apparent vandalism was perpetrated by the regime to lend an air of popular enthusiasm to its anti-American campaign.

FAR EAST

[PAGE 04]
3. Death of Thai Commander in Chief reported:
General Phin, Commander in Chief of the Thai armed forces, died on 30 June. The Thai Government is attempting to suppress the news of his death.

Comment: Phin has been the key supporter of his son-in-law, Police Director General Phao, who has been maneuvering for control of the ruling clique. The government’s suppression of the news might be an attempt to prevent open conflict in Bangkok. In any case, Phin’s death is likely to cause a change in the tenuous balance of power among the rival military leaders.

4. Tibetan dissatisfaction with Chinese Communists grows:
Opposition to the Chinese Communists is widespread in Tibet. Many Tibetans believe that the Chinese will be ejected eventually. The "People’s Party," an opposition group, has much hidden support.

The Dalai Lama to inform the American Government that when the time is propitious for the liberation of Tibet, he hopes that the United States will give material aid and moral support.

a serious food shortage in Lhasa where 10,000 Chinese troops are stationed. Of these, 9,000 are poorly fed and badly clothed conscripts.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: Hunger has been a cause of Sino-Tibetan tension for the past six months, and it was mainly responsible for street-fighting in Lhasa last March.

Although the Tibetans may offer some passive resistance, there is little chance of a successful anti-Chinese revolt.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Mossadeq to present his case to Parliament:
Prime Minister Mossadeq told the American Ambassador on 1 July that he intends to offer the new Parliament his resignation by 6 July. Parliament, according to Mossadeq, will have to choose between the present government or a new government with oil revenues and British control.

Comment: Iranian law requires that the Prime Minister submit his resignation when a new Parliament is convened. Mossadeq’s recent conversations and actions, however, suggest that he will neither retire nor compromise on the oil issue.

6. Iraqi Foreign Minister apprehensive over Jordan-Israel tension:
The Iraqi Foreign Minister is apprehensive over the increased tension on the Jordan-Israel frontier. He fears that Israel intends to use the unsettled political situation in Amman as justification for a move to occupy west Jordan.

The British Charge in Baghdad has also indicated apprehension that recent border incidents may foreshadow imminent Israeli action against Jordan. He has expressed the hope that the United States would act under the American-British-French declaration of May 1950 guaranteeing the truce lines. Otherwise, Britain might be obliged to act unilaterally on the basis of the Anglo-Jordanian treaty.

Comment: American officials in the area have also reported increased tension along this border.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Disruption of De Gaulle’s party may be imminent:
General De Gaulle’s Rally of the French People may be broken up during its current national conference.

De Gaulle’s recent appeal to approximately 40 potential dissident Gaullist deputies for a discussion of differences was ineffectual.

Comment: The approximately 30 Gaullist deputies who have hitherto supported Pinay against De Gaulle’s wishes are traditional conservatives and were never won over to the General’s comprehensive program.

There have been rumors of a rapprochement of the more liberal-minded remainder of the Gaullists with Popular Republican and Socialist elements in an effort to form a new middle-of-the-road majority. De Gaulle, however, is personally unacceptable to many potential members of such a coalition, and there now seems to be little likelihood, short of the complete failure of Pinay’s economic program, that the Gaullists can rally enough support to gain control of the government.
