1. RESIGNATION OF HUNGARIAN PARTY LEADER RAKOSI

The removal of Matyas Rakosi from his
post as Hungarian party first secretary
and from his position on the politburo on
18 July, coupled with the election of new members to the
politburo, represents a clear-cut gain for the moderate faction of the party. The selection, however, of economic czar
Erno Gero as the new first secretary probably reflects Moscow's desire to restrain and control the rightist movement,
while simultaneously granting some of its demands. First
Deputy Premier Gero is a "hard-line" Rakosi follower and
reliable Moscow-oriented Communist.

In his acceptance speech, Gero announced
plans for an immediate improvement in the standard of living
and stated that an open letter of apology would be sent to the
Yugoslavs for past "slanders."

Although apparently supporting Rakosi at
least until June, Moscow may have reluctantly decided that a
combination of Rakosi's inability to handle the factionalism
problem and Rakosi's traditional antipathy toward President
Tito of Yugoslavia rendered him a liability. In exchange for
Soviet withdrawal of support for Rakosi, permission for additional concessionary "relaxation" policies, and the granting
of increased moderate representation at top party levels,
moderate leaders Janos Kadar and Imre Nagy may have
agreed to support efforts to restore party unity.

Kadar is one of the four new members of the
politburo, only one of whom apparently represents the "hard-line" group. Two new alternate politburo members also apparently support the moderate wing.

The removal of Rakosi and the increase
in the power of the "soft-line" forces are compromise measures
which presumably have been adopted as a calculated risk, one
that is to be minimized by the selection of Gero as party first
secretary. The risk stems from the probable creation of confusion among Rakosi followers and the possible stimulation of
new and outspoken demands from the intellectuals and from the
party moderates, especially at lower levels.
