Spaak Has Reservations Regarding Britain's Membership
In the Common Market

In his wide-ranging review of what he called the "problem of Europe," Spaak made it clear he felt the economic and political unification of Europe would be achieved only if the present momentum is maintained. European integration could be stalled or frustrated, he believes, either from "without" if Britain's adherence should involve the sacrifice of the "principles and institutions" of the EEC treaty, or from "within" if De Gaulle and France should become "totally recalcitrant and uncooperative." Given the difficulties Britain may have in accepting the EEC as it stands, Spaak feels it necessary that further steps be taken to strengthen ties among the EEC members. He believes that continued progress by the EEC would encourage London to join in its own self-interest.

To strengthen the EEC politically, Spaak is willing to proceed from De Gaulle's confederation plan. This plan is currently stalled, in large part by Dutch opposition to consideration of NATO problems by the confederation, and a 19 May meeting to discuss the plan was postponed until July. At his meeting with the French ambassador, however, Spaak said he would not support the Dutch view and would even make other concessions if De Gaulle in turn would agree to certain steps to strengthen EEC institutions. In explaining to MacArthur this position, Spaak admitted he is "not encouraged" by De Gaulle's views either on Europe or NATO, but feels it must be recognized that De Gaulle now is the dominant figure in Europe and should be "utilized rather than frustrated." Spaak doubts France can in the long run dominate Europe and believes the other five EEC countries might be able to "force" De Gaulle to be more forthcoming in NATO discussions.

Since Spaak's prestige in European and NATO affairs is considerable, his position suggests that the Common Market will be extremely cautious in considering British entry. There have been a number of indications that British opinion is rapidly evolving in favor of at least a conditioned bid for membership, despite the continued ambiguity of official public statements and repeated reassurances that London will not

22 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10
Approved for Release: 2020/08/11 C02049790
