Afghanistan-Pakistan: Afghan troops disguised as Pushtoon tribesmen apparently crossed the Pakistani border into the Pushtoon tribal territory of Bajaur on 20 May and attacked Pakistani garrisons there. The attacks evidently were part of Kabul's continuing efforts to incite rebellion among Pushtoon tribes living in Pakistan. The Pakistani minister for states and frontier regions stated yesterday that the Afghan attacks were preceded by heavy-mortar and machine-gun fire, and that a captured Afghan soldier had admitted about 1,000 Afghans took part. If, as the Pakistani minister claims, the attacks were repulsed with heavy losses to the Afghans, Kabul may decide to send additional, stronger forces across the border rather than suffer new losses of prestige among the Pushtoon tribesmen living on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistani frontier. Pakistan, which in the past has generally played down the frequent small-scale armed clashes in the Pushtoon tribal areas, may use the latest attacks as grounds for strong counteraction.
(Backup, Page 9) (Map)

Iraq: An uneasy atmosphere prevails in Baghdad as disillusionment with the Qasim regime continues to spread throughout Iraq. On 19 May Baghdad police broke up a small demonstration attempted by trade unionists shouting anti-Qasim slogans. Prime Minister Qasim attended a public function in a Baghdad suburb the same day, and the military and police guard in the area was the heaviest noted in many months. Several different Iraqi groups--the Moslem Brotherhood, the Iraqi Baathists, a group of army and air force officers, and an organization of prominent Iraqi exiles--are all reported to be engaged in separate plotting to assassinate or overthrow him. Such conspiracies would be more likely to succeed, however, if they had substantial army support, which at present seems to be lacking.

Western Europe: Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak, who played a leading role in the negotiation of the Common Market (EEC) treaty in 1955 and 1956, expressed to Ambassador MacArthur on 16 May reservations regarding Britain's accession to the EEC. Spaak doubted London would actually accept the "principles" of the EEC and declared it would be a "disaster" if the

22 May 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
