Situation in South Korea

The embassy believes that the known Communist affiliation of coup leader Maj. Gen. Pak Chong-hui before the Korean war and the obscure backgrounds of other new leaders may tempt opponents of the new government to charge that the coup was Communist inspired. He is apparently sensitive about his past Communist affiliation and may lean over backward to vindicate himself by publicly taking a strong anti-Communist position. However, former army chief of staff Lt. Gen. Choi Yong-nok, who has opposed the coup, implied in a conversation with the US army attaché that Pak's anti-Communism might be a pose and said it would become apparently within three months that the coup was Communist inspired.

Pak was admittedly a Communist in 1948 and is reported to have turned state's evidence to reveal other Communists in the army. He was court-martialed, but his sentence was suspended. When the Korean war began in 1950, he was recalled to active duty. His war record was excellent, but the South Korean Army Counter Intelligence Corps continued to be suspicious of him. Both American and South Korean officials have observed that Pak appears "obsessively concerned" with corruption and have even suggested that Pak's motive in directing the coup is self-vindication.

The revolutionary government has suspended civil rights and on 20 May arrested a number of prominent military officers, cabinet officers, and other officials of the deposed Chang Myon government. Former Premier Chang himself remains under surveillance in his home.

The Home Ministry order police bureau chiefs to ferret out leftist students who "are plotting to flee to the coast or the area of the truce line and seize a chance to go to Japan or cross north."

However, the revolutionary leaders have ordered police to exercise "special caution in the confinement of students" and to take "particular pains to ensure that the students do not strike back." The students, largely responsible for overthrowing the Rhee government a year ago, have

22 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
Approved for Release: 2020/08/11 C02049790
