generally remained quiet since the coup, although the American Embassy reports that 400 "unenthusiastic" students did appear in a pro-government demonstration on 19 May.

The coup government is rapidly establishing direct control over the press by threatening arrest and shutdown, in addition to continuing the heavy censorship imposed immediately after the coup. Leading newspapers moved by 19 May from their initial reaction that coup leaders would quickly return the government to civilian control to a position justifying the coup as the exercise of the people's "natural right of revolution." The press is also distorting the reaction of US government leaders to the coup as welcoming the resignation of the "weak" Chang government and the "smooth success of the military revolution."

Banks and trading companies still appear hesitant to resume normal operations. Retail business is generally limited to daily necessities. Relaxations from the total freeze instituted on 16 May are being made by the coup government on a case-by-case basis.

Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong remains head of the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction (SCNR)--the new name of the Military Revolutionary Committee which staged the coup--as well as being prime minister and defense minister. Pak Chong-hui, its deputy chairman, holds no position in the new cabinet set up by the SCNR. The cabinet is comprised of 13 general and field-grade officers, mostly in their thirties, and of one retired lieutenant general, Foreign Minister Kim Hong-Il, former ambassador to Nationalist China.

North Korea, still charging that the coup was engineered by the US, is staging mass rallies to voice its opposition. Speaking at a rally on 20 May, Vice Premier Kim Il called on the entire South Korean population to smash the coup; the Pyongyang regime earlier had urged all South Korean military personnel to resist the coup leaders. Pyongyang is using the disturbed situation in South Korea to renew its contention that the only solution

22 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
Approved for Release: 2020/08/11 C02049790
