[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

11 May 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. BOMBARDMENT OF QUEMOY ISLANDS BY CHINESE COMMUNISTS

3. KHRUSHCHEV CALLS FOR NEW CONTROL MEASURES

4. MILITARY JUNTA REPLACES PRESIDENT OF COLOMBIA

11 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. BOMBARDMENT OF QUEMOY ISLANDS BY CHINESE COMMUNISTS

Chinese Communist artillery on 10 May fired more than 600 rounds on the Quemoy group--the heaviest shelling of these islands so far this year. The Chinese Nationalist news agency reports that the Nationalist garrisons on the islands have been alerted for a possible invasion.

The number of rounds fired on 10 May is far from a record total. Some 6,000 rounds were fired on the islands on 3 September 1954, nearly 3,000 rounds on 20 January 1956, and over 1,000 rounds on 28 April 1956. Most of the artillery exchanges in the past year were initiated by the Nationalists. No report is yet available to indicate which side initiated the latest shelling.

The most favorable period for amphibious operations is now at hand, but the Chinese Communists would probably bring up more than the 89,000 troops believed to be in the Amoy area before launching a full-scale attack against the Quemoys, which are garrisoned by 84,000 Chinese Nationalists. However, Communist strength in the area is adequate to assault one of the smaller islands in the Quemoys, such as Erhtan or Tatan.

The Chinese Communist air force continues to maintain a generally defensive posture in the Taiwan Strait area. Prior to an amphibious assault on the Quemoys, the Communists would probably bring their bombers and fighters within closer range of the islands. Newly constructed airfields opposite the offshore islands are serviceable but still unoccupied.

The shelling of the Quemoys coincides with sharp Communist propaganda reaction to the announcement that

11 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]
Matador missiles are to be based on Taiwan. In a broadcast on 10 May entitled "A Warning to the American Aggressors," the Peiping radio charged that the United States is converting Taiwan into an atomic base to carry out aggression. The Communists reiterated their routine declaration of determination to "liberate" Taiwan but otherwise made no threat of early military action.

11 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
3. KHRUSHCHEV CALLS FOR NEW CONTROL MEASURES

Soviet party boss Khrushchev, in a short concluding speech to the Supreme Soviet on 10 May, sounded a call for severe legislative measures in order to ensure the success of the forthcoming economic reorganization.

Khrushchev said it was necessary to draft measures calling for strict responsibility by the leaders of enterprises and members of the economic councils. He added that it may also be necessary to establish a system under which financial penalties would be imposed on those guilty of causing losses to the state. Those who undermine state discipline are to be relieved of their posts and demoted.

The tone of these statements contrasts with the encouragement of criticism during the discussion of the reorganization proposals prior to and during the Supreme Soviet session. With the structural pattern of reorganization agreed upon, the regime apparently now is moving on to the next step--the forging of tight control over the post-reorganization bureaucracy.

11 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
4. MILITARY JUNTA REPLACES PRESIDENT OF COLOMBIA

A five-man military junta replaced President Rojas on 10 May. The new government will be pro-US and anti-Communist in orientation.

The military forced Rojas' ouster after a week of demonstrations and violence provoked by his attempt to perpetuate himself in office. Opposition political leaders, business groups, and students participated in the movement against Rojas, which paralyzed the economic activity of the nation. The Catholic hierarchy also provided substantial support by condemning his regime.

The situation may continue tense for several days. Leaders of the opposition parties, which earlier had proposed a joint presidential candidate to challenge Rojas' plans, told the American embassy in Bogota on 9 May that they would accept an interim junta only if it undertakes to restore constitutional government and civil liberties and calls free elections by next spring. The embassy commented on 10 May that some groups among the throngs in Bogota celebrating Rojas' ouster are already demanding a civilian president.

11 May 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
