[PAGE 01]
30 December 1951
Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Importance of Vietnamese right to full independence stressed (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Egyptian rioting continues on Suez issue (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. French request postponement of February NATO Council meeting (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Importance of Vietnamese right to full independence stressed:

The importance of a promise of full independence to Vietnam now, to be effective when the threat of Communism has passed, was stressed by the Papal Nuncio to the Philippines upon his return from Indochina. General Romulo, the Philippine statesman, seconded this view, stating that although French forces could not be withdrawn from Indochina now, French recognition that there is a Vietnamese independence movement would lighten the task of combatting Communism.

Comment: Despite mounting pressure in France for a solution to the Indochina problem, Paris has never conceded to Vietnam the right to secede from the French Union. Lacking this privilege, the majority of politically influential Vietnamese have never regarded Vietnam as truly independent.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 04]
3. Egyptian rioting continues on Suez issue:

The continuation of small but violent student demonstrations in Egyptian cities has resulted in the closing of secondary schools as well as universities. The Egyptian press, meanwhile, is publishing the most exaggerated stories of incidents in the Canal zone.

Comment: Public opinion has become so inflamed that the government, which originally promoted support for its own position, is now finding it increasingly difficult to maintain public order. The current rash of demonstrations, with their new note of toughness, was touched off by King Farouk's staff appointment of two officials generally considered pro-Western.

WESTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 05]
5. French request postponement of February NATO Council meeting:

The French Foreign Office has requested a two-week postponement of the NATO Council meeting currently scheduled for 2 February in Lisbon. The Foreign Office explains that the French Assembly is expected to debate the European Defense Forces after its recess in late January.

The US Department of State has expressed its strong opposition to this proposal, but has indicated that it might agree to "some postponement for the convenience of the French" if it knew that agreement had been reached by the six European Defense Community powers.

Comment: Before leaving for the November NATO meeting at Rome, Foreign Minister Schuman was obliged to assure the Assembly that no commitments on the European Defense Community would be made without parliamentary approval. Current studies on a revised French military program are not expected to be completed before the Assembly recesses, and Pleven's request for postponement of the Lisbon session probably stems from a desire to attend this meeting with the prior assurance of Assembly support.
