Indonesian Dissidents Demand Protection Money From American-Owned Rubber Estate

Indonesian dissidents on 4 May demanded ten percent of the income from Goodyear's Wingfoot rubber estate, the largest in Sumatra, in return for a "guarantee" against further attack, according to Wingfoot's manager. The manager told the American consul at Medan that the dissidents estimated this amount at 300,000 rupiahs monthly--approximately $30,000 at the official exchange rate. A similar approach has been made to a Goodyear official in Singapore, where a dissident representative stated that the rebels' increased activity against Goodyear was provoked by American arms aid to the central government.

Goodyear's managing director for Indonesia gave the American consul the impression that he is prepared to recommend acceptance of the rebel proposal, since adequate security appears otherwise unavailable in the immediate future. The rebels have given Wingfoot two weeks to consider the proposition. The deputy territorial army commander in North Sumatra appears "not unduly disturbed," and told the consul more troops would be stationed eventually in the Wingfoot area. Prime Minister Djuanda also stated recently that a decision had been made to transfer additional troops to Sumatra.

Despite army claims of improved security, Indonesian government forces have been notably unsuccessful in protecting the estate area, and even an increase in forces assigned is unlikely to forestall hit-and-run raids. Goodyear's Wingfoot estate alone comprises 40,000 acres. With the exception of the towns, the area appears largely rebel controlled. The government's two limited offensives in the past six months were disastrously ambushed by the dissidents.

US Rubber, with the knowledge of the local Indonesian army commander, agreed in mid-April to a dissident demand that the rebels be permitted to tap a section of US Rubber's Damoeli estate. Dissident attacks on foreign estates in North Sumatra began in June 1958, and have become increasingly serious since January 1959.

14 May 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 6
