continuance of economic than of military aid from the West, but said that either kind must be given without strings, emphasizing that Yugoslavia will not alter its stand in the controversy over American inspection and supervision of the utilization of aid.

Tito spoke with considerable gratitude of the Soviet cancellation of Yugoslavia's prewar debt of $90,000,000. All past claims, even Yugoslav ones for a far higher total for damages accruing from the post-1948 Soviet blockade, have apparently been wiped out. He contrasted Soviet generosity with West German unwillingness to reach an agreement on wartime debts and with Western insistence on large interest payments on past loans. Tito appeared to be trying to use what was in fact a rather academic concession by Moscow to show the West that he can bargain with both sides successfully.

Relations with the Satellites

Tito charged that "certain men in the neighboring Satellites . . . especially in Hungary" are not pleased with the improvement in Soviet-Yugoslav relations and are "intriguing under cover" against Yugoslavia. He said they are telling their followers that the Soviet gestures toward Yugoslavia are only a maneuver, and are still arresting men who favor friendship and co-operation with Yugoslavia.

Tito charged that "these men," who arranged false trials in the past and sentenced innocent men such as Lazlo Rajk in Hungary to death, are afraid to admit their mistakes and to follow a new path. "These men," Tito concluded, "will inevitably fall into their own political traps" and will not succeed in causing relations between the Soviet bloc countries and Yugoslavia to deteriorate again.

Tito's charges seem designed to test the intentions of Soviet leaders, in view of the promises they reportedly made in Belgrade to bring about changes in the Satellites. This portion of the speech may have been prompted by his dissatisfaction with the Satellites' caution in endorsing the Soviet-Yugoslav rapprochement, and particularly with the indications of renewed campaigns in Poland, Hungary, and Albania against "nationalist" deviationists within the parties.
