GENERAL

1. British Parliamentary criticism complicates Anglo-Egyptian relations:

The British Cabinet is reviewing its proposals on Anglo-Egyptian defense in the light of the mounting Parliamentary opposition to the Government’s “concessions” to Egypt which was revealed in recent debates on the Anglo-Egyptian financial agreement. Critics in Parliament also attacked Egypt’s continuing ban on Suez Canal traffic bound for Israel.

Comment: The Cabinet’s review of proposals for Anglo-Egyptian defense arrangements reflects the seriousness with which the Government views the possibility of further Parliamentary criticism of its Egyptian policy. A new agreement for a British base in Suez is necessary before the expiration of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty in 1956, and Egyptian public opinion is chronically hostile to the presence of British forces in the Suez area. In view of these factors, British military planners have recently come around to the Foreign Office view that any new treaty must make some concession to Egyptian demands for British evacuation of the Canal Zone. In the past few months there have been a few indications that the positions of British and Egyptian negotiators have moved closer together, but the good feeling surrounding the negotiations has not yet been accompanied by tangible results. The immediate danger lies in the possibility that British Parliamentary criticism may so antagonize Egyptian public opinion that the Egyptian Government will be unable to accept any arrangement short of complete British evacuation.

2. UK following up South African promise of troops for Middle East:

The Foreign Office has asked the US Embassy in London what action is likely to be taken, and how soon, on a pending South African request for US materiel to equip one armored division, which will be needed to defend the Middle East if war breaks out. Since the South African troop commitment was contingent on obtaining the necessary materiel, the UK is extremely anxious that these needs be filled as quickly as possible, lest South Africa find some excuse for changing its mind.

- 3 -
