Pro-Communist Party May Win Zanzibar Elections

The Zanzibar Nationalist party (ZNP), led by Ali Muhsin and Abdul Rahman (Babu), its president and secretary general respectively, represents the economically dominant Arab community of about 45,000. Both leaders have visited Moscow and Peiping and have either countenanced or encouraged Sino-Soviet bloc infiltration of the party. Peiping has provided financial and organizational assistance to the ZNP, arranged free trips to the China mainland for high party officials, and assisted in preparing and disseminating propaganda. Soviet aid apparently has been limited to offers of scholarships to Lumumba University in Moscow through its embassy at Addis Ababa.

The Afro-Shirazi party (ASP), poorly organized and led by its illiterate president, claims to represent the protectorate's 225,000 African inhabitants, composed principally of Bantu immigrants from the mainland and descendants of the earliest inhabitants of the islands--the Shirazis, who trace their origin to Persia. The alliance of these two groups suffered a setback in December 1959 when a group of Shirazis--largely from the nearby island of Pemba--left the party to form the Zanzibar and Pemba People's party (ZPPP).

The ASP won 10 of the 22 elective seats in the January elections, with nine seats going to the ZNP and three to the ZPPP. The latter, under pressure from each of the two major parties for support in forming a coalition government, split into two factions; one faction, including the two council members, supported the ZNP, while the other member headed a faction sympathetic to the ASP. A temporary solution to the resulting deadlock was reached when all parties agreed to serve under the civil secretary, acting as chief minister, for six months until new elections could be held. They also agreed to add a 23rd seat to the council in an effort to avoid another deadlock.

The ZPPP will probably again hold the balance of power. If Sheik Muhamed Shamte--president of the ZPPP and leader of the faction which supports the ZNP--is able to carry the few Pemba

29 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
