[PAGE 01]
22 March 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
Communist prisoners report no plague or cholera in their unit (page 3).
Peiping rebuffs Indian offer to investigate biological warfare charges (page 3).
Pakistanis reported "not too happy" over their relations with Peiping (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
Turkish fears of Kurdish uprisings discounted by US Army Attache (page 4).
Egyptian Prime Minister considering new elections (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
Polish and Czechoslovak shortages delayed 1952 trade agreement (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
Belgium threatens to curtail military commitment to NATO (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Communist prisoners report no plague or cholera in their unit:
Far East Command interrogation of 80 prisoners and civilian refugees, some of whom were in Communist North Korea as recently as 10 March, revealed that they knew of no plague or cholera in North Korea. Captured Communist soldiers reported that unit political and non-commissioned medical officers were the source of claims that the United Nations were using biological warfare.

The incidence of typhus, typhoid and smallpox, however, equals last year's epidemic conditions, the Far East Command believes.

Comment: The outbreak of disease in epidemic proportions among Communist troops and civilians in North Korea is a constant possibility. There is no convincing evidence from any source, however, of the recurrence of epidemics similar to those experienced by the enemy last year.

2. Peiping rebuffs Indian offer to investigate biological warfare charges:
Indian Ambassador Panikkar reports that he was unable to see Premier Chou En-lai for the purpose of expressing alarm over Peiping's charges of biological warfare and to offer India's services in an investigation of those charges. Panikkar was interviewed by a Chinese Communist Foreign Ministry official who thanked him for the Indian offer but stated that Peiping was conducting its own investigation with the help of "friendly" nations.

[PAGE 04]
Panikkar stated that the Peiping government is taking the matter very seriously and, although the accusations seem incredible, the Chinese people are satisfied that the charges are true.

Comment: Several international committees of Communists and fellow travellers are preparing "evidence" to support Communist charges of biological warfare. Refusal to permit an investigation by any non-Communist group has reduced the effectiveness of their propaganda even in India.

3. Pakistanis reported "not too happy" over their relations with Peiping:
Analysis of bi-weekly secret reports submitted by the Pakistani Embassy in Peiping during 1951 has convinced American Embassy officials in Karachi that the Pakistanis are "not too happy" over their relations with the Chinese Communists.

Pakistani representatives in Peiping reported that the Chinese Communist leadership is "arrogant and fanatic" and that the Chinese people are "living under fear." Anti-foreign feeling on the part of the Chinese Communists was said to be "incredible," and the Pakistani Charge concluded that "we will have to write off the Chinese as far as friendship is concerned."

Comment: These reports confirm earlier indications that Pakistani officials do not share Indian Ambassador Panikkar's view that the Chinese Communists are primarily nationalists who may be influenced by a conciliatory policy.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Turkish fears of Kurdish uprisings discounted by US Army Attache:
General Nuri Yamut, Chief of the Turkish General Staff, recently told General Arnold, Chief of the American military mission in Turkey, that he expects trouble in the Kurdish

[PAGE 05]
areas of Turkey, Iran and Iraq. He reportedly gave Arnold a map showing the areas of potential disturbance.

The Kurds number approximately three million people; half live in Turkey, the remainder in Iran, Iraq, Syria and the USSR. During the past several years, the Soviet Union has beamed a steady barrage of radio propaganda at this Near East minority.

5. Egyptian Prime Minister considering new elections:
In the absence of progress in solving the Suez and Sudan issues, Egyptian Prime Minister Hilali reportedly is considering the dissolution of Parliament and the holding of new elections, which would probably return the Wafd to power. The Premier is reported to be disgusted with the British and with their "seeming belief that they can stall along without making any constructive gesture."

Comment: The immediate obstacle to progress on the treaty dispute is lack of agreement on a proposed statement of principles on which to base negotiations.

[PAGE 06]
Egypt, which only recently asked for a unilateral British declaration, now appears willing to reconsider a joint statement. The Egyptian Foreign Minister has asked a British Embassy official what Britain has to offer as a bilateral declaration.

Both the American and British Ambassadors in Cairo believe, however, that the proposed British statement will be unacceptable to the Egyptians.

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Polish and Czechoslovak shortages delayed 1952 trade agreement:
Significant shortages of industrial goods and raw materials impeded negotiations between Poland and Czechoslovakia for the 1952 trade agreement which was finally signed on 29 February.

The Czechs stated that they were having considerable difficulty persuading the Poles to deliver non-ferrous metals to be processed by Czechoslovak industry for Poland. Although Czechoslovakia had the plant capacity, it did not have the raw materials to satisfy Polish requirements.

Comment: the problem the Satellites face in their efforts to increase industrial productive capacity and meet the USSR's economic demands in the face of Western export controls and the world shortage of critical materials.

foreshadowed a 1952 Polish-Czech trade level roughly seven and one half percent below that of last year.

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Belgium threatens to curtail military commitment to NATO:
The Belgian delegate to the European Defense Community states that, should the other members reject his country's proposal that all adopt a two-year period for compulsory military service, Belgium will be forced to "re-examine its NATO obligations." Belgium considers its present two-year conscription period essential for the fulfillment of its military commitments.

The French delegate comments that this new proposal has serious political implications.

Comment: Belgium is the only Western European country whose conscripts are called to serve two years, and the government is under strong domestic pressure to reduce this period. Such a step is opposed by the Belgian Defense Minister on the ground that the country's present military program could not then be carried out.

Critical financial and economic problems facing France make it impossible for its government to lengthen the eighteen-month conscription period.
