[PAGE 01]
1 July 1956
Copy No. 105

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. IRAQI TROOPS TO MOVE TOWARD SYRIAN AND JORDANIAN BORDERS (page 3).

2. TITO COMMENTS ON HIS MOSCOW VISIT (page 4).

3. ARGENTINA ORDERS MILITARY ALERT AGAINST POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES (page 5).

4. EGYPTIAN CABINET CHANGES (page 6).

5. BELGIAN SENATE APPROVES PROPOSED VISIT OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PEIPING (page 7).

6. USSR OFFERS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TO LAOS (page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 9)
[PAGE 04]
1. IRAQI TROOPS TO MOVE TOWARD SYRIAN AND
JORDANIAN BORDERS

Comment on:

Reports that Iraq will move a large
number of troops toward the Syrian
and Jordanian borders suggest that
Baghdad is preparing to support a
coup in Syria or is taking preventive
measures against further "deterioration
of the situation in Jordan. Of these
possibilities, action in regard to
Syria seems the more likely.

According to one report, three Iraqi
brigades are to be moved to Rutba, a town about 80 miles
from either the Syrian or Jordanian border. Another re-
port states that supplies for an infantry division group of
18,000 men are to be stockpiled at station H-3 on the Iraq-
Jordan oil pipeline near Rutba. This report is supported
by information that the army has ordered 80,000 gallons
of gasoline for immediate delivery from the government-
owned refinery. Leave for all Iraqi army officers may be
canceled in the near future, and a special top-secret cipher
has been issued to all departments of the Iraqi army.

The Iraqi government has long regarded
Syria as the key to the solution of the problem of Iraq's iso-
lation from the other Arab states; Prime Minister Nuri Said
stated in early June that before Jordan could be stabilized
either Saudi Arabia or Syria "must be won over to our side."
[PAGE 05]
2. TITO COMMENTS ON HIS MOSCOW VISIT

President Tito told Ambassador
Riddleberger on 29 June that Soviet
leaders had not exerted any pressure
on him during his Moscow visit and
that the joint communique was largely the result of Yugo-
slav suggestions. He said that there was no discussion
whatsoever of military relations, which would have been
completely contrary to Yugoslav policy.

Tito is convinced that all Communist
parties will eventually be free from Stalinist concepts and
will reassert their right to dissent from Moscow, and that
his policy of establishing bilateral contacts with all "Social-
ist" parties will help in accomplishing this end. He pointed
to Togliatti's attitude as a clear indication of ferment in
Western Communist parties and predicted more of these
"positive developments." Tito cited Togliatti's visit to Bel-
grade and the results of his own trip to Moscow as contrib-
uting to these developments.

He said that for internal reasons Khru-
shchev must move slowly in revising Stalin's policies. He
feels that Khrushchev has undoubtedly strengthened his posi-
tion, but that Stalinist elements remain. Tito counseled pa-
tience and more contact on the part of the West with Soviet
leaders, remarking that the "devil is sometimes not as black
as painted."
[PAGE 06]
3. ARGENTINA ORDERS MILITARY ALERT AGAINST POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES

The extensive security measures or-
dered by the Argentine government on
29 June reflect its concern over action
by Peronista and nationalist elements,
but the regime is believed capable of
quelling any disturbances. Military
units and the some 4,000 civilian com-
mandos have been alerted and more
than 150 persons arrested. This ac-
tion follows recent terroristic attacks on the homes of high
naval officers since the abortive revolt on 9-10 June.

While the regime's position was appar-
ently strengthened for the immediate future by its quick ac-
tion at that time, the attempted revolt and continued plot-
ting re-emphasize the considerable political discontent,
especially over the slow progress in the return to constitu-
tional government. This discontent and widespread shock
over the government's summary execution of rebels earlier
this month apparently have given new impetus to the regime's
consultations with political leaders regarding constitutional
reform and scheduling elections.
[PAGE 07]
4. EGYPTIAN CABINET CHANGES

The changes in the Egyptian cabinet an-
nounced on 29 June have the primary
effect of removing from top posts the
principal "wild men" who were members
of the former Revolutionary Command
Council (RCC). While the changes may give the regime a
more moderate tone, they do not indicate any significant
shift in the direction of Egyptian policy.

Gamal Salim, former deputy prime min-
ister whose brother Salah Salim was forced to resign last
year, and ex-minister of state Anwar Sadat have been noted
for their extremely nationalistic and anti-Western manifestos.
Hassan Ibrahim, the third RCC member dropped, reportedly
was among those who strongly opposed Salah Salim's resigna-
tion. Little is known of the two new civilian appointees.

The officers who have been dropped pre-
sumably will be treated similarly to Salah Salim, who is now
publishing a "controlled opposition" newspaper with funds
supplied by the government. Nasr's careful treatment of such
individuals indicates he is fully aware that they could form a
nucleus for future army opposition to the regime.
[PAGE 08]
5. BELGIAN SENATE APPROVES PROPOSED VISIT OF
PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PEIPING

Press reports that the Belgian Senate
has approved the proposed visit of a
Belgian parliamentary delegation to
Communist China as well as to Taiwan
indicate that the controversial trip to the Far East will al-
most certainly take place. It had been tentatively scheduled
for September.

Foreign Minister Spaak had previously
told Ambassador Alger that he could not intervene in an es-
sentially parliamentary matter. Belgian motives in under-
taking the trip are probably a mixture of curiosity, Liberal
interest in trade possibilities, and Socialist views on the
desirability of contacts with the Orbit.

The delegation will be headed by the presi-
dent of the lower chamber, Camille Huysmans, whose rather
neutralist ideas are not shared by most of his Socialist col-
leagues.
[PAGE 09]
6. USSR OFFERS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TO LAOS

The USSR has offered to recognize the
Kingdom of Laos and establish diplo-
matic, economic and cultural relations,
according to a Laotian government
communique. Laos will probably agree
to reciprocal recognition rather than af-
front the USSR, but will politely evade
diplomatic and other exchanges, accord-
ing to the American embassy in Vientiane.

Moscow probably feels that the time is
right to extend neutralism in Southeast Asia by seeking in
Laos relations similar to those the bloc is now developing
with the adjoining country of Cambodia, where neutralism is
already firmly established. The USSR has undoubtedly noted
with approval the increasing Laotian interest in neutralism as
well as the cautiously favorable Laotian response to overtures
from Peiping.
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 1 July)
