in per capita industrial production in or about 1970, and that "to win time in this contest (for both economic and military power) is now the main thing." In supporting his claims for progress Khrushchev redrew selected comparisons between the Soviet and US economies to support his prediction that Soviet industrial production, although only 30 percent of the US in 1955 and 60 percent in 1960, will exceed the US in 1965.

The Soviet leader reaffirms Moscow's view--which Peiping disputes--that the consequences of general war could be disastrous for the bloc as well as the West. He also reaffirms that the USSR is ordinarily opposed to local wars owing to the danger of their expansion, a risk which Peiping minimizes. As for one category of local wars, however, i.e. "liberation" wars such as the current Algerian rebellion, Khrushchev states his view (in this case, in agreement with Peiping) that such wars are indeed inevitable so long as imperialism exists, and he affirms that the bloc will give aid to "liberation" forces.

The speech reinforces earlier indications that Moscow will pursue a more aggressive program in all "colonial" areas among which Khrushchev specifies Algeria, the Congo, and Laos. However, the speech evades the question--on which the Chinese have charged Khrushchev with timidity--of whether bloc support to "liberation" forces will go so far as to risk military clashes with the West. Similarly, in distinguishing a fourth category of wars, "national uprisings" such as Castro's, and in stating his expectation of and favor for such uprisings, Khrushchev declares that such wars must not become wars between states but evades the question of what risks the bloc will take.

Coexistence and Negotiations. Khrushchev reiterates his adherence to the concept of "peaceful coexistence"--that is competition and conflict with the West by all means short of deliberate engagement in war between states. The Chinese have argued that this militant interpretation of "coexistence" impedes the "struggle" with the West.

On East-West relations Khrushchev reaffirms his belief in the existence of elements in the West who are interested in peace,

21 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
