Situation in Laos

With the apparent capture on 20 January of Tha Thom--the government's last strongpoint in Xieng Khouang Province--the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces have completed the disruption of Laotian Army General Phoumi's planned operation to retake the strategic Plaine des Jarres. Phoumi's plan had called for government troops to advance north from Tha Thom simultaneously with a drive east along Route 7 from the junction at Phou Khoun, which antigovernment forces seized on 17 January.

Phoumi hopes to retake the junction soon, with the aid of reinforcements now arriving in the area, but the antigovernment forces retain the initiative. The dispersal of the government's forces in the Tha Thom area puts Kong Le and Pathet Lao in position for a choice of actions--to move south against Pak Sane outflanking Vientiane or to regroup for a drive in strength westward along Route 7 for a possible attack on Luang Prabang or on the government columns advancing north from Vang Vieng.

The antigovernment forces are keeping the Laotian Army off balance by a buildup of other potential striking forces north of Luang Prabang and in southern Laos. Following the fall two weeks ago of a government blocking position 55 miles north of Luang Prabang, reports have been received that the attacking force of about 700 Pathet Lao are maneuvering for a possible assault on the royal capital. Meanwhile, a marked increase in antigovernment guerrilla activity in the south. Laotian Army headquarters announced on 19 January that Communist bloc transports are air-dropping supplies to Pathet Lao forces in Saravane Province near the South Vietnamese border, but this has not been confirmed.

The serious morale problem among government troops in the face of the deteriorating military situation is reflected in the refusal by the Tha Thom garrison to make a determined stand as ordered. Under the circumstances, the government commander in the Tha Thom area is turning to harassing tactics, using principally some 1,500 Meo tribesmen who are adept at guerrilla warfare but are poorly armed and equipped.

Soviet IL-14 transports continued to airlift supplies into Laos on 20 January and additional flights are scheduled. Since

21 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7
