[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
14 November 1952
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Department review completed

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Chou En-lai seeks transfer of POW's from American to "neutral" control (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British considering alternatives for Suez base (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Chou En-lai seeks transfer of POW's from American to "neutral" control:

Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai
the "important
step" in solving the prisoner of war issue
is the release of the POW's from American
control. Chou is said to be convinced that all prisoners held under
"neutral" control would "gradually" be repatriated.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Comment: Soviet and Satellite spokesmen
in the UN General Assembly have recently taken the line that the
outstanding issue regarding the POW's is the American screening
and forcible detention of the prisoners rather than Communist insist-
ence on total repatriation.

Nevertheless Soviet Foreign Minister
Vyshinsky, in his most recent public statement on this issue, on 10
November proposed the creation of a commission which would "pro-
mote repatriation of all prisoners."

4. British considering alternatives for Suez base:

Strategic base sites at Basra, at Haifa, and
at Alexandretta in Turkey are being con-
sidered by British military planners as the
possible alternative to Fayed, the present
Suez base. Fayed would probably be used only for workshops and
ammunition dumps.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
American Ambassador Caffery agrees with
the British contention that Fayed is perhaps not the ideal site from
which to oppose Soviet military expansion in the Near East.

Comment: The three choices under consi-
deration reflect a sharp shift in British military thinking. Britain
has in the past insisted on maintaining the Suez Canal base because
it was considered beyond the area which Soviet forces might overrun
in the event of war.

Alexandretta has an excellent natural
harbor, while the port of Haifa would need substantial expansion.
Britain probably would encounter political difficulties in establishing
a strategic base in Israel or Iraq.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
