[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

20 July 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

3. Portuguese prime minister incensed at Nehru's policy toward Goa (page 5).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Concern over possible Communist disturbances in South Vietnam reported (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
Page Denied

Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied

[PAGE 04]
3. Portuguese prime minister incensed at Nehru's policy toward Goa:

Prime Minister Salazar informed Ambassador Bonbright on 16 July that although he would do his best to avoid using force to repel Indian agitators entering Goa, Portuguese troops would fire on the Indian passive resistance intruders if necessary. He said Nehru wanted martyrs in order to justify Indian police action.

Salazar spoke bitterly of the way many people encouraged the false impression of Nehru as an "impartial mediator" in the East-West struggle. He hoped that as a result of Portugal's firm stand "the mask of peace would be torn from Nehru," leaving him "exposed for what he is, a living lie."

Comment: Public pressure is mounting in India for more forceful action against Goa. There are plans for a passive resistance march on 15 August, the anniversary of Indian independence. While India is unlikely at this time to try to take over Goa, a major incident might jeopardize its aspirations to mediate on such international questions as Formosa and Indochina.

Nehru's recent talk with Pope Pius on the Goan issue is being successfully used in the Indian press as anti-Portuguese propaganda.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Concern over possible Communist disturbances in South Vietnam reported:

The American embassy in Saigon reports that local French and British circles are exhibiting nervousness regarding possible Communist reaction to Premier Diem's statement on all-Vietnam elections. The counselor of the British embassy is of the opinion that while it is still highly unlikely, an all-out Viet Minh attack cannot be completely discounted. The French claim to have evidence that the Viet Minh is effectively stirring up the countryside and cited a recent instance when a French army patrol came across an encamped Viet Minh armed unit, "with flag raised," not far from Saigon.

The American embassy takes the view that the prospects for north-south negotiations regarding elections are "more theoretical than real" as a result of Diem's statement. It feels, therefore, that Communist disturbances in South Vietnam are now "within the realm of imminent possibilities."

[PAGE 06]
Comment: There have been Communist threats of trouble in South Vietnam if pre-election consultations did not get under way on 20 July. Diem's declaration has been strongly denounced in a broadcast from Hanoi on 18 July which accused the United States and France as well as Diem of sabotaging the Geneva agreement and of planning to use force to unite Vietnam.

The Viet Minh is believed to have as many as 10,000 troops scattered in small bands throughout South Vietnam as well as a considerable number of sympathizers. These forces could conduct widespread guerrilla warfare, but could not overthrow the Diem regime by their own efforts.
