[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

2 May 1956

Copy No. 103

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

DIA review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. GREECE PLANS TO PRESS FOR RENEWAL OF CYPRUS
NEGOTIATIONS

2. POLITICAL UPHEAVAL LIKELY IN PAKISTAN

3. POLISH WRITERS DEMAND CHANGES IN POLITBURO

4. JAPANESE FOREIGN MINISTER MAY BE REPLACED

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. GREECE PLANS TO PRESS FOR RENEWAL OF
CYPRUS NEGOTIATIONS

Greek foreign minister Theotokis
plans to approach both Turkish for-
eign minister Koprulu and British
foreign secretary Selwyn Lloyd dur-
ing the 4-6 May ministerial meeting of the North Atlantic
Council in an attempt to reopen consideration of the Cyprus
dispute, according to Ambassador Cannon.

Theotokis reportedly wants to examine
with Koprulu ways of improving Greek-Turkish relations.
He hopes that Turkey can be persuaded to adopt a more
flexible attitude toward the Cyprus problem.

Theotokis intends to tell the British
that if a "forward-looking statement" could be made about
the groundwork being done on the proposed Cypriot consti-
tution, the present impasse would be broken. Theotokis
will try to dissociate Athens from the terrorism on Cyprus
and ask for British understanding while the Greek govern-
ment is "working its way" on this problem.

Comment
The plans outlined by Theotokis suggest
that the present Greek government in-
tends to continue its moderate approach to solving the Cyprus
issue. Prime Minister Karamanlis just survived a strong
opposition attempt to unseat him on the Cyprus issue and if
this moderate policy fails, a new attack on his government
may be successful.
[PAGE 05]
2. POLITICAL UPHEAVAL LIKELY IN PAKISTAN

An important change in Pakistan's
fragmented political leadership ap-
pears imminent as a result of mount-
ing pressure from the new Republican
Party in West Pakistan and growing
political and economic unrest in East
Pakistan.

It appears likely that Awami League
leader H. S. Suhrawardy will succeed Chaudhri Mohammad
Ali as premier. This would almost complete the break-up
of the Moslem League, which founded Pakistan.

There is an additional possibility that
powerful old-line West Pakistani Moslem Leaguers may
join with East Pakistani dissidents in order to pass a legis-
lative resolution demanding the ouster of President Mirza
and the present provincial chief ministers. Rather than al-
low this, Mirza would probably flout the recently enacted
constitution and attempt to dictate new appointments in both
Karachi and the provinces. This course would involve con-
siderable risk, as Mirza's influence with civil and military
officials may not be strong enough to sustain him in such an
action.
[PAGE 06]
3. POLISH WRITERS DEMAND CHANGES IN POLITBURO

A meeting of Warsaw writers on
27 April strongly criticized the re-
gime and demanded that elections to
the politburo be held in the near fu-
ture in order to remove those responsible for past abuses,

The writers also attacked General Witaszewski--
the political aide to Marshal Rokossovski--who at a recent
meeting in Lodz allegedly attempted to enlist the workers'
support against the intellectuals.
three quarters of Witaszewski's audience walked out.

Comment
Criticism in recent weeks has appar-
ently gone beyond what the regime is
willing to permit.
thinks that the recent dismissals of Polish of-
ficials are only a beginning and that such politburo members
as Deputy Premiers Berman and Jozwiak-Witold may be dis-
missed.

The regime's concern over the rapidly
mounting criticism was indicated by First Secretary Ochab's
warning on 29 April that "politically unstable" elements
would not be permitted to attack party unity or party policy.
[PAGE 07]
4. JAPANESE FOREIGN MINISTER MAY BE REPLACED

Japanese foreign minister Shigemitsu
may be replaced shortly after Minister
of Agriculture and Forestry Kono, who
is now in Moscow negotiating a fisheries
agreement, returns to Tokyo, according to Shigemitsu's
predecessor, Katsuo Okazaki. Okazaki told Ambassador
Allison on 30 April that Shigemitsu's position is growing
weaker all the time and that he expects Shunichi Matsumoto,
Japan's chief negotiator at the London negotiations with the
USSR, to become foreign minister with Kono's support.

Comment
Matsumoto, while not unfriendly to the
United States, is known to favor a more
independent position for Japan and closer relations with the
Sino-Soviet bloc.
[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 1 May)

Israel has charged that Jordanian infil-
trators clashed with Israeli settlers south of Lake Tiberias.
Israel intercepted an Egyptian-chartered Dutch plane over the
Negev which it suspected was engaged in photographic recon-
naissance and forced it to land at Lydda airport for investiga-
tion.

UN truce supervision headquarters in
Jerusalem has announced agreement by Israel and Egypt to
strict cease-fire observance along the Gaza strip and to estab-
lishment of UN observer posts and mobile patrols along the
35-mile Gaza border. Final adoption of the truce plan is to
be by action of the Egyptian-Israeli Mixed Armistice Commis-
sion.

Syria has informed Secretary General
Hammarskjold that it cannot promise to refrain from opening
fire if Israel resumes its Jordan River water diversion project
at Banat Yacov.

Jordan has still not given a clear-cut answer
to Hammarskjold's proposals for a cease-fire. Prime Minister
Rifai said Jordan's reply was "harmonious with the attitude of
the other Arab states" and another official said Jordan's reply was
"positive to a certain extent."

reports that it appears that most Jordanian units which were moved
into West Jordan and the Jordan Valley on 10-11 April have now
returned to their usual locations in the vicinity of Amman.
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
