[PAGE 01]
Copy No. 138

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. COMMUNIST OFFICIALS CLAIM KHRUSHCHEV'S POSITION WEAKENED (page 3).

2. TYURA TAM MISSILE TEST RANGE RESUMES ACTIVITY (page 4).

3. TURKISH-SYRIAN BORDER SITUATION (page 5).

4. ISRAEL SEEKS NATO GUARANTEE (page 6).

5. FRAGILE COALITION HANDICAPS NEW FRENCH PREMIER (page 7).

6. PERU SUSPENDS CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES IN TWO PROVINCES (page 8).

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. COMMUNIST OFFICIALS CLAIM KHRUSHCHEV'S
POSITION WEAKENED

Comment on:

Khru-
shchev's political future is in jeopardy.
since the dismissal of Zhukov. These
opinions contrast with the confidence expressed by Soviet
officials on similar occasions in the past that changes in the
Soviet hierarchy have strengthened the regime. The views
on the Zhukov ouster, probably intended to reach Western
governments, may be designed to convey the idea that it is
in the interest of the West to refrain from any actions which
could help a Stalinist faction to oust Khrushchev.

Zhukov had been Khrushchev's strongest supporter and that
his removal had left Khrushchev dangerously isolated.
hushchev would be the next Soviet
leader to fall, probably within the next few months.

Zhukov's support of Khrushchev against
Beria in 1953, again in December 1956 during the Hungarian
crisis, and also during the June 1957 shake-up of the presidium.
Bulganin, Voroshilov, and Suslov--none
considered firm supporters of Khrushchev--may
have cooperated to induce him to oust Zhukov.
Bulganin has always considered Zhukov
a personal opponent.

Yugoslav Communists have contended
for some time that Stalinist elements, whom they seem to fear
more than Khrushchev, continue to threaten his position and
policies. Gomulka may now subscribe to this belief.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. TYURA TAM MISSILE TEST RANGE RESUMES ACTIVITY

Comment on:

The Tyura Tam Missile Test Range
again was active on 5 November, less
than 46 hours after the launching of
the second Soviet earth satellite.

It is believed that the 5 November ac-
tivity represented practice rather than an actual launching
attempt. Such practice this soon after the launching of
Sputnik II on 3 November could indicate plans for another
launching in the near future.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. TURKISH-SYRIAN BORDER SITUATION

Comment on:

Reports received in late October that Turk-
ish troops were being withdrawn from the border area have not
been confirmed. The Turks recently prohibited entry into the
area near Diyarbakir--a city about 65 miles north of the bor-
der and site of a major Turkish air force base--and refused to
allow the American air attache to enter without the approval of
the minister of the interior.

Meanwhile, the Syrian radio and press con-
tinue to allege that Turkish and unidentified planes are overfly-
ing Syrian territory. On 4 November, Radio Moscow charged
that "hundreds" of Turkish tanks are moving toward the Syrian
border and warned that danger still threatens Syria.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. ISRAEL SEEKS NATO GUARANTEE

Comment on:

The Israelis presumably are aware of the
difficulties in getting NATO protection.

Israel's aim at this time there-
fore may be merely to continue to impress upon
Western countries the idea that serious consideration should be
given Israels interests. Should the Middle East situation dete-
riorate further, the Israelis probably would quickly seek a spe-
cific French commitment of support against the threat posed by
Soviet-armed Syria and Egypt. These tactics are complementary
to Tel Aviv's previously reported approach to the United States
for heavy arms.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. FRAGILE COALITION HANDICAPS NEW FRENCH PREMIER

Comment on:

Premier Gaillard's ability to take effec-
tive action on France's pressing problems
will be limited because his cabinet in-
cludes exponents of the widely divergent
views of all the nonextremist parties in the assembly. Even
though the assembly gave him a substantial vote, interparty
frictions are expected to re-emerge quickly on a number of
issues. Gaillard has already moved to make the parties rec-
ognize their responsibility, however, by threatening to resign
if any of them bolt his coalition.

The immediate problem is to check France's
inflationary trend and to halt the drain on the country's internal
resources and foreign exchange. Gaillard did not present a
detailed program, but intends to demand special economic
powers. He may start by imposing stringent import restric-
tions since he believes France's unfavorable balance of pay-
ments is the nub of its economic crisis. He apparently intends
to seek new taxation and drastic cuts in government spending
to buttress the government's request for foreign aid.

New taxes and budget cuts will be the critical
issues, because the Independents oppose additional taxation, and
the Socialists will be reluctant to go along with any curtailment
of social welfare measures. Current French prosperity, more-
over, has tended to hide the seriousness of the financial crisis
and the necessity of sacrifices from the French public.

Gaillard is expected to continue the Algerian
policy advocated by his two immediate predecessors. Reappoint-
ment of Robert Lacoste as minister for Algeria was probably an
attempt to assuage fears of rightist deputies who now may be
willing to accept the basic statute for Algeria, but there is grow-
ing Socialist rank-and-file opposition to its limited scope.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7

[PAGE 09]
6. PERU SUSPENDS CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES
IN TWO PROVINCES

Comment on:

Peru suspended constitutional guarantees
in two provinces on 5 November because
of a clash between workers and the armed
forces at Ilo, the southern port being built
as an outlet for the new $200,000,000 Amer-
ican-owned copper industry at Toquepala. Serious unrest in the
Ilo-Toquepala area began with a strike declared on 23 October
to support demands that the company return a fired workman to
his job and dismiss all the high executives of the company. The
government on 25 October had declared the strike illegal and
sent a destroyer escort and troops with tear gas to the area to
support its decision.

Labor troubles in Peru have increased
markedly over the past 18 months. Current strikes at north-
ern sugar plantations and on the Central Railway may have
strengthened the government's determination to reassert its
authority, weakened by labor's successful demand of 18 Octo-
ber for rescission of a decree limiting the freedom of labor
organization.

6 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
