Peiping Stands Firm in Dispute With Moscow

Following a period of almost six weeks during which senior Chinese Communist representatives are believed to have been negotiating with Soviet officials, Peiping--contrary to some Western press interpretations--continues to stand firm in its dispute with Moscow. Chinese statements on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the entry of Chinese forces into the Korean war reiterated Chinese beliefs that the US is a "paper tiger" and that peace can be won only through force. The latest issue of the Chinese party's major theoretical journal, Red Flag, published on 31 October, insists on the necessity of violence in seizing state power and implicitly criticizes Khrushchev's gradualist strategy.

The Red Flag editorial was apparently written to refute a recent article in the Soviet party's theoretical journal, Kommunist. The Soviet article criticized the "dogmatist" (Chinese) approach to Lenin's theory of revolution, accusing such dogmatists of ignoring the changes in the world since Lenin's time and consequently of rejecting the "new propositions... and tactics" of the world Communist movement.

In the course of its argument, the Red Flag editorial attacks the basic Soviet contention that in the "new epoch," in which the forces of socialism are superior to the forces of imperialism, the world Communist movement can advance gradually, without war, to a final triumph. Red Flag declares that this "new epoch" of Communist superiority is "unprecedentedly favorable" not for a gradualist strategy but for "proletarian revolution" in various countries of the world, especially in the underdeveloped countries.

Delayed since mid-October, this issue of Red Flag probably reflects decisions reached at recent politburo discussions in Peiping. The two politburo members believed to have been recently engaged in discussions with Soviet officials in Moscow participated in these discussions.

The apparent lack of success of preliminary negotiations with the Soviet representatives makes it unlikely that the scheduled November meeting of world Communist parties in Moscow will
