[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
22 April 1958
Copy No. 140

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 APRIL 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Gomulka planning trip to other satellite countries in further Polish move to assert bloc solidarity.

Soviet ambassador renews general aid offer to Lebanon in attempt to weaken Chamoun government.

Peiping introduces new complicating proposal in border dispute with Burma.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia - Government troops continue advance toward Bukittinggi, last dissident stronghold in Sumatra. Dissident leader reported planning guerrilla warfare.

Tension in Jerusalem rising as both Jordan and Israel deploy armor; serious incidents likely.

Majority of Suez Canal Company shareholders are likely to approve Nasir's compensation offer of $65,000,000.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus - British authorize Turkish Youth Day demonstrations for 23 April despite dangers of violence.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Poland: Gomulka's impending visit to Hungary and Rumania, a trip which may also include Bulgaria, is the latest of a series of moves by Poland during the past month to emphasize bloc solidarity. These moves have included adopting a position more in conformity with the Soviet interpretation of the Hungarian revolution, taking the lead in the bloc campaign against West German nuclear armament, and boycotting the Yugoslav party congress despite Gomulka's known sympathies. Such actions in support of Soviet bloc policy may have been taken by Gomulka to enhance his status among bloc leaders and to improve relations with the USSR.

USSR - Lebanon: Soviet Ambassador Kiktev has renewed Moscow's offer of unconditional economic assistance to Lebanon. Similar offers which have not been specific, have been made to Jordan and to Saudi Arabia as part of Moscow's discreet effort to extend its economic relationships with pro-Western Arab states. This offer is apparently timed to exploit unrest in Lebanon in connection with President Chamoun's intention to seek re-election and is intended generally to encourage opposition to Lebanon's pro-Western policies.

Communist China - Burma: Communist China has raised a new issue which will further delay its already protracted border negotiations with Burma. Peiping has suggested that in defining the border in northern Burma, "Tibetan influence" be taken into consideration--a reference to Tibetan tribal minorities in the area where

[PAGE 05]
the Indian, Burmese, and Tibetan borders meet. The Burmese ambassador told Foreign Minister Chen Yi on 1 April that this proposal would be "difficult" for Rangoon to accept, as it would mean a "big portion" of Burma in the north would be ceded to China.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Indonesia:
government forces have maintained control of Padang since they occupied it on 17 April, but says the dissidents launched a strong counterattack on 20 April which was repulsed. After a sharp clash, the central government has taken the town of Indarung, a few miles east of Padang on the road to Solok. Djakarta troops are proceeding along this roundabout but easier route toward Bukittinggi, the last dissident stronghold in Sumatra, rather than moving directly north on the road from Padang. As of 20 April, the revolutionary cabinet had withdrawn to a town south of Solok. Dissident military leader Lt. Col. Hussein claims still to have 5,000 troops, including partisans, under his command. He is reported to be depressed over the loss of Padang but planning guerrilla warfare.

Israel-Jordan: Tension between Israelis and Arabs in the Jerusalem area may rise sharply as the Israelis make final preparations for the large military parade and other celebrations scheduled for 24 April. The presence of sizable concentrations of troops and armor in both the Israeli and Jordanian sectors, in violation of the General Armistice Agreement, creates the possibility of serious incidents. The presence of large crowds of civilians near the armistice lines could also lead to clashes.

22 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
Suez Canal compensation: The British directors of the old Suez Canal Company have been instructed by the Foreign Office to stand firmly for acceptance of Nasir's offer of approximately $65,000,000 at a company board meeting to be held on 22 April. Since both the British and French governments view Nasir's offer favorably, the majority of the shareholders of the company seem likely to accept the offer of compensation for the company's nationalized property in Egypt.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: The British have postponed further discussions with Athens pending the Greek national elections on 11 May, and are now trying unsuccessfully to moderate the Turkish demand for partition. In the meantime, they are refusing to make "any" public policy statement on Cyprus. The British at present are more fearful of violence by Turks than by Greeks, and plan to authorize demonstrations on 23 April, Turkish Youth Day, despite the danger that both communal violence and a renewed EOKA campaign may flare up.

22 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
SINO-BURMESE BORDER AREA

AREA OCCUPIED BY TIBETAN TRIBES
NORTHERN BOUNDARY IN DISPUTE

[PAGE 08]
Sino-Burmese Border

Communist China is invoking Tibetan interests in the Sino-Burmese border area as a device to prolong the deadlock in its border negotiations with Burma. Rangoon is refusing to accept Peiping's suggestion that "Tibetan influence" and the location of monasteries be taken into consideration in establishing the border.

Peiping's argument was "difficult" for Rangoon to accept and stated that there are Tibetans living on the Burmese side who have been paying taxes to Burma "for generations." In a reference to Tibetans living far to the south of the border, he protested that a "big portion" of northern Burma would have to be ceded to China.

The Chinese Communists apparently are also preparing to cite Tibetan interests in anticipated Sino-Indian border negotiations, on another disputed area. The Indian charge in Peiping recently informed the Burmese ambassador that the Chinese did not want the Tibetans to think that China was weak and could be forced to give up some of its territory to India.

[PAGE 09]
NORTH SUMATRA
CENTRAL SUMATRA
SOUTH SUMATRA

Railroad
Road
Pipeline
Swamp
Tunnel
Bridge

STATUTE MILES 0 100

[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Indonesia

Padang has remained under central government control since 17 April,
there had been a dissident counterattack on 20 April. Djakarta troops apparently are moving toward Bukittinggi, the last dissident stronghold in Sumatra, by way of Solok, and claim the capture of Indarung, a town on the road connecting Padang and Solok. The Padang airfield, which had been damaged by the dissidents before the invasion, has been repaired and is being used by government aircraft.

The revolutionary cabinet
is planning guerrilla warfare.
guerrilla tactics should prevent the central government from consolidating control over the area.

The central government's air attacks have been the decisive factor in all engagements.
Central government forces themselves, depending heavily on air support, have failed to push the ground war to the extent of their capabilities.

the dissidents will stage new counterattacks against Djakarta positions in Tapanuli and in the east coast area of North Sumatra some time before 28 April.

22 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 11]
Israeli-Jordanian Tension in Jerusalem

Increased Israeli-Jordanian tension in Jerusalem, as a consequence of troop movements into the area by both sides, will add to the difficulties of avoiding a serious incident during the large Israeli military parade and anniversary celebrations scheduled for 24 April.

During the past week, Israel has moved at least 74 tanks and other armored vehicles, plus field artillery, into Jerusalem in violation of the General Armistice Agreement. Between 4,000 and 5,000 Israeli troops have been brought into the city.

The Jordanian Government, probably fearful of the propaganda consequences of not taking a firm position against this violation of the armistice agreement, announced on 20 April that Jordanian troops and military equipment would be moved into the Jerusalem area in sufficient strength to redress the balance of forces. About 4,000 troops are available for the move, including an infantry brigade and two tank battalions with 60 tanks. The Jordanian Government has been advised by UN Truce Superviser Von Horn that about 150,000 Israeli civilians will be along the route of the parade in the vicinity of the armistice lines.

The Israelis also plan to use searchlights from Israel to illuminate a Star of David on the Haddasa hospital on Mount Scopus, an Israeli-held enclave inside Jordan. Jordanian Foreign Minister Rifai has stated that these searchlights would be "knocked out." The celebrations also are to include a fireworks display on Mount Scopus. Israel is reported to have agreed, however, not to have an aerial fly-by.

General Von Horn has obtained agreement from both countries to permit UN military observers to be stationed throughout the city.

[PAGE 12]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Poland: Gomulka’s impending visit to Hungary and Rumania, a trip which may also include Bulgaria, is the latest of a series of moves by Poland during the past month to emphasize bloc solidarity. These moves have included adopting a position more in conformity with the Soviet interpretation of the Hungarian revolution, taking the lead in the bloc campaign against West German nuclear armament, and boycotting the Yugoslav party congress despite Gomulka's known sympathies. Such actions in support of Soviet bloc policy may have been taken by Gomulka to enhance his status among bloc leaders and to improve relations with the USSR.
