Laos

The primary objective of the Soviet note probably was to provide minimum satisfaction to US and British views sufficient to get negotiations under way and to forestall any increase in Western military assistance to Vientiane without undertaking any commitments which would reduce the bloc's bargaining strength and freedom of maneuver. Moscow's agreement to a joint appeal by the Geneva co-chairmen for a cease-fire does not concede any basic points on the crucial issue of the timing of a cease-fire. This unyielding stand suggests that the bloc leaders are confident they can gain eventual Western agreement to negotiations under conditions favorable for advancing bloc objectives in Laos without sacrificing any of the advantages which derive from the military initiative and successes of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces.

In line with the bloc's official pronouncements and propaganda over the past two months, the Soviet note placed primary emphasis on Britain's agreement to a 14-nation conference. Moscow claimed credit for having pressed this approach since last December and sought to reap further advantage by proposing that the conference be convened early in April in Phnom Penh.

Although Moscow professed to agree with Britain's call for the "earliest termination of hostilities," the Soviet reply was deliberately evasive in dealing with the mechanism proposed by the UK for arranging a cease-fire. The note ignored the fundamental US-UK position that reactivation of the ICC and an international conference are conditional on the achievement of a de facto cease-fire. It implicitly rejected the Western position that a conference cannot be held until the effectiveness of a cease-fire is verified by both the Geneva co-chairmen and the ICC.

Moscow's reply failed to spell out the authority and functions of the proposed ICC meeting in New Delhi. It said only that the commission should call a meeting as soon as possible and present its report to the co-chairmen. Moscow

3 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
