[PAGE 01]
7 October 1955

Copy No.
100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. COMMENT ON INDONESIAN ELECTIONS (page 4).

3. COMMENT ON NEW GREEK CABINET (page 5).

7 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
2. COMMENT ON INDONESIAN ELECTIONS

Unofficial returns from non-Javanese districts have improved the position of the Masjumi. It is now running second, with the Communists in fourth place. The latest returns, which account for 90 percent of the estimated vote, give the National Party 27 percent, the Masjumi 23.1 percent, the Nahdatul Ulama 23 percent, and the Communist Party 21 percent. Minor parties accounted for the remainder.

A Djakarta daily which frequently reflects National Party policies has criticized Western observers for assuming the Nationalists would establish a coalition government with the Communists. It stated there were more important political groups in Indonesia than the Communists with which the National Party was willing to work.

The district election committee in central Java reportedly has ordered new elections in five cities because of alleged irregularities. As many as 3,000,000 votes may be involved. Both the National and Communist Parties did well in this area and undoubtedly will contest the legality of this order.

7 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. COMMENT ON NEW GREEK CABINET

Prime Minister Karamanlis' cabinet, which was announced on 6 October, is comprised exclusively of members of the Greek Rally. Several of the members are holdovers from the Papagos cabinet, but the party's "old guard" is not represented.

Parliamentary attacks on the new government may come not only from the regular opposition but also from some of the slighted Rally elements, particularly the faction of former foreign minister Stephanopoulos. Nevertheless, with the strong support of the king, a vote of confidence is expected. Initial reports of public opinion on the government are favorable.

Changes in the cabinet may be expected as Karamanlis consolidates his position and prepares for the eventual showdown at the polls.

7 Oct 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
