probably last for several months and result in some widely publicized purges at the provincial or lower levels. The references to opposition of only a "few elements" in the party and government, however, suggest that any purge will affect only a small minority of the cadres; there is no indication that it will reach into the top leadership.

In citing overfulfillment in advance of production goals originally scheduled for 1962, the communique puts the best face possible on industrial performance in 1960, but failure to meet 1960's "leap forward" goals is apparent. The communique suggests that the value of industrial output increased by only 14 percent in 1960, less than half the 29 percent scheduled. The guidelines for 1961, as spelled out in the communique, comprise mainly a further effort to boost agricultural production, stopgap measures to tide light industry over continued shortages of raw materials, and a reduction in the rate of growth in heavy industry. Investment in capital construction is to be reduced, and the emphasis in industry is to be on "consolidating, filling out, and raising of standards." No production goals are announced for 1961, but the tone of the communique is a clear admission that Peiping's "great leap forward" has spent its force.

The communique also announces that the central committee plans to establish six regional bureaus to strengthen leadership over the municipal and provincial party committees. The six regional committees are identical with the form of party organizations in force before June 1954. They were dissolved at that time in the aftermath of the purge of two regional leaders who were charged with attempting to set up "independent kingdoms." The current reorganization points up the lack of qualified leadership at the intermediary level, which apparently is severe enough to force Peiping to run the danger of allowing regionalism to develop once again.

The plenum also passed a resolution on the Moscow meeting of Communist parties held in November 1960, affirming

23 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
