The Arab League

The Arab League was founded in 1945 to promote unity among its member states, but it has made little progress toward achieving this goal. Its founders--foremost of whom was the late Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Said--professed a desire to work toward the sacrifice of sovereignty and special interest in order to attain such unity. The original members were Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Yemen, along with Egypt and Syria, which in 1958 formed the United Arab Republic. Entry into the league by Libya (1953), the Sudan (1956), and Tunisia and Morocco (1958) brought the total membership to its present ten. Algeria, whose rebel government has a representative attending the current meeting, is not a member. In the 16 years of the league's existence, relatively minor advances in cultural and economic cooperation have been made, but political differences remain as pronounced as ever.

The league attempts to set forth a coordinated Arab viewpoint on various issues and maintains information offices outside the Arab world for this purpose. This kind of display of unity is negated, however, by the almost constant propaganda contest among Arab leaders for position as the leading champion of Arab causes. At various times, for example, Cairo, Amman, and Baghdad have accused each other of promoting a policy of softness toward Israel or of lukewarmness toward the Algerian rebels.

In recent years, Nasir's strong advocacy of his type of Arab nationalism and neutralism, which offends pro-Western Arab governments and many ambitious Arab leaders, has been the most constant irritant in inter-Arab relations. Jordan's King Husayn and Iraqi Prime Minister Qasim--well aware of Nasir's past sponsorship of attempts to overthrow their respective regimes--oppose Nasir's continued dominance of the League, but neither commands great trust or respect from other members. In such an atmosphere, the league is unlikely to increase its meager contributions to Arab unity, and efforts to form a bloc to undermine Nasir's influence in the organization will probably grow only gradually.

3 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
