Developments in Laos Following Formation of New Government

The new government of Khou Abhay in Laos is concentrating on devising electoral procedures which it hopes will ensure a conservative victory over the Communists in the National Assembly elections tentatively scheduled for April or May. Among the still unresolved questions in connection with preparations for elections are whether to hold them in one or two stages or whether to have candidates contest for seats on a province-wide or district basis. These issues may well become serious sources of new friction among Laos' anti-Communist elements and frustrate the efforts of moderate Premier Khou and his brother, Deputy Premier Nhouy, to heal the deep divisions in conservative ranks caused by the recent governmental crisis.

Premier Khou, who is elderly, says he plans to exercise over-all policy control, but he has delegated a great deal of authority in day-to-day governmental affairs to his younger and more energetic brother. Nhouy is a former interior minister who was closely involved in past government efforts to devise workable electoral procedures.

Army leaders claim they can "completely" pacify the country before elections, but this is probably a vain hope. While the Communists insurgents have been relatively quiet in recent weeks, they are believed to retain control of significant areas of the countryside. There have been indications, moreover, that rebel ranks are being increased by young Laotians who have completed courses at Communist training and indoctrination centers reportedly located just across the frontier in North Vietnam.

The new government seems to contemplate with as much enthusiasm as the Phoui regime the prospect of substantially increased UN technical assistance under Secretary General Hammarskjold's scheme to maintain a continuing UN presence in Laos. The government, however, has taken pains to make it clear to both friends and enemies of Laos that it intends to pursue a neutral foreign policy.

Hanoi has greeted the new government with comparative moderation but has indicated that it might call for increased Communist activity if Vientiane departs from a neutral course.
