[PAGE 01]
30 December 1959
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
30 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Korea - Japan: South Korea has raised a last-minute obstacle to the settlement of two major issues with Japan--the exchange of Japanese fishermen seized by South Korea in return for Korean illegal entrants being held in Japan and a program for repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to South Korea. South Korea's ambassador in Japan implied to the US ambassador on 28 December that a final settlement was conditional on United States willingness to provide financial assistance for the resettlement of the repatriates. Further procrastination by Seoul in returning the fishermen will undermine the Tokyo government's efforts to counter growing demands in Japan for a stronger policy toward South Korea.

Meanwhile, the program for repatriation of Koreans resident in Japan to North Korea is continuing, but South Korean agitation against this has recently abated.
[PAGE 05]
Watch Committee Conclusions: The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future:

In Iraq the influence of the Communists continues to disturb Nationalist elements, and a new attempt to assassinate Qasim could occur at any time.

In Laos, differences between the anti-Communist elements are still unresolved. The position of the CDNI supported by influential army elements and apparently by the King seems to have been enhanced. The likelihood of a coup attempt by the CDNI accordingly seems to have diminished.

UAR: A crisis has developed between UAR President Nasir and leaders of the Syrian Baath party who have resisted the growing domination of the Syrian administration by Egyptian officials. Four Syrian Baathist ministers, including Akram Hawrani, a UAR vice president, have submitted their resignations in the past few days, and some 40 Syrian Baathist army officers reportedly have been sent to Cairo as a precautionary measure. The final downfall of the socialist-minded Baath in Syria--which was one of the leading proponents of the union of Egypt and Syria--would be welcomed by the more conservative political elements in Syria; in the longer run, however, it might result in greater resentment against the Egyptians because it would tend to make Egyptian control of Syria more direct and obvious.

30 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
ASIA-AFRICA
Seoul Raises New Obstacle to Agreement with Tokyo

South Korea has raised a last-minute obstacle to agreement with Japan on settlement of two major issues--the exchange of Japanese fishermen held by South Korea for illegal Korean entrants detained by Japan and the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to South Korea. South Korean Ambassador Yu Tai-ha in Tokyo implied on 28 December that final settlement could not be reached unless the United States would provide advance financial assistance for the resettlement of the prospective Korean repatriates.

To secure the return of its fishermen, Tokyo has agreed to seek Diet approval to provide Korean repatriates to South Korea the amount of $1,500 per five- to six-person family, following an over-all settlement of Japanese-South Korean differences. Tokyo has implied that further procrastination in returning the fishermen may force it to take sterner measures, such as referring outstanding issues between the two governments to the United Nations, arming its patrol craft along the "Rhee fishing line," evicting the South Korean mission in Japan, or establishing "official" trade relations with North Korea.

Seoul is holding about 200 Japanese fishermen seized for violation of the unilaterally imposed Rhee line, most of whom have completed sentences imposed by South Korean courts. Japan is believed to be holding some 300 illegal Korean entrants.

According to the South Korean foreign minister, Yu had led President Rhee to believe that the United States would provide financial aid for the repatriates. Without such an arrangement, the foreign minister told Ambassador McConaughy, the Tokyo negotiations are again up in the air.

Meanwhile, the repatriation of about 5,000 Koreans in Japan who have so far requested to go to North Korea is continuing. On 28 December the third group of about 1,000 left Japan without incident. South Korea has moderated its agitation against the repatriation, but it requested on 27 December that the United States take "necessary action" to halt the program.

30 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 09]
