II. ASIA-AFRICA

Fighting Erupts in Laos

The Laotian Government's military position in Sam Neua Province in northeast Laos is threatened by a sudden onslaught of attacks on remote army outposts by dissident elements of the former Communist Pathet Lao movement. Reports on the fighting are still sketchy but several of the small outposts reportedly have fallen, and the government fears an enemy attempt on the town of Sam Neua, where the airfield provides the principal access to this remote and mountainous region.

The government is taking steps for prompt reinforcement of the two infantry battalions, comprising some 1,200 men, which at present to a large degree are scattered throughout the province in units of platoon strength. Antigovernment guerrilla forces in the province are believed to number upwards of 1,000 men, and include pro-Communist local tribesmen plus elements of the recently defected Pathet Lao battalion and probably some cadres from nearby North Vietnam. Ambassador Smith in Vientiane considers it likely that these attacks have been instigated and supported by the Vietnamese Communists, but direct evidence of this is lacking.

Prime Minister Phoui Sananikone has termed the situation "grave," but he does not believe the fighting in Sam Neua heralds full-scale civil war throughout Laos. Phoui believes the enemy's primary purpose is to take possession of Sam Neua, and later Phong Saly Province--the two former Pathet Lao strongholds.

The government has shown concern over the possible resumption of armed dissidence since May when the Pathet Lao battalion, assembled at Plaine des Jarres in Xieng Khouang Province, refused to be integrated into the Royal Laotian Army and escaped from its encampment. At that time Prince Souphanouvong and other leaders of the Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ)--the political party formed by the Pathet Lao after the 1957 unification agreement--were briefly placed under house arrest. Phoui, in reaction to the Sam Neua fighting, now plans to place the

29 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
