CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

* Bloc aircraft for Indonesia; Arrangements with
Czechoslovakia for the delivery of at least eleven Soviet
IL-14 transport aircraft flown by Czech pilots to Indo-
nesia via Moscow-Irkutsk-Peiping-Rangoon-Medan-
Djakarta have been completed.
preparations were too far advanced to allow changes
in the Czech insignia on the planes. These planes will in-
crease the central government's airlift capacity by 30
percent and will almost certainly be pressed into service
against the dissidents as soon as possible.

USSR-Egypt: Three Soviet W-class submarines and
a minesweeper that departed the Baltic on 19 March ar-
rived at Alexandria, Egypt, on 2 April. The submarines
will probably be transferred to Egypt, providing the United
Arab Republic with five W-class long-range units and one
M-class short-range unit. This would give Egypt more
modern long-range submarines than any of the European
satellites.

Yugoslavia: The announcement that Tito will visit
Gomulka late this spring--the result of a long-standing
invitation--comes only five days after his talks with
Hungary's Kadar and is a continuation of his efforts to
extend his influence in Eastern Europe. Tito probably
hopes this announcement will elicit a stand from the still
silent Sino-Soviet bloc on the Yugoslav Communist party
congress this month and its controversial program.

Kashmir: UN representative Graham's latest report
on Kashmir, scheduled for release today, will probably
stimulate mutual recriminations by both Pakistan and India,
but is unlikely to result in any material change in the sit-
uation. Indian officials, including Nehru and Krishna
Menon, have been unusually firm of late in stating that
Kashmir is an integral part of India. Pakistan is in no
position seriously to threaten India's hold on most of the
state. Each side may also use recently publicized shoot-
ing incidents on the East Pakistan-Indian frontier to show the "aggressive" intentions of the other.
