6. US Ambassador regards solution of receipt problem as key to Iranian oil settlement:

The US Ambassador has stressed again the importance of solving the problem of the receipts for tanker shipments as a means of breaking the deadlock in the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company dispute with Iran. To date the British have not conceded the right of the Iranians to collect receipts on oil shipments, even with the reservation that they were signed without prejudice to the rights of the AIOC. The Ambassador states that he does not believe that the British would be sacrificing their fundamental rights under these circumstances, and that such an agreement would expedite negotiations on other matters. The Ambassador expresses the opinion that if the British are endeavoring to force the Iranians to terms by keeping them without oil revenue funds, such a policy is most dangerous.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Renewed European Army talks are encouraging:

The Paris European Army talks have been given new impetus by the presence of Chancellor Adenauer's chief security adviser Theodor Blank. French and German differences now appear less irreconcilable. Although the chief French representative was not authorized to offer concessions on the size of the proposed units and the level of their integration into a European Army, he clearly left the way open for a later French concession by suggesting that this question be referred back to the governments.

However, Blank's proposal to start raising a German contribution to NATO on the basis of the report on the recent Allied-German talks at Petersberg -- while the Paris conference on a European Army pursues its "long and arduous" work -- was flatly rejected by the French representative.

Comment: Although no basic changes in the French position on Germany's defense contribution are likely before September, influential officials in the Foreign Office are revealing greater determination to press on toward mutual Western agreement on this question. Bonn has shown a similar determination by sending Blank instead of his subordinates to Paris.
