[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Chinese Nationalists in Burma reportedly reinforced from Formosa (page 3).
3. Quirino asserts United States seeking to replace him with Magsaysay (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on Indian efforts to secure Communist China's admission to UN (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Paris Embassy takes optimistic view of Mayer's EDC policy (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Chinese Nationalists in Burma reportedly reinforced from Formosa:

The Burmese commander in north Burma, Brigadier Douglas Blake, has told the American Army and Air Attaches that Chinese Nationalist forces in Burma have reached a strength of 17,000. He said additional troops were arriving in Thailand by air from Formosa and proceeding overland into Burma.

The Army Attache comments that he has unconfirmed evidence of a Nationalist build-up but feels the figure of 17,000 is too high.

Comment: Brigadier Blake has a reputation for integrity. There is no evidence, however, from non-Burmese sources of a Nationalist build-up in Burma.

[PAGE 04]
3. Quirino asserts United States seeking to replace him with Magsaysay:

According to the governor of the Philippine Central Bank, President Quirino says that the United States has for more than a year followed a "carefully calculated campaign" to replace him with Defense Secretary Magsaysay and to get the Liberal administration out of office. To support his statement, Quirino cites the recent publication of two MSA reports on land tenure.

Comment: Quirino may hope to counter the unfavorable publicity his administration has received as a result of the publication of these reports by diverting public attention to charges of American interference in Philippine politics.

SOUTH ASIA
4. Comment on Indian efforts to secure Communist China's admission to UN:

Evidence is accumulating that India, as part of a renewed effort to achieve peace in Korea, is actively seeking admission of Communist China into the United Nations and that it hopes to promote an Arab-Asian request to this effect in the near future.

Despite Indian denials, Madame Pandit reportedly has broached the issue in Beirut,
The government-controlled Egyptian radio has suggested that Egypt could be persuaded to accept Chinese Communist UN membership.

V. K. Krishna Menon of the Indian UN delegation explored the subject with the British Foreign Office in London early this month.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

8. Paris Embassy takes optimistic view of Mayer's EDC policy:

The American Embassy in Paris considers that Premier-designate Rene Mayer has improved the chances of EDC ratification in return for minimum concessions to the treaty's opponents. The Embassy states that a third of the Gaullist deputies would desert their party to side with the government in a showdown on the treaty, and that Mayer continues in firm support of its basic principles.

Mayer's statement to the National Assembly, that a Saar settlement must be defined before the Bonn and Paris treaties are ratified, is viewed as the most troublesome aspect of his EDC policy.

Comment: This is the first indication that any Gaullists would support the EDC, and Mayer has evidently used the threat of a party split to undermine Gaullist opposition to the government's policy.

[PAGE 07]
