Agitation Against Communist Government in India's Kerala State

The widespread agitation against the Communist regime in Kerala State, which the local Congress party and other opposition groups opened with a general strike on 12 June, has resulted in continuing disturbances. Five persons were killed and 30 injured on 13 June when Communist-directed police opened fire on a large crowd in northern Kerala. Many opposition volunteers have been arrested following "nonviolent" demonstrations in the capital city of Trivandrum and other centers throughout the state.

Further violence is likely when the intensive agitation planned by the Catholic and Hindu Nair communities against Communist education policies begins on 15 June. These groups have long planned an all-out effort to challenge the Communist government and apparently have been amassing weapons in anticipation of clashes with Communist security forces.

Both government and opposition leaders had hoped to place the responsibility for whatever violence occurred on the other. A group of top Kerala and all-India Communist party leaders reportedly agreed at a meeting in Bombay on 7 June to avoid police firing during the first stages of the agitation, and resort to "intensive repression" only when it is clear such action is essential to prevent serious disorders. Opposition strategists now are likely to exploit the police shooting on 13 June to incite further "direct action" against the Communists.

Communist Chief Minister Namboodiripad has offered to compromise with the opposition parties, and he invited Prime Minister Nehru to visit Kerala following Nehru's recent statement that he would go there if it would help resolve the situation peacefully. Anti-Communist leaders in Kerala are unlikely to accept the compromise offer, since they hope that a serious breakdown of law and order will either force the Communists to resign or cause New Delhi to suspend parliamentary government in the state and institute direct rule. If the Communist position deteriorates drastically, party leaders may also conclude that direct President's Rule--with the onus for intervention on New Delhi--is the best way out of an unfavorable situation.

15 June 59
