Indonesian Situation

Indonesian army officials expect the dissident capital of Menado in North Celebes to fall to government forces within two weeks.

Government aircraft reportedly bombed Menado again on 23 May. The government has further strengthened its position by relieving the commander in South Celebes, Lt. Col. Andi Mattalatta, who had been sympathetic to the dissidents and had failed to take action against revolutionary officers traveling through his territory. He has been replaced by Lt. Col. Andi Jusuf. Colonel Jani told the American army attache army headquarters is willing to negotiate with the dissidents but that the army will dictate the terms.

Army Chief of Staff General Nasution is reported working toward the reorganization of both the army and the country's political system, with anti-Communism and the dissolution of political parties as his basic policies. Nasution, however, must obtain the support of President Sukarno if he expects to implement his plans. Nasution is also said to be seeking the cooperation of Colonel Kawilarang, former military attaché to Washington who joined the dissidents, in order to facilitate the reintegration of dissident areas.

The second major shipment of bloc arms is en route to Indonesia. A Soviet vessel loaded with 1,500 tons of military equipment, apparently including at least five more jet fighter aircraft, left the Black Sea on 21 May and is expected to arrive in Indonesia by mid-June. A second small Soviet tanker left the Black Sea on 19 May "to be delivered to the Indonesians," suggesting that it, like the ten small Soviet cargo vessels delivered in March and April, may be supplied under the $100,000,000 Soviet credit. The first tanker is expected to arrive in early June and the second by mid-June. They are to replace Western vessels on interisland runs. A second group of IL-14's was scheduled to leave Irkutsk for Peiping on 21 May on the first leg of the flight to Indonesia.

24 May 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
