Communist China to Open Trade Office in Brazil

Trade between Communist China and Brazil has been limited to a few Chinese purchases of Brazilian sugar; it is unlikely that the opening of a trade office will lead to a spectacular leap in trade. Communist China in the past, however, has found the signing of trade agreements or the opening of trade offices a useful preliminary move in gaining recognition. This procedure was used in the UAR, Morocco, and Cuba. However, in 1958 Peiping abandoned plans to open an unofficial trade office in Japan after the Japanese Government rejected Peiping's demand for a clear endorsement of the right to fly the Chinese Communist flag. Last year the Chinese Communists closed a trade office in Lebanon--maintained for four years--because Beirut failed to sever relations with Taipei.

The Chinese Communists have long indicated a particular interest in Brazil and apparently consider it the key to their efforts in South America. Brazilian members of Latin American delegations to China have reported that the Chinese Communists have given them far more attention than has been accorded other members. The Chinese plan further to court Brazilian interest by opening an exhibition in Brazil illustrating the achievements of the Peiping regime.

The Quadros administration has been making unusually strong efforts since its inauguration last January to expand economic relations with both Communist and non-Communist countries. President Quadros has made equivocal statements as to his alignment with the West and has accepted an invitation to the Nasir-Tito conference of "non-aligned" countries which was announced in April.

Quadros is not likely to accord early recognition to Peiping, however, since he apparently prefers to space out his announcements of dramatic changes in Brazilian foreign policy and has indicated that the re-establishment of relations with the USSR may precede the establishment of relations with Communist China.

The Chinese trade group in Brazil--led by Nan Han-chen, head of Peiping's Committee for the Promotion of International

13 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
