According to observers, all US officials, the possible Type-37 appeared to be three times longer than an IL-28. The wings were sharply swept back (estimated 35 degrees) and tapered from root to tip. Most prominent part of the aircraft was the very high vertical stabilizer. The horizontal stabilizer was located just above the fuselage. None of the observers reported reciprocating engine noise or saw propellers. All observers believed the aircraft to be jet propelled. Among the US officials sighting these aircraft, there were conflicting views regarding the engine installation -- three indicating the probability that the engines were buried in the wings. One observer believed that he saw one engine nacelle on each wing. Another thought the aircraft looked like a B-52. All, after reviewing the Type-37 photograph, agreed that in all probability the aircraft in question were Type-37's.

D/I USAF Comment: It is considered probable that as many as nine aircraft, similar to the Type-37 were sighted in flight. No information was obtained from these sightings which would alter previous estimates that the Type-37 represents a jet bomber in the heavy class. The existence of as many as nine Type-37 aircraft would indicate that the Soviet heavy jet bomber program is significantly farther advanced than hitherto estimated. The appearance of nine such aircraft in flight indicates that series production of this model must have begun around July 1953 at the latest.

D/I USAF estimates have not considered that series production of the Type-37 would begin before sometime in 1956. While currently held estimates have predicted the introduction of small numbers of turboprop heavy bombers in the Type-31 class in operational units by mid-54, the indicated availability of serially produced Type-37's indicates that bombers of this more advanced type could appear in operational use by mid-54.

In view of the possible availability of these heavy jet bombers a reappraisal of the entire Soviet long range bomber program is being undertaken.

21 Apr 54
