[PAGE 01]
20 January 1958

Copy No. 137

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOS REVIEW COMPLETED
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Yugoslavia's carefully balanced position between East and West in its foreign relations may be jeopardized by the French interception off Oran of a Yugoslav freighter carrying 150 tons of arms which the French fear are destined for North African rebels. While France has not reacted strongly to previous shipments, in the light of present French sensitivity over North Africa this incident will tend to confirm recent French suspicions that Tito is swinging too far away from the West.

Marshal Zhukov has not been publicly identified since his removal from high party and government posts in late October. Soviet officials have stated that he would receive a new military appointment upon completion of 90 days' leave of absence which is probably about to expire.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
Egyptian President Nasir appears basically wary of proposals for Syrian-Egyptian union, and seems to be setting difficult conditions in order to dampen Syrian enthusiasm for the project. Pressures for union continue to mount, however, and there almost certainly will be additional public announcements that plans for union are being developed. (Page 1)

III. THE WEST

West German-Soviet trade and repatriation talks will be resumed on 30 January, and are expected to last for two or three months. Bonn now has reason to believe that the USSR will shortly release some 75 German missile experts held in Sukhumi. These Germans probably have not had access to current Soviet missile development.

French military reaction in Algiers to the recent Tunisian border incidents is such that civilian officials fear that even a minor incident could start the French Army across
[PAGE 06]
the frontier "with or without orders from Paris." Premier Gaillard faces a foreign policy debate in the National Assembly beginning 21 January. He is under heavy pressure from rightist deputies to break relations with Tunisia, although the Foreign Ministry is playing down this possibility. Tunisian President Bourguiba's 18 January speech to the constituent assembly was restrained in tone.

The circulation of antigovernment manifestos signed by prominent Venezuelans and a rumored oil workers' strike suggest mounting pressure on President Perez, with civilian groups probably attempting to coordinate their efforts with dissident military groups. Perez, in another effort to bolster his authority, has dismissed the new chief of the national security police and has apparently considered recalling the previous chief, Pedro Estrada, to Caracas.

Firm indications of the outcome of the Guatemalan elections will probably not be available before the afternoon of 20 January. Meanwhile, there have been no reports of violence.
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

No back-up material.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Syrian-Egyptian Union

There are conflicting reports of Nasir's immediate reaction to proposals for Syrian-Egyptian union.

In apparent contradiction, the Egyptian chargé in Damascus said Nasir has agreed to union provided that the Syrian Army abstains from politics and Syria's political parties dissolve. The chargé said "all Syrians who matter" had accepted these terms.

Both reports indicate, however, that Nasir is basically wary, particularly of army factionalism and Communist influence in Syria. He is using his strong bargaining position both to check the Syrian haste for union and to bid for more control over the Syrian situation. Even if Syrian leaders should give lip service to his terms, they probably would not be able or willing to carry them out. The pressures Syrian politicians have generated nevertheless seem strong enough to bring about further public announcements that plans for union are being developed.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice-President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under-Secretary of State
The Counselor
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander-in-Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
