CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 February 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

* Summit talks - Soviet view: On 28 January, Soviet Ambassador Malik told Acting British Prime Minister Butler that the USSR's position is "elastic" on the composition and date of a heads-of-government meeting. Khrushchev's remark in the London Times on 1 February that the USSR is willing to postpone a Summit meeting beyond its suggested date if "two to three months" is "too soon" is probably intended to emphasize this point. Moscow is apparently confident that mounting popular pressure will force the US to drop its insistence on adequate preparatory work.
(Page 1)

Communist China: Peiping has fired the communications, food, and timber industry ministers. They have been under attack since last June for "opposing" Communist party domination of the central government. Three more ministers and four vice ministers have also been criticized recently in the Communist press. Some of these men may possibly be dismissed during the National People's Congress which convenes on 1 February.
(Page 2)

Soviet pressure on Laos: The USSR is again pressing Laos to exchange diplomatic missions. This move is probably timed to counter the favorable effects of Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma's visit to the US and has the longer-range objective of buttressing the Communist-controlled Pathet Lao political and subversive campaign within Laos. The Laotian Government may continue to stall, at least until after the elections for additional National Assembly seats to be held 4 May.
(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Egyptian-Syrian union: Syrian President Quwatli's arrival in Cairo on 31 January will probably be followed very soon by a joint proclamation with Nasir on Egyptian-Syrian union.

Israeli-Syrian tension: Israel's note to the United Nations charging Syrian "aggression" is a reminder of Israel's long-range concern over the effect of Egyptian-Syrian union on Israel's security. Syrian nervousness regarding Israeli intentions is suggested by the fact that a Syrian official has queried the American Embassy in Damascus about Israeli troop movements. However, a reconnaissance of Israel's northern and central commands has revealed no observable Israeli military build-up.

The Communist bloc continues to develop its relations with Indonesia. A Polish delegation recently departed for Djakarta to investigate the chartering of Polish ships to Indonesia and to offer personnel for operation of Indonesian vessels. The recent visit of Czech Premier Siroky resulted in a communique aligning the bloc with Indonesia on important local and international issues.

France - Tunisia: Recent reports suggest that civilian leaders in Paris are beginning to share to an increasing extent the frustrations of French military leaders in Algeria over the sanctuary in Tunisia enjoyed by Algerian rebels. It is unlikely that Premier Gaillard will sanction a major punitive offensive at this time, but the Algerian-Tunisian frontier situation continues to have explosive potentialities, and new incidents might force Gaillard's hand. In the meantime, Paris is apparently delaying any further diplomatic approaches to Bourguiba.
