[PAGE 01]
6 May 1961

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
6 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Congo: Leopoldville may reconvene parliament.
(Page ii)

3. Communist China: Chou En-lai rejects offer of American wheat from Burmese prime minister.
(Page ii)

4. Pyongyang invites South Koreans to visit North Korea.
(Page ii)

6. Libya: Cabinet reorganized.
(Page iii)

7. Iran: Appointment of new prime minister intended to end demonstrations in Tehran.
(Page iii)

SECRET

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Congo: Leopoldville's Foreign Minister Bomboko--the dominant figure at the Coquilhatville political conference--apparently hopes to enlist UN support to disarm Tshombé's troops, and subsequently himself move against Gizenga, according to the American Embassy in Leopoldville. There are indications that the Leopoldville group may reconvene parliament--a move long sought by Gizenga--as a means of securing Gizenga's attendance at the current talks. Leopoldville government leaders, who are still keeping Tshombé under detention, apparently regard the present conference at Coquilhatville as crucial to the Congo's future and have no plans to defer outstanding issues to a subsequent meeting.

Belgian Foreign Minister Spaak, who is also minister of African affairs in the new cabinet, will seek to build up the Leopoldville government at Tshombé's expense and to weed out some of the more blatant Belgian supporters of Tshombé in Katanga. Because of strong right-wing sentiment in Belgium, however, he would be reluctant to see a general exodus of Belgian settlers from Katanga at the UN's insistence.

Communist China: Demonstrating an extreme sensitivity to any suggestion that Communist China needs American help in its present difficulties, Premier Chou En-lai rejected an offer, extended by Burmese Premier U Nu in April, of some 300,000 tons of wheat from private American sources on favorable terms. Chou admitted that the purchase of Canadian and Australian grain for hard currency was placing a heavy strain on China, but declined to consider a proposal that would have permitted payment for the American wheat in Chinese Communist currency.

North - South Korea: North Korea has offered to throw open its borders and pay the bills for a wide variety of visitors from South Korea. On 4 May Pyongyang issued a statement endorsing a proposal for North-South contacts it said had been made the same day by a group of South Korean students.

6 May 61
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 06]
made the same day by a group of South Korean students. Pyongyang invited the students to come North and offered to provide "freedom of travel" and living facilities. Virtually every segment of the South Korean population was promised similar treatment in this offer, which Pyongyang undoubtedly expects Seoul to denounce. Although the bulk of South Korean political and student leaders probably will reject Pyongyang's offer, public interest in reunification has been growing since April of last year. (Page 5)

Libya: The reorganization of Prime Minister Uthman's cabinet on 4 May appears aimed at heading off a new governmental crisis over graft and corruption among top officials. Members of the Uthman government in their six months of power managed to find "legal" as well as sub rosa means for extracting large sums from several Western-owned oil companies. Although the pro-Western minister of foreign affairs has been replaced by an experienced diplomat who has also been favorably disposed toward the West, the composition of the revised cabinet as a whole suggests a continuation of the gradual trend in Libya toward nationalist and neutralist policies. (Page 7)

6 May 61
DAILY BRIEF
iii

[PAGE 07]
Iran: Confirmation by the Shah of reports that Ali Amini has been appointed prime minister to replace Sharif-Emami, who resigned on 4 May, would indicate an intent to appease elements which have called for reform and an attempt to quiet demonstrations which have been going on in Tehran since 2 May.

Amini would probably attempt a moderate reformist program, but his success would depend on the extent to which the Shah is willing to support him against the ultraconservatives, who would oppose any reforms threatening their interests. General Bakhtiar also talked to the Shah on 5 May and is a possible choice for prime minister, but he is reported to be reluctant to accept the post.

6 May 61
DAILY BRIEF
iv

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
The Situation in the Congo

According to press reports, Tshombé has been advised that he will not be released until he has guaranteed the participation of Katanga deputies in parliament. In April, elements of the Congo Army nominally loyal to Gizenga reportedly agreed to recognize General Mobutu's authority in return for a reconvening of parliament as desired by Gizenga.

Bomboko may regard a reconvening of parliament as the price which Leopoldville must pay to secure Gizenga's participation in negotiations aimed at reuniting the Congo. The American Embassy in Leopoldville reports that Gizenga has "made long strides" in the past three weeks to increase his parliamentary support. Gizenga appears assured of the support of over 40 deputies of the 136-man lower chamber--a bloc comparable to that controlled by Lumumba during his period as premier.

Spaak has to contend with powerful rightist elements in the cabinet which are hostile to any course which might appear to be sacrificing Belgian interests. An aggressive supporter of a vigorous pro-Katanga policy, former Defense Minister Gilson has been retained in the cabinet as minister of interior as a concession to the rightist elements among the Social Christians. Another "flight" of Belgians from the Congo would have grave repercussions on public opinion and seriously weaken Spaak's position as foreign minister.

6 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4

[PAGE 10]
North Korea Seeks Contacts With the South

The Seoul University league for national unification, which Pyongyang states proposed North - South student talks, claims to have affiliated organizations on a number of South Korean campuses but probably speaks for only a small minority of leftist-inclined students. However, the failure of the "April revolution" of 1960 to provide anticipated economic improvements has increased public interest in reunification as a solution for the country's ills.

Aware of this interest, North Korea is conducting an intensive propaganda campaign around the reunification theme. Boasting of its economic progress in the past few years, Pyongyang bombards the South with offers of economic assistance and calls for a wide range of contacts as preliminary steps toward reunification. Pyongyang has sought to make Seoul responsible, in the eyes of the Southern population, for thwarting these overtures.

Responsible South Korean government and opposition leaders have been strongly opposed to any form of exchange with the Communists and probably prefer to avoid any initiative on reunification. Last November, however, the Chang Myon government showed some willingness to take a more flexible position toward North-South contacts in order to convince the public it was moving in a reasonable manner to satisfy desires for reunification.

6 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Libyan Cabinet Shake-Up

Three of the six new cabinet appointees were drawn from the House of Deputies' Committee on Finance and Economy, the body which would have been most likely to attack the executive branch effectively on the corruption issue. These appointments are presumably a continuation of Uthman's maneuver to fragment the opposition in the House of Deputies which brought about the fall of the Kubar government last October. The charges against them centered on bribes and other irregularities in the government's handling of the costly Fezzan road project. In spite of the past scandal, both he and King Idris are insistent that construction of the Fezzan road be continued by the same Libyan firm and on much the same basis as originally planned.

The government is also extremely vulnerable because of the crudity of the favors granted by top officials in response to bribes from a few of the many Western-owned oil companies operating in Libya. In March, for example, the government unexpectedly opened several concession areas, accepted the applications of two companies which had paved the way with appropriate largesse, and immediately closed the bidding. In a more open and "legal" fashion, federal officials have worked with Libyan provincial governments to obtain large special payments from companies in connection with pipeline rights-of-way. Public resentment has rapidly increased and tends to be directed against the Western oil industry as well as against venal Libyan officials.

6 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
