1. USSR OFFERS STATUS QUO SETTLEMENT AS ALTERNA-
TIVE TO BOLSTERING NATO STRENGTH

Soviet Premier Bulganin's letters to President Eisenhower and to heads of other NATO governments together with recent private statements apparently are intended to undermine the rationale of American measures to increase NATO's strength and unity by offering the West a general political settlement based on the status quo.

In a conversation on 4 December with the Swiss ambassador, Bulganin elaborated on Khrushchev's proposal of 3 December to a group of ambassadors for Western recognition of the status quo in Eastern Europe in exchange for a Soviet agreement not to attempt to overthrow capitalist regimes. Bulganin stated that the USSR was prepared to give assurances, on a reciprocal basis, against intervention in the affairs of capitalist countries. He suggested that such an agreement might cover a period of 12 or 15 years.

Bulganin denied that the Russians were engaged in a "sputnik diplomacy." He asserted, however, that they had achieved technological parity with the West and that East and West should therefore come to an agreement on the basis of the status quo. Soviet presidium member Mikoyan took the same line in a talk with the Swiss ambassador on 7 December, stating that East-West negotiations should be facilitated now that the USSR has reached parity in the technological field. He remarked that the USSR previously had suffered from an inferiority complex which had made negotiations difficult.

Although the Soviet leaders evidently believe their technological achievements will enable them to gain world recognition of the USSR's strategic parity with the West, it is unlikely that Moscow considers there has been a sufficient change in the balance of power to justify any radical shift in Soviet foreign policy. Bulganin remarked to the Swiss ambassador that although one side or the other might gain a temporary lead in some particular field, this could not change the basic situation.

12 Dec 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
