[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

29 March 1956

Copy No. 103

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. USSR PROPOSES NEW APPROACH TO DISARMAMENT (page 3).

2. PRAVDA JUSTIFIES ATTACK ON STALIN (page 4).

3. ICELANDIC PARLIAMENT DEMANDS WITHDRAWAL OF AMERICAN TROOPS (page 5).

4. SOVIET NAVY TO EMPHASIZE ADVANCED WEAPONS (page 6).

5. YUGOSLAV POLICE WATCH INTERNAL REACTION TO SOVIET PARTY CONGRESS (page 7).

6. RHEE ENDORSES YI KI-PUNG AS VICE-PRESIDENTIAL RUNNING MATE (page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 9)

[PAGE 04]
1. USSR PROPOSES NEW APPROACH TO DISARMAMENT

After bluntly rejecting the Anglo-French disarmament proposal at the UN disarmament subcommittee meeting on 27 March, Soviet delegate Gromyko submitted a new Soviet plan. His proposal contained elements from both the Anglo-French "working paper" introduced by French delegate Moch on 19 March and the American proposals for limited "confidence-building" measures, as well as the original Soviet plan of 10 May 1955. In contrast to Moscow's more detailed plan of 10 May, the new approach leaves wide latitude for prolonged negotiations by which Moscow probably hopes to sharpen any divergences among the Western powers.

The proposal's most significant departure from the 10 May plan is the absence of provisions for the prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons. The preamble of the new plan, however, maintains that it would assist in reaching an "indispensable" agreement on banning nuclear weapons, but the plan itself calls only for a reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces.

Moscow probably expects that this new plan will be unacceptable to the Western powers. This is suggested by the inclusion of the proposal at the end of Gromyko's speech that, independent of reaching any disarmament agreement, the powers should adopt the three "partial measures" outlined by Khrushchev in his speech to the Soviet 20th Party Congress. These would include the immediate cessation of thermonuclear weapons tests, prohibition of atomic weapons on German territory, and a 15-percent reduction in military budget allocations.

[PAGE 05]
2. PRAVDA JUSTIFIES ATTACK ON STALIN

A long editorial in the 27 March issue of Pravda provides the first official published justification of the anti-Stalin drive. The editorial divides Stalin's career into two phases. It says that "Stalin rendered great services to our party, the working class, and to the international labor movement" but treats his rule from the early thirties onward as a prolonged aberration. The present leaders disclaim any responsibility for the excesses of the purge era, when, in the face of Stalin's absolute dominance and the myth of his infallibility, opposition to his policies was futile. However, they evidently feel it would be unwise to reject the earlier period of Stalin's rule, which produced the policies of collectivization and Five-Year Plan industrialization. In addition, by treating with respect the early phase of Stalin's career, the regime leaves the generation of Communists who grew up under Stalin with a part of the myth to believe in, and renders the destruction of the rest more palatable.

Stalin's egomania, Pravda charges, created the "cult of the individual" which in turn led to "unjustified repression" and encouraged "servility." Behind these charges there apparently lies a real need to revitalize the bureaucratic machinery and restore intellectual initiative within the Soviet state.

Determination to prevent re-establishment of one-man dictatorship is also indicated in Pravda's editorial. The attack on Stalin is intended, it says, "to preclude any possibility of a revival of the cult of the individual in one or another form."

[PAGE 06]
3. ICELANDIC PARLIAMENT DEMANDS WITHDRAWAL OF AMERICAN TROOPS

The Icelandic parliament's 28 March resolution calling for a withdrawal of American troops makes it certain that Iceland will insist on a revision of the Defense Agreement of 1951 with the United States, whereby American forces man the NATO air base at Keflavik. Even the Conservative Party, which alone opposed the resolution, will undoubtedly advocate some revision during the campaign for parliamentary elections, probably to be held on 24 June. The base has become increasingly unpopular with a large segment of the Icelandic people.

The Progressives, second party in the government coalition headed by the Conservatives, withdrew from the cabinet on 27 March to force the elections. They favor a revision of the agreement whereby the Icelanders would themselves undertake to guard and maintain the installations. In accordance with Article VII of the agreement, the Icelanders can force an American evacuation in 18 months.

Most "revisionists" hope that Iceland would continue to receive dollar earnings by maintaining the base.

[PAGE 07]
4. SOVIET NAVY TO EMPHASIZE ADVANCED WEAPONS

Comment

Recent articles by high-ranking Soviet naval officers have indicated widespread interest in the development of torpedoes with atomic warheads, atomic mines, ship-borne guided missiles, and nuclear propulsion for naval vessels.

[PAGE 08]
5. YUGOSLAV POLICE WATCH INTERNAL REACTION TO SOVIET PARTY CONGRESS

Comment

Belgrade undoubtedly wishes to quash at its source any rumor that it will now return to its pre-1948 relations with the USSR. Yugoslav officials have stated that their government does not intend to abandon its caution in dealing with the USSR despite recent developments there.

The Yugoslav interior secretary told the Yugoslav National Assembly on 27 March that of the 15,800 Cominformists prosecuted between 1948 and 1955, only 1,400 are still in jail.

[PAGE 09]
6. RHEE ENDORSES YI KI-PUNG AS VICE-PRESIDENTIAL RUNNING MATE

President Rhee's belated endorsement of Yi Ki-pung, speaker of the National Assembly, for the South Korean vice presidency virtually assures Yi's election.

Election of Yi to the vice presidency would increase the likelihood of an orderly succession in the event of Rhee's death in office. Yi has developed strong political backing in the dominant Liberal Party and is acceptable to most of South Korea's military and national police leaders.

Although lacking in Rhee's qualities of leadership, Yi is regarded as a capable administrator. American-educated, he is a political moderate who has been co-operative with American officials. A former minister of national defense, Yi resigned after opposing Rhee in the use of troops to quell a domestic political disturbance. Since 1953, however, he has been closely associated with Rhee's policies.

[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 March)

Egyptian troops in the El Auja sector again directed small arms fire on an Israeli patrol inside Israel, according to a military spokesman in Tel Aviv. (Press)

Of the more than 90 IL-28 light jet bomber experts now in Egypt, the Egyptian government proposed to retain only about 15 in various fields of specialization. This plan suggests that all of the 45 IL-28's ordered by Egypt have been delivered and assembled and that some basic instruction has been given in their use and maintenance. Further training of crews for these aircraft is believed to be taking place in the Soviet bloc.

15 Sherman tanks be returned immediately from reserve stocks at the El Arish ordnance depot, near the Israeli frontier, to a motor pool in the Cairo area. This reduction in combat reserve stocks may provide further indication that Egypt is forming new combat units in the canal zone or may indicate a new shipment of armor to one of its allies.

The two Egyptian destroyers on order from Britain will not be completely refitted until late May or early June. The two destroyers which Israel is to receive from Britain are not expected to depart until later than the previous estimate of 1 April; however, they should reach the eastern Mediterranean well ahead of the Egyptian vessels.

Within one month, the first recruits from South America will arrive in Israel to serve one year as volunteers, according to a statement by Israeli Brigadier Carmel, minister of communications, upon return from a trip to South America. Tel Aviv has encouraged recruiting of foreign volunteers "to strengthen Israel's borders." In November 1955 an appeal was made to Jewish communities abroad for 100,000 volunteers for work in the border settlements.
