for nations to settle outstanding differences both bilaterally and through the UN.

USSR: Party Secretary Frol Kozlov, by many indications the second-ranking man in the Soviet leadership, has been out of public view since mid-April. There has been no official explanation for his absence. The most important event he missed was the May Day celebration, which traditionally brings the top leaders out in full force. Mikhail Suslov, the other leading party secretary under Khrushchev, was the ranking party official at several Moscow functions during the latter part of Khrushchev's April vacation.

Japan: Foreign Minister Kosaka has renewed Tokyo's request that a tripartite council be established to handle matters concerning Japan, the United States, and the Ryukyu Islands. Kosaka claims that such a council would undercut leftist agitation in Okinawa and forestall attempts by the political opposition in Japan to make the Okinawan issue a public controversy prior to Prime Minister Ikeda's visit to Washington in June. The US high commissioner for the Ryukyus comments, however, that establishing the council is likely to stimulate agitation for further concessions to reversionist forces in Okinawa and Japan. It seems likely that Japan's role in Ryukyuan affairs will be raised in Ikeda's discussions during his visit here. (Backup, Page 4)

South Africa: Unrest is likely to increase in South Africa in the next few weeks. Non-white organizations, aided by Communists, are planning a series of strikes and demonstrations late in the month to protest the proclamation of a South African republic on 31 May. In an effort to head off the demonstrations, the police are carrying out a series of raids and have arrested or restricted most of the leaders of the antigovernment campaign.

"serious disturbances in the public order" during May.
"the armed forces have been alerted and, if necessary, will take harsh action. The white civilians are also preparing themselves, and there has been a race to the city's gunsmiths."
(Backup, Page 6)

8 May 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
