Defense and Interior portfolios out of "leftist" hands. Souvanna was definite that General Phoumi and Prince Boun Oum would be excluded from a possible Souvanna government, but he adopted an equivocal position when asked if Phoumi could be given responsibility for military affairs at a sub-cabinet level.

The Laotian Government considers that the primary objective of the conference is to work out an internationally guaranteed neutrality status for Laos, but it considers the formation of a government of national union an internal affair. In a 6 May press conference in Phnom Penh, Souvanna Phouma adopted the same position, saying it would be incorrect for the conference to deal with internal Laotian affairs. Souvanna proposed that the conference study the creation of a neutral zone which would include both Laos and Cambodia.

The Hanoi Foreign Ministry has charged that on 6 May US aircraft violated North Vietnamese air space four times. The alleged overflights are reported to have occurred in the southernmost provinces of Ha Tinh and Quang Binh. Hanoi warned that the US must "bear full responsibility for the consequences of its actions."

Communist propaganda continues to place the blame on the US for the failure thus far to achieve productive cease-fire negotiations. A People's Daily commentary on 7 May terms Vientiane's refusal to meet at Ban Namone a "move to create new obstacles" to forming a coalition government and sending a Laotian delegation to Geneva. People's Daily also charges that the US desires only a "breathing spell" and that the "emphasis of US policy is still on intervention."

Soviet airlift operations continued to be scheduled through 7 May. On 5 May a total of 21 Soviet and North Vietnamese transports were involved in airlift operations; of this number, five Soviet LI-2s were noted in round-trip flights from Hanoi to Xieng Khouang. On 6 May 20 Soviet and North Vietnamese transports were involved in airlift operations; of these, eight

8 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
