locale of much of the fighting readily permits covert supply from
across the border.

The Communists probably estimate that any demonstrated
inability of the Laotian Government to cope with the partisan attacks will bring effective pressure on the Laotian Government and the West for the return of the International Control Commission (ICC). Peiping and Hanoi probably regard the ICC as the best means at present for restoring an atmosphere favorable for the expansion of Communist assets in Laos, assuring Laotian neutrality, and frustrating US and French efforts to train the Laotian Army.
With cumulative evidence of the present Phoui government's proUS orientation, coupled with its moderate success in undercutting Communist strength in some sections of the country, the propaganda from Peiping and Hanoi has reflected increasing concern
over the deteriorating Communist position in Laos. The relatively
poor showing of the Laotian Army in June against the renegade
Pathet Lao battalion may have encouraged Peiping and Hanoi to
act while local partisan capabilities were still sufficient to keep
the Laotian Government off balance.

During his visit to the Soviet Union last month, North Vietnam's President Ho Chi Minh undoubtedly discussed with Soviet
leaders the problem of Communist strategy in Laos. At his next
meeting with British Foreign Secretary Lloyd on 3 August, Gromyko probably will renew Soviet pressure for reconvening the
truce commission.

Meanwhile, an Indian official in New Delhi has implied his
government's concern, as chairman of the ICC, over how to deal
with Communist bloc objections to the recent introduction of
American military training personnel into Laos. Commonwealth
Secretary Desai stated it was unfortunate that the Laotian Government had itself requested American instructors; if the French,
who are permitted under the Geneva truce terms to maintain a
training mission, had made the request, there would have been no
legal basis for objection. Desai also noted that the current activity in Laos was another clear indication of the reason why India
feels meetings of the ICC "when needed" could be helpful in confirming allegations of foreign intervention.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
