Continuing Instability in the Sudan

The internal situation remains unstable as the Abboud military government moves into the final stage of the conspiracy
trials of officers implicated in the May coup attempt. The government has concluded its case against General Hamid, last of
three high-ranking officers to be tried, and has announced that
trials of junior officers will begin on 4 August. The sentences
of convicted officers will probably not be announced by President
Abboud until all the trials have been completed later this month.

Meanwhile, the power struggle in the army is continuing
between opponents and supporters of the accused. The forceful Minister for Cabinet Affairs, Brigadier Hasan Beshir Nasir,
has been striving to reshuffle officer appointments to ensure
loyalty in key positions, particularly in the armored and artillery forces. Army headquarters tightened existing restrictions on travel of army
officers to Khartoum and required that all officers provide 48
hours' advance notice and obtain permission before traveling to
the capital. Also, the UAR ambassador in Khartoum informed Cairo that
President Abboud had received letters demanding that he release
the arrested officers and issue orders for the arrest of Hasan
Beshir Nasir, or be assassinated at the hands of the "free ones"
--presumably a dissident officer group.
Abboud's wife was attempting to persuade him to avoid danger by
leaving the government.

Former Premier Azhari has indicated that civilian political
groups, with some military support, are attempting to find a
basis for establishing a nonparty civilian cabinet under a supreme council of retired officers. Some political figures, however, appear striving to gain advantage from the unstable situation by maneuvering to obtain Egyptian support. The UAR
ambassador in Khartoum informed Cairo that Brigadier Hasan Beshir Nasir wished to send a secret
envoy for talks with President Nasir. Ansar sect leader Sidiq
al-Mahdi expressed concern to Ambassador Moose on 27 July
over the visit to Cairo and Moscow by Ethiopian Emperor Haile
Selassie, because the Sudan had always considered Ethiopia
as its "second line of defense" against Egyptian encroachment.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5
