I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Moves to Maintain Close Ties With Cairo

Moscow agreed to grant major concessions to the UAR in a
new arms deal. Under the agreement, the Soviet Union will supply the UAR with additional jet fighters and "new bombers."
Cairo last year had asked the USSR to provide two squadrons
of MIG-19s and one squadron of TU-16 jet medium bombers,
which Moscow had refused previously. Moscow, however, has
apparently decided to increase its efforts to maintain close relations with Cairo and may have agreed to a compromise, involving the supply of other less advanced combat aircraft.

In addition, Moscow now has agreed to provide "civilian"
equipment to the UAR under the new agreement. In the past the
Soviet Union has repeatedly refused to permit the UAR to include
such items as civil aircraft and trucks in arms deals, insisting
that the UAR purchase these items, specifically modern civil
aircraft such as the IL-18 and the TU-104, under short-term
commercial credits and at the full quoted price.

The arms deal apparently will be concluded on the basis of
"the financial terms of the former agreements," suggesting that
Moscow will grant the UAR large discounts. Moscow had previously agreed to sell arms to the UAR under this agreement at
one-third their price and on extended payments. Since these terms
did not appear to be completely satisfactory to Cairo and, in view
of the reference to the former agreements, Moscow apparently
has agreed to make the terms of repayment even more favorable
to the UAR. Cairo probably will be required to make only token
payments for its arms purchases, presumably in the form of surplus commodities such as cotton.

The agreement has been under negotiation, mainly in Moscow,
since July 1958 and was approved in draft form in March. Difficulties, primarily concerning the financial terms, delayed the
final agreement. The UAR's arms-purchasing agent in Moscow
was instructed by Cairo on 29 July to agree to sign the contracts
that come under the agreement or to sign the agreement itself,
provided it stipulates a supplementary agreement to cover additional requests and the civilian equipment. In the same message,
Cairo revealed that it was contacting Moscow to "define the extent" of its concessions to the UAR.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
