FAR EAST

3. Comment on mission of North Korean delegation to Moscow:

The composition of the six-member North Korean delegation which Radio Pyongyang announced had departed for Moscow on 1 September suggests that implementation of the $250,000,000 Soviet loan for rehabilitation and reconstruction will be an important topic of discussion between the two governments. Members of the delegation include the chairman of the state planning committee, a vice premier who is a specialist on economic affairs, and the minister of railways.

The other members -- Premier Kim Il-sung, the vice chairman of the central committee of the Labor (Communist) Party, and the minister of foreign affairs -- would be likely to participate in either economic or political discussions. No military officials are included in the delegation. The possibility that the group also may receive instructions on strategy for the Korean political conference is suggested by Peng Teh-huai, who headed the Chinese delegation at the truce talks, has also left for Moscow.

None of the members is associated with the Chinese-trained faction of the North Korean government. This reinforces previous indications that the Chinese faction will not play a major role in future internal Korean developments.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Regular airlift of supplies to Chinese Nationalists in Burma indicated:

Burma has confirmation from "unimpeachable" sources that the Chinese Nationalists in Mong Hsat have been supplied regularly throughout the monsoon season by air from Thailand. According to a high official of the Burmese Foreign Office, his government has received specific details, including data on the planes and companies involved.

The American embassy in Rangoon adds that the Shan ruler of Kengtung State, where Mong Hsat is located, reported on 26 August that as many as two or three flights a week were arriving at the Nationalist headquarters.

Comment: Last spring the Nationalist government promised that supply flights to Mong Hsat would be suspended. In July both CAT and Fushing air lines, the two organizations most frequently mentioned as being involved in these operations, denied that any of their planes had flown into Burma during the preceding two months.

There have been numerous reports since then, however, of a continuing airlift to Mong Hsat. Such activity would tend to confirm suspicions of Nationalist insincerity in promising to cooperate in the evacuation of its troops from Burma.

- 4 -

2 Sept 53
