West Germans Urge Integrated NATO Logistics System

In a recent conversation with Secretary of Defense Gates, West German Defense Minister Strauss called supply and storage problems an increasingly serious obstacle to the build-up of West Germany's armed forces. Strauss felt that, if agreement cannot be reached in NATO on a Bonn proposal for an integrated logistics system, West Germany would have no alternative but to make bilateral arrangements with other countries including non-NATO nations--an apparent allusion to Spain. Otherwise, West Germany would be forced to stop further military procurement and abandon its attempts to meet NATO logistic requirements. The German proposal is the first item on the agenda for the 31 March - 1 April NATO defense ministers' meeting.

American Embassy officials in Bonn believe that, even allowing for possible German overestimation of logistic requirements and of the difficulties in meeting them, Strauss is still confronted with "unquestionably an enormous problem." They believe that a NATO rejection of Bonn's proposals for an integrated logistics system would sooner or later evoke the consequences of which Strauss speaks. Since solutions outside the NATO framework are "clearly unpalatable" to the Adenauer government, the effect of a rejection would be to put the Federal Republic's military effort in a "deep freeze."

Under present NATO planning, which makes each nation responsible for its own logistics, West Germany is required to maintain sufficient military supplies for 30 days east of the Rhine and for 60 days west of the river. Suitable land is not available for this purpose or for needed additional airfields and maneuver areas. Bonn has concluded agreements with France, the Netherlands, and Portugal to provide additional facilities, but believes that these arrangements are not adequate and that a fully integrated NATO system is the only feasible solution to the difficult command and control problem which would arise in the event of hostilities.
