Situation in the Congo

Brussels' stated intention to ignore Premier Lumumba's ultimatum to withdraw Belgian troops from the Congo may lead to a formal Congolese request for Soviet intervention. The Belgians continue to airlift reinforcements to the Congo, and while Belgian troops have yielded to UN authority in certain areas of Leopoldville Province, they have shown no disposition either to leave the country or to withdraw to Belgian bases there.

Although Lumumba has threatened to request Soviet "intervention" on 19 July, there are indications that members of his government are emerging from their recent shock and are concerned over the present course of events. On 18 July, the Congo Senate adopted a resolution opposing Lumumba's ultimatum to the Belgians and rejecting any Soviet interference in the Congo. Opposition to Lumumba appears likely to increase as the present trend toward political fragmentation continues.

In Katanga Province, which has declared itself independent of the Congo, Premier Tshombe has formally requested recognition from the UN and from various Western states. It is possible that his anti-Lumumba regime will be recognized by Portugal and supported by the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Belgium is reluctant to accord precipitate recognition to Katanga lest it be accused of establishing a puppet state in its erstwhile colony. Should any other country recognize Katanga, however, Brussels would probably follow suit.

There is no confirmation to date of Tshombe's claims that the Congo's Kivu and Kasai provinces will affiliate with Katanga. In these and in Leopoldville Province, however, further secessionist moves are possible.

Meanwhile, UN representative Ralph Bunche in Leopoldville reports that he had great difficulty in convincing Lumumba that UN forces would not be turned over to him to use against the Belgians, and characterized Lumumba as "crazy." UN officials in the Congo have recommended that UN troop strength, now approximately 5,000, should be brought to 10,000 as soon as possible, while UN headquarters in New York hopes to move a Swedish battalion to the Congo in order to allay the misgivings of Congo Europeans concerning the arrival so far of only African contingents of the UN force.

19 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
