Bulk of Turkey's Senior Military Officers Face Forced Retirement

The provisional government of Turkey, in a move prompted by the National Unity Committee (NUC), plans to retire 2,000-3,000 generals and field-grade officers. Rumors of the proposed forced retirement program already are reported causing unrest in the officer corps.

Turkey's military personnel management practices, which for years have allowed an accumulation of deadwood in top ranks, have been badly in need of reform. Summary retirement of the large number proposed, however, could increase political ferment throughout Turkey and result in some damage to the military establishment. The procedure would undoubtedly result in the dismissal of some able officers, as the Turkish armed forces lack an effective personnel evaluation system. Ambassador Warren has noted that the proposed step could be no more than a move to complete the revolutionary process of the "colonels coup" and ensure that NUC members are left in effective control of the military forces.

The high level and unusual intensity of the Turkish approaches to American officials on the retirement plan indicate the importance Ankara attaches to it. General Gursel, chairman of the NUC and interim chief of state, accompanied by his top adviser, Colonel Turkes, and by Foreign Minister Sarper, made a strong appeal for American financial support. Gursel was highly critical of the military goals of the former regime and claimed that, if the present government spent the amount required to meet them, Turkey would become "an army without a country."

The ambassador cautions that future Turkish decisions on other phases of Turkish-American relations, including current and contemplated US requests for defense facilities, could be influenced by the American reaction to the current approach. He further noted that Turkish leaders are apparently determined to go ahead with the retirement program, and that, if the American response is negative, the chances of influencing future military personnel policies would probably be very slight.

19 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
