WESTERN EUROPE

5. New Communist moves expected to counter Berlin food relief program:

American officials in Germany believe that the East German government may approach High Commissioner Conant, directly or through Soviet officials, to demand the release of blocked East German funds in the United States for the purchase of food. Premier Grotewohl recently demanded release of the funds and said his government is willing to buy American food at world market prices.

US officials in Germany fear that any increased attempt to publicize the American role in the Berlin food relief plan might be used as an excuse not only for further Soviet intimidation of persons bringing food parcels across the border but also for the closing of the East-West Berlin border and for new interference with food shipments from West Germany into Berlin.

Comment: Communist retaliation has so far been limited to isolated seizures of food and identity cards, presumably because harsher measures would seriously upset current Soviet conciliatory policies. Official requests to purchase food from the blocked account might bolster the weak Communist propaganda response to the food program, even though the account totals only about $1,400,000.

6. France plans to send additional metropolitan battalions to Indochina:

French commissioner general Dejean told Ambassador Heath in Saigon on 29 July that Paris has agreed to initiate the "Navarre plan," but cannot carry it out completely until funds are available. According to the reported decision, nine battalions will be sent from France on 1 October and the battalion now in Korea will be added if the UN Command consents. Additional cadres, non-commissioned officers, specialists and cargo planes will also be sent.

Dejean pointed out, however, that these reinforcements and the formation of new Vietnamese battalions would not enable Navarre to undertake an all-out offensive in the next few months, but only a stepping up of limited offensive moves.

Comment: Navarre is reported to have requested 15 battalions from France. The reinforcements now promised are not scheduled to leave France until the time autumn hostilities usually begin in Indochina.

This policy of reinforcing Indochina, apparently a triumph for Foreign Minister Bidault, cannot be expected to survive over the long term unless the military situation undergoes marked improvement in the coming months.

- 6 -

2 August 53
