[PAGE 01]
21 December 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
21 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
1. Four Soviet submarines from Baltic reach Albanian base.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
2. Khrushchev rejects Iranian offer to ban foreign ballistic missile bases as insufficient for "normalizing" relations.
3. Turks arrest "key members" of Kurdish underground organization.

III. THE WEST
4. Adenauer feels West Germany must have close ties with France against the day when US withdraws military forces from Europe.
5. French to be ready for nuclear test by March 1960.
6. Castro regime reported planning to instigate mass demonstrations of loyalty by spreading false rumors of counterrevolution.
[PAGE 04]
21 December 1959

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Submarines: The four Soviet W-class submarines which left the Baltic on 5 December reached Albania on 18 December. This raises to eight the number of Soviet long-range submarines currently based at Valona Bay. The T-43-class minesweeper which escorted the units from the Baltic is scheduled to enter the Black Sea on 26 December.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran-USSR: Khrushchev told the Iranian ambassador it was "impossible" for the USSR to accept Iran's offer to ban foreign ballistic missile bases on Iranian territory as a basis for "normalizing" relations and ending Soviet propaganda attacks on the Shah's government. Instead he urged Iran to accept a Soviet draft calling for Iran to ban any foreign bases whatsoever, commenting that signature of the Soviet draft would create no difficulties for Tehran's implementation of its bilateral agreement with the US "if there was no intention of cooperating with the aggressive forces against us." Khrushchev said that because of current Iranian policy Radio Moscow will continue to criticize the Shah's government.
The Iranian foreign minister believes there will be no further negotiations on this subject.

Turkey: Turkish security forces arrested 30 "key members" of a Kurdish underground organization on 17 December. Many of those arrested are university students, and at least some are believed to have Communist connections. The government-imposed press ban on information relating to the arrests is indicative of Ankara's sensitivity to the Kurdish problem and also reflects Turkish sensitivity to any expression of political opposition. (Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
West Germany: Adenauer is reported to be defending his close cooperation with De Gaulle on the grounds that sooner or later American military forces will withdraw from Europe, making close ties with France imperative for West Germany. The chancellor says that for this reason he went along with De Gaulle's argument that Europeans must possess and control their own retaliatory weapons. The American Embassy in Bonn comments that actually Adenauer may be thinking in terms of "NATO as such" controlling a nuclear deterrent. (Page 3)

France: De Gaulle has told General Buchalet, chief of the military applications division of the French Atomic Energy Commission, to pick a date for the French nuclear weapons test solely on the basis of technical considerations, without concern for world political pressures. Buchalet says France could test now but he intends to hold up the test--probably a three- or four-shot series--until March 1960 when full instrumentation will be ready.
the first test is scheduled between 8 February and 13 March. (Page 4)

Cuba: the government is planning to instigate, possibly with Cuban Communist party assistance, mass demonstrations of support for Castro on 22 or 23 December by spreading false rumors of counterrevolutionary activity. The purpose would be to smoke out or intimidate bona fide opposition.
some tightening of military precautions and a general increase in tension have been noted recently, and Castro used similar tactics successfully in the revolt simulated by his agent, William Morgan, last summer. If such mass demonstrations do occur, anti-American violence is possible.

21 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkish Security Forces Arrest Kurdish Underground Leaders

Thirty "key members" of a Kurdish underground organization in Turkey were arrested on 17 December. The action was ordered by Premier Menderes following four years of monitoring Kurdish activities by the security and police services.

Two of the Kurds were arrested in Diyarbakir, a Kurdish center in eastern Turkey, while the rest were detained in Istanbul and Ankara. Many were reported to be young university students.

All 30, after being placed in jails in Istanbul by 20 December, will be tried for "engaging in activities dangerous to the security of the nation." A search of their homes revealed at least one document indicating a link with Iranian Communists, and one of the Kurds arrested is described by the Turkish official as a known Communist sympathizer.

The Turkish Government has imposed a press ban on all information related to the arrests beyond the fact that such action has been taken. Representatives of the press were informed, however, that the arrests involved a secret political organization "with foreign connections." With this treatment, the limited Kurdish organization could serve as a pretext for a general tightening of controls on domestic political opposition.

Ankara has always been extremely sensitive on matters involving the estimated 2,000,000 members of the Kurdish minority in Turkey. Officials frequently have denied publicly that there is a Kurdish nationalist movement in Turkey, maintaining that this minority has been assimilated into the Turkish nation. Reports

Page 1
[PAGE 07]
of a movement for an autonomous Kurdistan have persisted, however, and some Turkish leaders privately concede that a problem exists.

While the Kurds hardly pose a serious threat to the security of a nation of 26,000,000, and in general are relatively inactive at present, they do present a potential target for Communist exploitation. This threat is largely countered at present by the apparent effectiveness of the Turkish security system and by the personal and tribal rivalries which exist throughout the Kurdish population.

Page 2
[PAGE 08]
III. THE WEST

Adenauer Defends Policy of Close Alliance with De Gaulle

West German Chancellor Adenauer, in recent talks with his cabinet, key officials of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), and other confidants, is reported to have indicated a growing fear that the United States is preparing to withdraw its military forces from Europe and otherwise reduce its European commitments.

Adenauer has stressed that, for this reason, Bonn must depend on France as the only reliable power in Europe.

after returning from his visit with De Gaulle, told his cabinet that NATO must be kept alive, since Europe would not be able to "defend itself for the indefinite future without large-scale American presence. Adenauer reasoned, however, that since the Federal Republic must be prepared for eventual American withdrawal, he was inclined to go along with De Gaulle's argument that the NATO structure and responsibilities must be revised to permit Europeans to possess and control their own retaliatory weapons. American Embassy officials have also commented that Adenauer's thinking may be running in the direction of "NATO as such," or possibly the Western European Union or "The Six," having control of a nuclear deterrent.

While stanchly defending De Gaulle, Adenauer described French Premier Debré as the evil spirit behind De Gaulle. He said Debré was nationalistic and cynical about European integration, using it merely as a means to enhance French power.

On the Berlin question, Adenauer reportedly praised the French for sticking to the principle of no change in the status quo. Adenauer told West Berlin Mayor Brandt that he fears "the Anglo-Saxons" might try to transfer some of their responsibilities for Berlin to the Federal Republic, thereby undermining the four-power status of the city.

21 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 09]
Spring Date Likely for French Nuclear Test

President de Gaulle has told General Buchalet, chief of the military applications division of the French Atomic Energy Commission, to select the date for testing French nuclear weapons solely on the basis of technical considerations, without concern for world political pressures. Sufficient plutonium is available to conduct a test now, but instrumentation to acquire the most complete diagnostic data will not be ready until March 1960.
the first test series could consist of three or four shots.
the first test would be a shot from a 300-foot tower.
in line with earlier intelligence estimates that France would probably conduct its first nuclear weapons tests in March or April 1960.

France intends to try to develop hydrogen weapons and small nuclear weapons. Advanced weapon development will depend on the availability of uranium highly enriched in U-235 either purchased from the United States or Britain or produced at a domestic isotope-separation plant. The French plant is expected to be producing non-weapons-grade U-235 by 1962, and can be producing weapons-grade material by 1964 if the decision to do so is made in the near future.

France's intention to conduct underground tests whether or not aid was received from the United States,
American aid to avoid costly duplication of effort.

Given the high cost of converting test instrumentation to make possible effective monitoring of underground tests, technical information on the results of US experiences would constitute a considerable saving for France.

21 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
21 December 1959

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
