[PAGE 01]
12 December 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
12 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

GMAIC statement on new class of Soviet submarine
Soviet press giving special treatment to Cuban revolution as "a national liberation movement."
East Germans making preparations to be present at summit conference.
Comment on Peiping's new note to Indonesia
Sharp reduction in Chinese Communist shelling of offshore islands coincides with Peiping's new stress on political solution to Taiwan issue

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkish health minister making study tour of USSR at Moscow's invitation.
Sudan--Military government acting to stamp out dissidence in the army.
Accord believed near on repatriation of Koreans in Japan to South Korea.

III. THE WEST

Greek population on Cyprus to elect president on 13 December
Guatemala--Revolutionary party protests fraud in 6 December elections; demonstrations planned.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
12 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Submarines: The Guided Missile and Astronautic Intelligence Committee has made a preliminary assessment of evidence concerning a new class of Soviet submarine, designated the "G" class by US intelligence, which is possibly equipped to carry guided missiles. ONI estimates that the Northern and Pacific Fleets each have three "G"-class units. In addition, these fleets each have two modified "Z"-class units, which the majority of the Committee believe are probably equipped to launch guided missiles. CIA, Army, and Air Force, however, evaluate these units as only possibly for guided missiles. (Page 1)

USSR-Cuba: The Soviet press is devoting increased attention to Cuba, and Izvestia recently characterized the Castro regime not as the usual Latin American revolution but a "national liberation movement"--Soviet terminology usually reserved for Afro-Asian anticolonialist movements. This portrayal implies that Moscow has put the stamp of approval on the Cuban revolution within the context of Marxist-Leninist dogma. The Soviet press also featured an article by a Cuban Communist party leader which advocated diplomatic relations with the "socialist camp" and, above all, the USSR and Communist China. (Page 3)

East Germany: The East German regime is already making preparations to be present at a future summit conference. The Foreign Ministry protocol chief planned a trip to Geneva this week to arrange accommodations for an East German delegation. East German Foreign Ministry officials will make every effort to participate in the conference. They believe that they will have Soviet support, and that the Western powers will eventually concede on the issue Chancellor Adenauer, however, has stated that Wes

[PAGE 05]
Germany should forego attendance at the summit in an effort to forestall East German participation.

Communist China - Indonesia: Peiping's note of 9 December to Djakarta, while conciliatory in language, reflects China's determination to continue its pressures on the Indonesian Government to end its "persecution" and "cruel treatment" of Chinese nationals. Warning against forces "bent on sabotaging the friendship" between the two countries, the Chinese Communists propose the immediate implementation of the long pending Sino-Indonesian nationality treaty, along with Indonesian guarantees of protection for and nondiscrimination against Chinese who do not choose to take Indonesian citizenship.

Although Djakarta is apparently willing to proceed with implementation of the treaty, it is believed determined to carry out its program of resettling Chinese retailers and is unlikely to offer guarantees satisfactory to Peiping. (Page 4)

Taiwan Strait: Chinese Communists have fired only 14 high-explosive shells against Chinmen so far this month, as compared with 81 last month and 1,215 in June. The Matsus have not been shelled at all in the last 12 weeks. This marked decline in shelling coincides with other indications of increased stress on a political solution of the Taiwan issue. (Page 5)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: A Turkish public health and medical survey delegation, headed by Minister of Health Lutfi Kirdar, left Istanbul on 9 December for a 10- to 15-day study tour of the USSR at the invitation of the Soviet Government. Kirdar will be the first Turkish minister to visit the Soviet Union since 1939. Ankara has had a long-standing invitation to send such a delegation and has assured the American Embassy that the trip has no political significance. It is not regarded as representing any basic change in Turkey's attitude toward the Soviet Government, but the timing suggests that Ankara may

[PAGE 06]
be trying to increase its maneuverability in anticipation of any broader East-West rapprochement.

Sudan: The Abboud military government has shown its determination to stamp out further dissident activity in the army by discharging 16 junior officers suspected of involvement in the antiregime plotting which led to the abortive coup of 10 November. The coup leaders were executed or sentenced to long prison terms early this month. The power of Deputy Army Commander in Chief Hasan Bashir Nasir, who was primarily responsible for thwarting the coup attempt and who for several months has been advocating a purge of the officer corps, probably is increasing.

Japan-Korea: The only condition blocking an accord between Seoul and Tokyo on repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to South Korea is said to be Japan's insistence that South Korea agree that in the future all Japanese fishermen who violate the Rhee line will be released automatically on completion of their prison sentences. Seoul has expressed its willingness to return on 24 December those fishermen who have already served their sentences. The Japanese Government fears, however, that South Korea may back out on its promise to release the fishermen when the repatriation to North Korea scheduled for 14 December begins. Such action would cause the Japanese to nullify any agreement for repatriation to South Korea.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: The political campaign on Cyprus will culminate on 13 December in the election by the Greek population of a president for the new republic. Observers on the island predict that Archbishop Makarios will defeat his 72-year-old rival, John Clerides, who is supported by an alliance of dissident rightists and Communists. Makarios' margin of victory must be over 60 percent of the total vote or he will suffer

[PAGE 07]
a damaging blow to his prestige both on the island and abroad. Makarios has the backing of the Greek Government, and Turkish Cypriot leaders as well as the British authorities favor his election.

Guatemala: The extensive fraud used to assure the victory of a majority of pro-administration candidates in the 6 December congressional election has led the moderate leftist Revolutionary party (PR) to announce its refusal to accept the election outcome. PR leaders plan protest demonstrations; some violence may occur but the government does not appear in immediate danger. On 10 December all public demonstrations were prohibited, and the police and army are likely to be used quickly to prevent serious disorder. (Page 6)

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

GMAIC Statement on Possible New Soviet Missile Submarines

The Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee sent the following conclusions to USIB:

1. Recent evidence has permitted a rather firm identification of a new class of Soviet submarine (designated "G" class by US intelligence) in both the Northern and Pacific Fleet areas. These are conventionally powered, but have a very long and high sail (conning tower), the details of which have not yet been observed. This is the second class of submarine with enlarged sail, the other being a modification to the "Z" class. The latter have been observed rather closely, and are now assessed by the majority of GMAIC as probably being for launching guided missiles, with the minority evaluating them as only possibly for guided missiles. Since there is little detail known on the new "G" class, the majority opinion is that it is possible that this class of submarine has a capability for launching guided missiles. There is some tie-in in COMINT between a "G"-class submarine and the special submarine detachment to which some of the modified "Z"-class are assigned; thus it is possible that both have a similar purpose.

2. We have previously estimated that, if used for missile launching, the modified "Z" could carry a 200-n. m. missile with a 1,000-pound warhead and an accuracy of 2-4 n. m. A modified 350-n. m. missile is technically also a possibility. Because of the increased height of sail, a longer missile is possible in the new "G" class and we therefore estimate that, if for missile launching, the "G" class could carry a 350-n. m. missile, although

[PAGE 09]
shorter or even longer range ballistic missiles are less likely possibilities. The warhead weight could be 2,000 pounds and CEP of 2-4 n. m.

3. There is specific evidence from photographs that two missiles could be carried on the "Z", but no good evidence as to the number that could be carried by the "G". Since the sail is much larger, more missiles could be carried.

[PAGE 10]
Increased Soviet Press Attention to Cuba

An Izvestia article recently characterized the Castro movement not as a usual Latin American revolution but a "national liberation movement" in which the working class and laboring peasantry "took the most active role." The application of this terminology specifically to Cuba implies that Moscow has put its ideological stamp of approval on the Castro regime. The October issue of the Soviet journal International Affairs had called Perez Jimenez' overthrow in Venezuela as well as that of Batista in Cuba a "turning point" marking the emergence of a "new stage in the national liberation struggle in Latin America."

On 4 December, Pravda published a lengthy article by Cuban Communist party leader Escalante in which he described the Castro regime as a "people's government" not controlled by the working class but subject to great influence by the "proletariat and the peasantry." He charged the US with threatening to reduce sugar imports, obstruct trade in general, and restrict tourism as a means of bringing pressure on the Cuban Government to submit to the interests of the "US monopolists." Escalante concluded by advocating that diplomatic relations be resumed between Cuba and the "socialist camp," particularly with the USSR, and Communist China. Moscow's publication of these remarks is probably intended to indicate its receptivity to any Cuban overtures to resume diplomatic relations.

[PAGE 11]
Peiping Proposes Talks With Indonesia Regarding Overseas Chinese

Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi sent a letter on 9 December to Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio which, while using conciliatory terms, said Peiping could not but be seriously concerned over the "intolerable" treatment of Chinese nationals in Indonesia. Chen said that Indonesian disregard of the rights of Overseas Chinese was "extremely detrimental" to friendly relations between the two countries.

Chen proposed immediate negotiations to solve the dispute. He suggested that, while Chinese in Indonesia should feel an obligation to take up Indonesian nationality, those who did not want to do so should be protected by the Indonesian Government from discrimination and persecution. Peiping expressed willingness to repatriate Chinese dispossessed under Djakarta's decree against alien businessmen.

In order that Chinese in Indonesia might state their citizenship preferences, Chen expressed Peiping's readiness to exchange immediately ratification instruments of the dual nationality treaty. The treaty, signed in 1955, would require Chinese in Indonesia to choose between Indonesian and Chinese citizenship within two years.

Peiping's proposals are obviously intended to stall further implementation of Indonesia's decree banning alien retailers in rural areas and resettling them in nearby cities. Foreign Minister Subandrio's reply to the Chinese proposals has not been made public. In view of Djakarta's consistently strong position on the decree as an issue of "national interest," it is not likely to back down on the ban and it apparently wants the dual nationality treaty to go into effect promptly.

[PAGE 12]
DATA ON CHINESE COMMUNIST SHELLS FIRED ON OFFSHORE ISLANDS

Month
Chinmen
HE Shells  Propaganda Shells
Matsu
HE Shells  Propaganda Shells

June
1215  808
429  108

July
537  373
404  41

August
125  225
78  64

Sept
156  808
5  69

Oct
114  872
0  0

Nov
81  491
0  0

Dec (thru 9th)
14  0
0  0

[PAGE 13]
Communists Gradually Reducing Shelling Against Offshore Islands

There has been a marked decrease in Chinese Communist shelling of the offshore islands since June, especially during the last three months. Only 14 high-explosive shells had been fired against Chinmen through 9 December, as compared with 81 during November, and 1,215 in June. The Matsus have not been shelled at all in the last 12 weeks.

The Communists may be preparing the way for a period during which persistent political approaches will be made to Nationalist officials in an effort to get them to defect to the Communist cause or to create suspicion between them and US officials. Coincident with the decline in shelling, Chinese Communist leaders have de-emphasized the use of force against Taiwan both in current propaganda and in recent conversations with foreign visitors and have suggested the prospect of "leniency" to the Nationalists by their recent amnesty of 30 Kuomintang "war criminals."

During his visit to China last October, Khrushchev may have given added impetus to Peiping's apparent shift to political warfare against Taiwan. According to recently available information, Khrushchev had "strongly requested" the Chinese not to embark on any new military action against Taiwan in the near future, and the Chinese are said to have given Khrushchev "assurances" that they would undertake no new military initiatives against the island.

[PAGE 14]
III. THE WEST

Electoral Fraud Prompts Bitter Reaction From Guatemalan Leftists

The extensive fraud used to assure the victory of a majority of pro-administration candidates in the 6 December congressional election in Guatemala has led the moderate leftist Revolutionary party (PR) to announce its refusal to accept the election outcome. PR leaders have publicized a number of specific charges of fraud and plan to challenge in the courts the electoral results in a number of constituencies. They also plan protest demonstrations and antigovernment disorders.

On 9 December, PR leader Mario Mendez Montenegro asked a leader of the antigovernment faction of the rightist Nationalist Democratic Movement (MDN) to support PR tactics. The MDN leader did not give a firm reply, but is reported to have requested another meeting. The MDN, suffering an internal rift covertly fostered by President Ydigoras just before the election, has also bitterly attacked the government's election tactics. The murder of an MDN official on 8 December, allegedly by government agents, has added to its anger, and an MDN-associated veterans' organization has declared that it will tolerate no more abuse from the government.

Some violence may occur if demonstrations are attempted, and MDN groups may resume the terroristic tactics they used occasionally last summer and fall. The government, however, does not appear immediately threatened. On 10 December all public demonstrations were prohibited, and the police and the army are likely to be used to prevent serious disorders.

In the long run, Ydigoras may weaken his own position by antagonizing the strong leftist forces in Guatemala. His tactics may also weaken the anti-Communist leaders now heading the dominant PR and enhance Communist efforts to win control of leftist political forces.

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 16]
