[PAGE 01]
26 December 1960
Copy No. C 145

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items may
be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18 Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
26 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Taiwan Strait--Almost no Communist shelling in past month.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos--Peiping endorses USSR's "just stand" on ICC and Geneva conference; bloc air support continues.

Congo--Hammarskjold implies he will try to take UN out of Congo if Mobutu uses force in Orientale Province.

King Saud promises some reforms; popular reaction to his take-over generally favorable.

Ethiopia--Security precautions continue high; Emperor's decision to reconstitute Bodyguard likely to antagonize army.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
26 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Communist China - Taiwan: Communist shelling of
the offshore islands has almost ceased for the past month.
Only one firing of 33 propaganda rounds has occurred since
27 November--the lowest ebb since the odd-day firing pat-
tern was established in October 1958. In addition, the "lib-
erate Taiwan" theme has been a negligible ingredient in main-
land propaganda since mid-1960. On the few occasions when
the Taiwan issue is mentioned, however, Peiping continues
to underscore its determination to use force if necessary while
expressing hope for a peaceful solution.

In contrast to the Communist behavior, Chinese National-
ist batteries have increased the number of high-explosive
shells fired against the mainland since mid-November. Tai-
pei apparently believes it is politically advantageous to keep
a state of tension in the strait.

II. ASIA--AFRICA

*Laos: Peiping, in a People's Daily editorial on 25 De-
cember, endorsed the "just stand" taken by the Soviet Gov-
ernment in formally requesting British support for reactivating
the International Control Commission in Laos and reconvening
the Geneva conference. The Chinese Communists would ex-
pect to participate in such a conference. The editorial implied,
however, that Communist China would disapprove of any Soviet
effort to bring the Laotian situation before the United Nations.
Three columns of Laotian Government troops continue their
security patrols north of Vientiane against the Pathet Lao and
[PAGE 05]
Captain Le's force. The present objective is said to be to
pinpoint enemy forces in preparation for more concerted op-
erations aimed at their liquidation. (SECRET NOFORN)

Six of the Soviet AN-12s that arrived in Peiping from
the USSR on 23 December continued on to Canton on 24 De-
cember. Their cargo will probably be transshipped to Hanoi
aboard Soviet IL-14s operating out of the North Vietnamese
capital. Soviet and North Vietnamese aircraft were sched-
uled for flights into Laos at least through 24 December.

*Congo: Hammarskjold has sent a letter to Kasavubu im-
plying that he will ask the Security Council to take the UN out
of the Congo if Mobutu uses force in an attempt to take Orien-
tale Province--still nominally controlled by Antoine Gizenga's
"government." Hammarskjold told US officials, however, that
he does not expect civil war in the Stanleyville area, since he
believes neither Gizenga nor Mobutu is strong enough to force
a fight. Hammarskjold plans to be in the Congo on 3 and 4 Jan-
uary. Khrushchev, after a delay of ten days, responded to
Gizenga's appeal for support by reiterating Soviet promises
of support and sympathy but avoiding any specific commitment
of assistance. Sudan continues to refuse transit to UAR planes
bound for Stanleyville, but President Abboud admits that flights
over remote areas of the country could probably be made without
Sudanese knowledge.

*Saudi Arabia: In his first policy statements since reassum-
ing active charge of the government on 21 December, King Saud
on 24 and 25 December promised to take steps to eliminate eco-
nomic "stagnancy" and decentralize the government, to have a
constitution drawn up, and to make other moves suggestive of
greater democratization. These statements, and the relatively
liberal character of his cabinet appointments, indicate that Saud
hopes at least to create the impression of sponsoring a reformist
government. The first popular reactions to the King's take-over

26 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
appear to be favorable, although educated Saudis reportedly
have adopted a wait-and-see attitude. (SECRET NOFORN)

A group of dissident Saudi military officers continue to
express dissatisfaction with

Representatives of
the officers' group told the charge that their movement was
inspired by the UAR's success with its revolution and that they
felt the time was favorable for action because of the "intense
disputes among the members of the royal household." The UAR
charge, noting that his views were unofficial, pointed out to the
officers the "economic and international" difficulties they would
face if they undertook a coup and advised them to be patient and
remain vigilant.

*Ethiopia: Although the leaders of the attempted coup
against Emperor Haile Selassie are now reported to have been
killed or captured, considerable sympathy for the coup effort
persists, and the Imperial Government's position may still be
precarious. Because of the elaborate precautions considered
necessary for the Emperor's safety, the royal family has not
attended the funerals of the government ministers killed by the
rebels. The Emperor reportedly decided on 21 December to re-
constitute the Royal Bodyguard, and some junior officers and
men have already been released from custody. This action could
seriously antagonize the army, which crushed the revolt. Offi-
cials of the government claim to have captured documents which
they say clearly indicate Soviet and Czech involvement in the
coup attempt, but the officials have not produced the evidence
they claim to have.

26 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 08]
