modifications, and there has been no withdrawal of UAR troops from the Sinai Peninsula. The selective call-ups undertaken by the Israeli Defense Force would permit full-scale mobilization within 12 to 18 hours. (Page 3)

Morocco: The long-rumored replacement of Premier Ibrahim by former Premier Si Bekkai, a political independent, may occur within the next few days. A Si Bekkai government would probably include representatives of most of Morocco's political factions. It would not be likely to undertake any important changes and would probably remain in office only until the local elections planned for May. These elections, the first ever to be held in Morocco, are expected to lead to the formation of a new government on the basis of the relative strengths shown by the contending parties.

Laos: Recent reports indicate that Communist influence and activity in Laos is more widespread than the government has admitted. The US Embassy agrees with the Cambodian ambassador's comments that real calm exists only in towns, that it is considerably less in adjacent villages, and that it is virtually nonexistent in most of the rest of the country. This view seems borne out by a report of a trip by a USIS-led team which found villagers under constant threat of reprisals and subject to intense Communist propaganda in areas where the team had been assured by Vientiane that there was no probability of danger from Pathet Lao forces. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Panama: Nationalist groups have apparently abandoned or postponed their plans for a mass march into the Canal Zone on 1 March, which is Panama's National Constitution Day and the final day of the pre-Lenten Carnival celebrations. Anti-US feeling is still high, however, and demonstrations by small extremist groups remain possible, either on 1 March or later. The canal issue is a favorite topic in the campaigning for the national elections to be held in May, and any demonstrations could easily take a violent turn. (Page 5)

29 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
