South Korea

Colonel Kim is emerging as chief of security for the revolutionary government. He was in charge of an intelligence for the new regime and that he was "generally" responsible for policy steps taken to consolidate the revolution. Kim is the brother-in-law of coup leader Major General Pak Chong-hui and a member of the group of discontented junior officers that actively agitated for the removal of senior generals following the fall of the Rhee government early last year. Both he and Pak were instrumental in the ouster at that time of then army chief of staff Lt. General Song Yo-chan and Song's immediate successor Lt. General Choi Yuong-hui.

Kim, a long-time intelligence officer, dwelt at considerable length on the stanch anti-Communist orientation of the coup leaders and how the weak anti-Communist stand of the Chang Myon administration made its ouster necessary to save the country.

The insurgents continue to move against military officers whose loyalty to the revolutionary government is suspect. Three more general officers, including Deputy Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Chang Chang-kuk, have been relieved of command and arrested in this process. All officers associated with former Rhee lieutenant Yi Pom-sok, leader of the defunct National Youth Corps, reportedly are slated to be given "minor assignments" to minimize any chance of their effectively hindering the revolution. Yi reportedly was planning a coup of his own when Pak seized power.

Apprehension appears to be growing among civilians who originally supported the coup or were apathetic to the overthrow of the Chang Myon government over the adoption of increasingly repressive tactics by the revolutionary leaders. some 3,000 persons have been arrested, but it is unclear how many are hoodlums and criminals and how many are political offenders. Most newspapers have been forced to adopt a position of complete endorsement of the new regime and give a distorted picture of American reaction implying that Washington supports the revolution.

Meanwhile, new Foreign Minister Kim Hong-il appears to be attempting to allay American concern regarding the

23 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
