NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Henderson says Iran needs emergency aid despite prospects of oil settlement:

Ambassador Henderson's revised schedule for an Iranian oil settlement indicates Iran cannot expect substantial oil revenues before November or December, and the consortium refuses to consider advances because of expected large expenses for rehabilitating and operating the oil industry.

Fiscal strains in Iran's economy are already apparent and are expected to become acute by August. The ambassador is convinced Iran will need an additional $10,000,000 for the period 20 August to 20 October.

Henderson's present recommendation is in addition to his earlier suggestion that the United States grant Iran $80,000,000 in economic and financial aid during the 12 months following an oil settlement.

Comment: Since Prime Minister Zahedi assumed office, the United States has contributed $60,000,000 in emergency aid in addition to economic and military grants of $46,000,000. Without this aid, Iran would have been bankrupt and any chance for political stability destroyed.

Henderson has suggested that oil production may be resumed in Iran soon after 1 October. This reflects his optimism over the progress of the oil negotiations despite the increasing Iranian political tensions. Considerable haggling and various adjustments within the agreement will probably occur before final settlement can be reached.

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Soviet ambassador urgently requests interview with Tito:

According to Yugoslav foreign secretary Popovic, Soviet ambassador Valkov recently returned from his second trip to Moscow in two months and urgently requested an interview with Marshal Tito. The interview will probably take place on 30 June at Brioni.

Popovic was unable to learn the reason for this request, but suspects that the Balkan military alliance may be discussed.

Comment: Beyond recent manifestations of diplomatic cordiality, there has been no indication of a basically new approach by Moscow toward Belgrade.
