[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

19 June 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Ranking members of Soviet mission in Japan returning to Moscow (page 3).
5. Rhee reportedly plans to discredit American Ambassador (page 5).
6. French behind removal of popular Cambodian Cabinet (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Ranking members of Soviet mission in Japan returning to Moscow:

Representatives of the Soviet mission in Tokyo called at the British Embassy on 14 June and requested transit visas to Hong Kong for five members of the mission, including the chief, Major General Aleksei Kislenko and political adviser. The party desires to go to Moscow this week via Hong Kong and China.

Comment: The departure of some ranking members may be a Soviet gesture in response to recent Japanese demands for the missions' withdrawal. Retention of a working staff of approximately 65 in Tokyo maintains the Soviet position that the dissolution of the Allied Council for Japan is "illegal."

[PAGE 04]
[PAGE 05]
5. Rhee reportedly plans to discredit American Ambassador:

President Rhee is determined to build a case charging American Ambassador Muccio with interference in South Korean politics.

Police have been collecting information on all Korean employees at American installations, subjecting many of them to interrogation, and have maintained a close watch on those in the American Embassy.

Comment: A plan to discredit Ambassador Muccio can not be confirmed. However, Rhee has told a ranking UN official that there was "corruption" in the American Embassy.

The Embassy has reported police surveillance during the past weeks, and some Korean employees have been subjected to pressure.

6. French behind removal of popular Cambodian Cabinet:

The US Charge in Saigon, in commenting on official French denials of implication in the King's 15 June overthrow of the Cambodian Cabinet, states that it is inconceivable that the King would have seized the initiative without securing French approval. French armored troops are now patrolling the Phnom Penh streets.

Comment: The deposed government, which holds two-thirds of the membership in the Cambodian Assembly, has in recent months increasingly insisted on a relaxation of French controls. The dismissal of the cabinet foreshadows certain political deterioration and may have repercussions in Vietnam.

[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

[PAGE 07]
