[PAGE 01]
5 December 1960

Copy No. C 77

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 30
NO CHANGE IN CLASS. X
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: H 8-2
DATE: 10 JUN 1980
REVIEWER:

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Bolivia: Soviet UN delegate Zorin has informed the Bolivian delegation that he is authorized to negotiate a Soviet offer of economic aid and that Moscow is ready to provide a $100,000,000 credit "if the recent US $10,000,000 loan is considered insufficient," according to Bolivian permanent UN representative Tamayo. Zorin also said that if Bolivian reluctance to send a mission to Moscow for aid talks is based on a feeling that previous Soviet offers were too small, "this could be taken care of." Hoping to exploit pressure within Bolivia on President Paz to accept a Soviet offer to build a tin smelter, Moscow probably would like to conclude a broader economic aid agreement with La Paz and to arrange an exchange of diplomatic missions.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
Sudan: Nasir's state visit to the Sudan from 15 to 25 November has resulted in further moves by the Abboud military regime toward closer ties with the UAR and neutrality between East and West. Soviet propaganda has recently made a special point of commenting favorably on the Abboud government, and on 27 November the Soviet ambassador to Khartoum reportedly offered a $50,000,000 line of credit. The regime is said to be seriously considering this offer but may act cautiously in order to avoid provoking a possible coup attempt by conservative Sudanese political and military elements.
[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Sudanese Military Government Considering New Soviet
Aid Offer

The Soviet ambassador, who met with Sudanese Prime Minister Abboud on 27 November, offered a $50,000,000 line of credit. Earlier in November the Sudan received its first bloc aid when the USSR presented a gift of five armored personnel carriers. Abboud promptly announced that 25 more would be bought. Negotiations are near completion for Sudanese purchase of 100,000 tons of Soviet wheat. Soviet propaganda has recently made a point commenting favorably on the Abboud regime, despite the regime's consistent efforts to harass and repress the local Communist party.

The influence on Abboud of UAR President Nasir appears to be leading the Sudanese Government not only toward closer ties with the UAR but also toward a position of complete neutrality between East and West. Nasir's methods of governing, some of his policy ideas, and his success in obtaining aid from both the bloc and the free world clearly made a strong impression on the Sudanese leader both during his July visit to the UAR and during Nasir's return visit to the Sudan from 15 to 25 November.

The Abboud regime is reported to be seriously considering the new Soviet offer but may act cautiously in order to avoid provoking possible civil disturbances or even a coup attempt by conservative political and military elements. The leader of the large and influential Ansar religious sect, which has many adherents in the army itself, is one of 18 prominent opposition leaders who are insisting on a return to civilian government. The regime has officially ignored their petition containing this demand and has banned all press comment; they are reported to have responded by printing thousands of copies to be distributed all over the country. The Abboud regime is maintaining strong security precautions, is soliciting statements of support from the citizenry,
[PAGE 09]
(and is calling the provincial military governors to Khartoum to try to assure continued loyalty of the forces of all five of the regional army commands)
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
CHINA
NORTH VIETNAM
GULF OF
TONKIN

BURMA
THAILAND
CAMBODIA
SOUTH VIETNAM

5 DECEMBER 1960
STATUTE MILES
200
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
TOP SECRET
