Communists-seize Leadership of Anti-Dutch Activity in Indonesia

The Indonesian Communist party (PKI) is promoting an anti-Dutch campaign based on the Netherlands' announced intention to send reinforcements to Netherlands New Guinea (West Irian) in the near future. Anti-Dutch student demonstrations--clearly coordinated by the Communists--occurred in four major cities in Java over the week end. Although aware that the Communists have seized the leadership on the West Irian issue, government officials, despite an army ban on demonstrations, are reluctant to crack down on activities which ostensibly reflect genuine national apprehension.

The PKI platform emerging from the demonstrations and previous resolutions includes severance of relations with the Dutch, seizure of remaining Dutch assets in Indonesia, submission of the dispute to the UN, and all-out support of President Sukarno.

The government has requested student demonstrators to await official orders and has urged that all anti-Dutch activities be channeled through the army-controlled West Irian Liberation Front. Both civilian and army officials appear to be awaiting the return of President Sukarno from his global tour in the presumption that he will undertake a government-controlled mass campaign. The President, however, is not expected to return before the first week in June, and if the Communists continue to exploit this issue at their present rate, Sukarno will be hard put to control the situation.

The Indonesian Navy, in an apparent show of force, is conducting naval and air training exercises in waters adjacent to West Irian. These reportedly include practice in convoy protection, torpedo attacks, mine laying, and commando tactics. The Foreign Ministry continues its approaches to Afro-Asian governments for cooperation in obstructing Dutch moves.

The West Irian issue increasingly diverts public attention from the anti-Communist, anti-Sukarno campaign of the Democratic League. The Communists are using the West Irian issue against the league, identifying both the Dutch and the league as opposed to President Sukarno.
