Moroccan King Completes New Cabinet

King Mohamed V announced on 24 May the formation of the theoretically nonpartisan Moroccan Government which he will head as premier. He had dismissed the Ibrahim government on 20 May after months of increasingly bitter disputes between rightist groups aligned with Crown Prince Moulay Hassan and leftists. Heeding the advice of his closest advisers that a government headed by Hassan would jeopardize the monarchy, the King has at last emerged into the political arena, where he can no longer avoid responsibility if he continues his former tactics of extreme caution and indecision. Hassan as deputy premier probably will carry the brunt of routine administration and is likely to use his office to suppress all leftist opposition.

Although the new cabinet does not appear to be the strong and decisive government needed to ensure internal stability, the King should be ably supported by four competent ministers who served in previous governments. Foreign Minister Driss M'Hammedi, who formerly held the interior portfolio, is close to the King but may not get along well with the crown prince. Personally, M'Hammedi is friendly toward the United States, but he is likely to carry out rigorously the King's policy of nondependence. Abdelkrim Benjelloun, an independent of rightist inclinations, will continue as minister of education.

The new minister of the interior is Si M'Barek Bekkai, who headed the first two independent Moroccan governments and is one of the King's closest supporters. Of the other new ministers, several are young, energetic, and intelligent. Minister of National Economy Mohamed Douiri, a former minister of public works, lacks experience in such a broad field and, as the creator of a rightist labor union formed to undermine the leftist Moroccan Labor Union, may have difficulty with the many leftists staffing his ministry.

Leftist groups, which are determined to prevent Moulay Hassan from ever acceding to the throne, will strive to solidify
