infiltration and incorporation of North Vietnamese troops into the Pathet Lao, the Communists could step up the effort, already underway on a considerable scale, to supply military equipment and technicians.
At least 17 Chinese Communist military transports have been identified in the shuttle operation which began on 13 December and terminates at Nanning, a rail center on the line to North Vietnam. On 15 December, two Chinese Communist civil transports flew from Peiping to Hanoi and are scheduled to return to Peiping on 16 December. An IL-14 flew to Vientiane on 15 December but apparently did not land as the airfield has been under artillery fire. It may have dropped supplies to Kong Le forces, however. On 16 December, all five of the Soviet IL-14's which had been airlifting material to Vientiane, were flying from Hanoi to Vientiane. It is not yet known whether they landed or paradropped supplies. Four of the five additional Soviet IL-14's scheduled for Hanoi arrived at Peiping from Irkutsk on 15 December and departed for Hanoi on 16 December. The fifth IL-14 is scheduled to fly to Peiping on 16 December.
In addition to Hanoi's private warnings, the bloc by its propaganda seeks to foment international alarm and justify Communist support for leftist forces in Laos. Hanoi, on 14 December, lodged a protest with the ICC for Vietnam charging that South Vietnamese troops were "present in the ranks of Phoumi Nosavan's" forces. In an official statement, also issued 14 December, Peiping charged the US with "crude interference" in Laos and endorsed Hanoi's demands for recall of the Laotian ICC. Peiping, in addition, in a 16 December People's Daily editorial, coupled a promise to uphold the 1954 Geneva agreements on Indochina with a threat to "exert its utmost efforts" to "check US imperialist interference" in Laos. The bloc effort to get international support for a negotiated settlement favorable to the Communists may gain some impetus from Indian Prime Minister Nehru's 15 December remark
16 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
