III. THE WEST

De Gaulle Readying Algerian Policy

President de Gaulle told the French cabinet on 26 August that the time had come to tackle the nub of the problem in Africa and Algeria. De Gaulle said he was preparing to find a solution which could satisfy "reasonable" and loyal Frenchmen "without disregarding those who are fighting for France." expressed the opinion that De Gaulle is far more liberal than 90 percent of his compatriots. expects him to emphasize to President Eisenhower that Algeria is a long-range problem and that while a course of action can be initiated now, it will take years for it to be successful.

De Gaulle planned a public statement on Algeria before the UN General Assembly opens on 15 September. The tenor of his speech will probably be outlined to President Eisenhower, and to the Council of the French Community on 10 September, when a move may be initiated to offer Community status to Algeria.

In any event, army sensibilities will be given careful consideration. believes De Gaulle is still fearful of the army's attitude, and feels that the army in Algeria, particularly the colonels, majors, and captains, will not accept a proposal which would call for a vote on the question of independence. He believes the younger officers, rather than the generals, are the key figures, and he considers them neither pro-De Gaulle nor pro-liberal Algerian policy. De Gaulle took pains to stress, on his recent tour of Algerian military installations, that the rebels must be subdued before there can be any political decisions on Algeria's future. He re-emphasized that the Algerians must decide for themselves after pacification has ended, and warned that this may take a long time. The press speculates that his tour may have persuaded him that the moment is not yet ripe for a political move on Algeria, or, on the other hand, that he has been reassuring the army that it would not be sold out as a result of a settlement by the politicians.

31 Aug 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
