[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

14 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. STALIN'S "CRIMES" REPORTEDLY AIRED AT SECRET
SESSION OF 20TH PARTY CONGRESS

4. EGYPT, SYRIA AND SAUDI ARABIA OFFER TO REPLACE
WESTERN AID TO LIBYA

5. USSR REPORTEDLY HAS OFFERED ECONOMIC AID TO
THE SUDAN

7. DEATH OF POLISH FIRST SECRETARY BIERUT
(page 9).

8. LAOTIAN GOVERNMENT CRISIS
[PAGE 04]
1. STALIN'S "CRIMES" REPORTEDLY AIRED AT SECRET
SESSION OF 20TH PARTY CONGRESS

Ambassador Bohlen reports that he
has heard from two different sources,
and has received indirect confirma-
tion from others, that Khrushchev
delivered a lengthy speech on Stalin's
"crimes" to a closed session of the 20th Party Congress
at which no foreign representatives were allowed.

In order to justify the attitude of the
present leadership, Khrushchev discussed in considerable
detail Stalin's actions during the purge period, charging
him with having decimated the party and executed many
of its outstanding leaders without cause. He said Stalin
"murdered" 5,000 of the best Soviet military officers, thus
undermining the defensive capacity of the country, and dis-
regarded repeated warnings, including some from Churchill,
of the imminence of Nazi attack.

Khrushchev is said to have announced
that statues and other signs of the glorification of Stalin
will be gradually eliminated, and Bohlen comments that
there is some confirmation that statues of Stalin are begin-
ning to be removed in Moscow.

Bohlen believes the reports are probably
accurate in substance and thinks it logical that the party elite
would receive more convincing justification for the attacks
on Stalin than were contained in the formal speeches at the
congress.

Comment
It now appears that Stalin's entire career
will eventually come under critical re-
view. Thus far, however, official public criticism of Stalin
since the party congress in both the Soviet Union and the
Satellites has been aimed primarily at the tyranny of his
later years. Only in the Soviet republic of Georgia, where
the people took great nationalist pride in Stalin, did the party
newspaper mention the anniversary of his death. On 9 March
the Georgian radio announced that a new monument to Stalin
would shortly be erected in a Georgian village.
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]
4. EGYPT, SYRIA AND SAUDI ARABIA OFFER TO
REPLACE WESTERN AID TO LIBYA

Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia have
offered to provide economic aid to
Libya to replace American and Brit-
ish assistance, according to the
British embassy in Tripoli. The Libyan ambassador
to Britain returned to London on 12 March to discuss
this offer and the Soviet aid offer with British Foreign
Office officials.

Comment
An Egyptian-Syrian-Saudi offer could
be intended to complement earlier re-
ported Soviet offers of aid to Libya, to exclude both Soviet
and Western aid, or to help Ben Halim get what he wants
from the West.

When Ben Halim was seeking Western
arms aid last fall, he asserted that Egypt had offered
Libya all the arms it needed. After Western aid was as-
sured, the Cairo press claimed Ben Halim had obtained
Egypt's permission to use an Egyptian arms offer to spur
Western agreement to his requests.
[PAGE 08]
5. USSR REPORTEDLY HAS OFFERED ECONOMIC AID
TO THE SUDAN

Representatives of East Germany,
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia reportedly called on the
Sudanese minister of defense in February and indicated
general willingness to furnish whatever equipment is
needed.

Comment
Following the Sudanese announcement
of independence on 1 January, several
bloc countries made overtures for diplomatic relations.
The USSR was reported last fall to have consulted Egyptian
prime minister Nasr regarding a Sudanese request for arms.
Prime Minister Azhari stated publicly on 22 January that
the Sudan had sent delegations to Czechoslovakia and other
Eastern and Western European countries to shop for arms.

The Sudan is seeking financial aid from
Western sources for water projects which depend in large
part on Sudanese-Egyptian agreement on division of the
Nile waters.

In the last few days, Prime Minister
Azhari has denied rumors that the USSR is offering the
Sudan a long-term loan which can be paid back in cotton
or other products.
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. DEATH OF POLISH FIRST SECRETARY BIERUT

The death of Boleslaw Bierut, first
secretary of the Polish United
Workers (Communist) Party, in
Moscow on 12 March is unlikely to
have any significant effect on the
stability of the party, whose present leaders have co-
operated smoothly since World War II. There does not
appear to be any strife or factionalism within the party
important enough to prevent an orderly transfer of au-
thority to a new first secretary.

The principal power in Poland has
been concentrated largely in the hands of Bierut and polit-
buro members Jakub Berman and Hilary Minc. The fact
that both of the latter are Jewish may make it undesirable
for either to succeed Bierut in the light of Poland's anti-
Semitism. Berman may continue to wield his power from
behind the scenes and Minc is concerned chiefly with eco-
nomic, rather than political, matters. Logical candidates
for first secretary are Edward Ochab and Franciszek
Mazur. Both were active in the prewar Communist Party,
and both have been prominent members of the politburo
and secretariat for several years.

Bierut was 64 years old at the time of
his death and had reportedly been in poor health for some
time. There is no evidence that he was in disfavor in
Moscow.
[PAGE 11]
8. LAOTIAN GOVERNMENT CRISIS

Prospects for establishing a stable
government in Laos have diminished
as a result of Premier Katay's sec-
ond failure to form a cabinet, nearly
a month after he resigned following the installation of a
newly elected assembly. Personal enmities among the
major party leaders in the 39-man national assembly have
been skillfully exploited by Bong Souvannouvong--a minority
deputy who is sympathetic to the Pathet Lao--to engineer
Katay's defeat. Bong has accomplished this despite Katay's
superior strength as leader of the largest pro-Western
party.

Bong, who refers to the Pathets as
"our compatriots who wish to work with us for the good
of the nation," seeks the premiership on the pledge that
he will solve the Pathet Lao issue within three months or
resign. Although he is not likely to become premier, his
activities have tended to stimulate a latent neutralism in
the assembly.

Meanwhile, general impatience over the
unresolved Pathet Lao situation is moving toward the point
where overtures from Peiping or Hanoi to arrange a settle-
ment might appear more attractive to the assembly.
[PAGE 12]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 13]
