I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Chou En-lai's Visit to Nepal

Communist China's Premier Chou En-lai left Katmandu on 29 April after a three-day visit during which he took every opportunity to increase Peking's influence in Nepal. Stressing the advantages of closer economic cooperation, Chou characterized both Nepal and Communist China as "poor" nations which must help each other--"the Chinese Government is willing to give support within its capability for the construction of Nepal." Chinese aid, now totaling $33,600,000, is "sincere, without any condition attached," Chou said. He proposed that some of these grant funds be used to build a road linking Tibet and Nepal.

Chou stressed that the Sino-Nepalese border problem could easily be settled in a manner "satisfactory to both sides." This attempt to make it appear that Nehru was the intransigent partner to the recent unsuccessful border talks in New Delhi was highlighted by Chou's denial that Communist China had any intention of claiming the southern slopes of Mount Everest.

Just before leaving Katmandu, Chou and Nepal's Prime Minister Koirala signed a treaty of peace and friendship omitting the clause on military nonalignment reportedly sought by the Chinese. The joint communiqué, however, did include expressions of sympathy and support for Afro-Asian nationalist movements. Reportedly, Chou had attempted to get Nehru to do this in the joint Sino-Indian communiqué signed on 25 April, but the Indian prime minister refused. Chou, who intends these statements to make it appear that Peiping is lining up support for national liberation, also tried unsuccessfully to get Nehru to join him in a recommendation for an Afro-Asian conference.

Chou's irritation with the lack of progress in the Sino-Indian talks was reflected in his charge on 29 April that Nehru had been "unfriendly" when he told the Indian Parliament on 26 April that China had committed aggression in Ladakh.

30 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
