The Situation in Guatemala

Communists and pro-Communists were apparently taken by surprise by the revolt launched on 13 November by disaffected army officers.
They are now, however, seeking to capitalize on the uprising. Communists have been reported infiltrating insurgent ranks, and in Puerto Barrios, where Communists are relatively strong, they may be among the civilians to whom arms were distributed by the rebels before government forces recaptured that city on 16 November.

Communists apparently organized the antigovernment demonstrations on 15 November in Guatemala City. Although the demonstrators were dispersed by the police, they have promised that new manifestations will be held nightly "until the government falls." The government's position in the capital is weakened by the withdrawal of troops to fight insurgents elsewhere.

the strong, moderate leftist Revolutionary party,
had rejected an approach for support from the revolt leaders before they launched their attempt, but that the party might feel obliged to join the insurgents in order to ensure establishment of a moderate government without Communist participation, should the Ydigoras regime fall.

As of 16 November, the government was continuing air and ground action against the insurgents who were forced out of the city of Zacapa and had taken to the nearby hills. Although government forces recaptured Puerto Barrios on 16 November, a number of the rebels who had held that city also remain at large. The US air attache reported on 15 November that "only a miracle" would permit the air force to retain for long its combat capability, explaining that the planes were rapidly deteriorating under combat conditions and that a lack of spare parts was preventing proper maintenance.

Although there is no evidence to support government claims of direct Cuban involvement in the revolt launched this week, Cuban propaganda and subversion probably contributed to the unrest that helped prompt it. Government charges of a Cuban-
