[PAGE 01]
11 June 1958

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Lebanon

Rebel units have resumed the offensive against govern-
ment security forces in both northern and southern Lebanon,
according to reports reaching Beirut. In Tripoli, security
forces utilizing artillery claim to have destroyed the citadel
which has been used by rebel forces as a command post, and
the opposing forces have clashed outside the city. Govern-
ment sources continue to expect a major rebel attack on the
city in the near future.

The political crisis shows some additional signs of be-
ing transformed into a confessional struggle. In an unprece-
dented action, the Grand Mufti of Lebanon--the nation's highest
[PAGE 11]
Moslem dignitary--and the Ulemas--the juridical leaders
of the Sunni Moslem faith--"excommunicated" Prime Min-
ister Sulh from their sect. Declaring "May the curse of
Allah fall upon him," the Ulemas called upon Moslems to
ostracize and disown Sulh. In retaliation, the government
has suspended four of the judges of the supreme Moslem
religious court who signed the decree, charging them with
engaging in political matters and demonstrating against
the government. This action will be interpreted by the
Moslem masses as meaning that the struggle in Lebanon
has assumed religious proportions, and will lessen Sulh's
influence in Moslem circles, while increasing his popu-
larity among the Christians.
[PAGE 12]
Arab Union Prime Minister Submits Resignation

Arab Union (AU) Prime Minister Nuri Said is attempt-
ing to increase pressure for a larger amount of Western
financial aid to the new union and for stronger action by
Britain to bring oil-rich Kuwait into the AU. The AU
Treasury Ministry has drawn up a budget for presentation
to the AU Parliament on 12 June showing an estimated deficit
of $18,592,000 for the nine months ending 31 March 1959,
and the prime minister has submitted his resignation rather
than present such a budget.

AU financial officials envisage that the union will normal-
ly have a deficit of about $21,000,000 annually. According to
the American Embassy in Baghdad, the Iraqis clearly expect
this shortfall to be made up by Kuwait. Nuri stated on 9 June
were open to Iraq: either demarcation of the Iraq-Kuwait
boundary so that a considerable part of Kuwaiti oil-pro-
ducing area would become Iraqi territory, or incorporation
of Kuwait in the AU.
[PAGE 13]
Nasir May Institute Purge in Syrian Region of UAR

Resumption of attacks on UAR Vice President Hawrani
and his followers by the semicontrolled Damascus press
may presage a purge by Nasir of the Syrian regional gov-
ernment. The attacks are accompanied by a suggestion
that Egyptians--"statesmen from the southern region"--
be brought in.

Similar attacks, centering on an agrarian labor reform
which Hawrani was sponsoring, occurred during Nasir's
visit to the USSR. In the present instance, Hawrani's sup-
porters among the regional government ministers are be-
ing criticized for their handling of the petroleum shortage
which has developed since the fighting in Lebanon cut the
normal supply routes for refined POL. A recent change
in the Syrian customs tariff, which had been interpreted
as aimed at bringing Syria's customs duties into line with
those of Egypt, has also been criticized in Damascus and
cited in press reports from Cairo as having irritated Nasir.

At the same time, Nasir's hatchet man in Syria, In-
terior Minister Sarraj, is being praised by the Damascus
press for his statements urging further efforts to solve
the POL situation. Sarraj and Hawrani, a demagogic po-
litical leader and theorist, have not gotten on well to-
gether in the Syrian regional government. Hawrani has
been especially suspect since it appears that his Arab
Socialist (Baath) party has not dissolved itself as was
agreed when the UAR was formed last winter. Nasir
almost certainly would like to eliminate any vestiges of
independent followings which Syrian politicians have car-
ried over into the UAR.
[PAGE 14]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
