[PAGE 01]
31 July 1951
Copy No. C1-7

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Attitudes of NATO members toward a Council meeting in September
(page 3).
2. German contribution to European army believed acceptable to
British (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Harassment of French officials in Shanghai (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Italians balk at embargo on ball bearings for Satellites (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Attitudes of NATO members toward a Council meeting in September:

Discussion in the NATO Deputies' meetings
of the proposal to hold a Council meeting in
Ottawa on 15 September has revealed con-
siderable anxiety over recent disagreements
among NATO members. The US, with some support from France, main-
tains that the date should be tentative until it becomes clear that defini-
tive action is possible on major questions such as the proposed European
Defense Forces, agreements with Germany, burden-sharing on bases, and
the admission of Greece and Turkey to NATO.

The UK, Canada and Belgium argue, however,
that an early Council meeting is highly desirable for an exchange of views
even if major issues are not resolved. The UK feels that the question of
the admission of Greece and Turkey cannot be further resolved by the
Deputies, and proposes soon to introduce a plan that may facilitate agree-
ment on sharing the costs of NATO bases.

2. German contribution to European army believed acceptable to British:

The UK Government may now be ready to
accept the idea of a German contribution to a
European army, according to an analysis of
the British attitude by US Embassy London.
The government would accept the European army concept provided it is an
integral part of NATO from the outset and does not retard the building up
of general NATO forces; and provided General Eisenhower considers this
the best means of utilizing German contingents.

"Conditioned acceptance" has gradually
overtaken original British hostility to the European Army, because the UK
now believes that the US supports the idea and because it now realizes that
UK and US troops would be separate.

The Embassy warns, however, that the gain
could be lost if the impression arises in the UK that the US is proceeding

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
without properly consulting the British. It urges specifically that a forth-
coming UK Cabinet decision on the German contribution to Western defense
would be greatly facilitated by advance information on the US attitude.

FAR EAST

3. Harassment of French officials in Shanghai:

French Consul General Royere and his Vice-
Consul in Shanghai were "subjected to indig-
nities" in June at the hands of dissident
Annamese, according to the French Consul
in Hong Kong.

The Annamese, former employees in the
French concession who had rejected repatriation offers and were vexed by
Royere's refusal to continue unwarranted relief payments, invaded the
Consulate and threatened to strangle Royere and the Vice-Consul; the
Chinese Communist police stood outside the building and did not inter-
vene. The mob took the French officials to a police station, where Royere
was threatened with deportation and was compelled to meet the Annamese
demands.

The French Consul in Hong Kong comments
that the Chinese Communists apparently were aware of confidential in-
structions from the French Foreign Office to Royere that he and his sub-
ordinates are to remain in China "at all costs."

Comment: France has not recognized the
Peiping regime, and the position of its representatives in Communist
China is precarious. Representatives in China of other non-recognizing
governments, notably the US before its officials were withdrawn, have also
been subjected to indignities. Although continued Chinese Communist
pressure upon such representatives would ordinarily be expected, there
have been no reports of such persecution since mid-June, and in recent
days there have been fragmentary indications that Peiping is considering
the adoption of a superficially conciliatory line toward the West.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Italians balk at embargo on ball bearings for Satellites:

At this week's meetings of the Coordinating
Committee's control group, Italy will indi-
cate willingness to accept an embargo on all
the 53 items proposed by the US for embargo
to the Orbit nations and to Communist China.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
Italy will refuse, however, to embargo ball
bearings, if the UK and France, which have accepted 33 items, including
ball bearings, reject the remaining twenty. The Italian Foreign Office is
convinced that the British and French are making a large number of ex-
ceptions on the basis of trade needs, and that therefore Italy could hardly
justify acceptance of an embargo on ball bearings, which are of key im-
portance in assisting Italy to obtain necessary imports from the East.

Comment: The UK, France and Italy are
reluctant to accept all US export control recommendations, principally
because of Western Europe's serious coal shortage. In order to obtain
Polish coal, the UK is anxious to continue exports of mining machinery,
while France has agreed tentatively to include ball bearings in exports to
Poland under a new trade agreement.

Although the Italian Government probably
will abide by its pledge to cooperate in preventing the export of ball
bearings to the Satellites, considerable illegal traffic in this item through
Trieste and Austria will continue.

- 6 -
