III. THE WEST
Cyprus: The Greek-Turkish deadlock over an interpretation of executive powers in the prospective constitution for Cyprus has become worse. The dispute will probably be referred immediately to the Greek and Turkish premiers. Unless the issue is quickly resolved, the original schedule of events leading to independence by next February will be disrupted and communal tensions may be revived.

Britain - West Indies: London has reverted to its earlier advocacy of associating the West Indies Federation, and especially Trinidad's anti-American Premier Eric Williams, in any review of the 1941 US-UK Caribbean bases agreement. The British seem convinced that Williams will emerge as the future leader of the year-old Federation and must be placated lest he abrogate the agreement later. They fear that a flat US refusal to discuss revision might even result in physical action against the major Chaguaramas base in Trinidad.
(Page 7)

UN--Khrushchev's visit: UN Secretary General Hammarskjold plans to play down the importance of the Soviet premier's visit to the General Assembly this September. He has scheduled Khrushchev's address to the assembly for 18 September rather than the opening day, 15 September, which the USSR reportedly preferred. Moreover, Hammarskjold plans to include Khrushchev in his regular dinner for heads of all UN delegations rather than give the separate dinner usually accorded "heads of state" visiting UN headquarters.
(Page 8)

Cuba: The Cuban Government on 19 August issued a decree ordering a 30-percent reduction in electric rates of the predominantly American-owned Cuban Electric Company, which supplies about 90 percent of the country's electric power. The company was not given a promised opportunity to refute the findings of a government commission that has been investigating it for several months. Government officials are believed considering a plan for permanent supervision, and the company president fears the government plans to take over the company eventually.
(Page 9)

22 Aug 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
