Indian Communist Party Congress Fails to Repair Rift

The main stumbling block to agreement on the CPI's future tactics continued to be the degree of support which Indian Communists should give Prime Minister Nehru and certain "progressive" policies of his Congress party government. Several days of bitter debate on this basic issue failed to resolve the split between the moderates, who line up with Moscow in favor of exploiting Nehru's prestige domestically and internationally, and the leftist extremists, who echo Peiping's line that Nehru has sold out to the "reactionaries" and must be actively opposed.

The question of the party's long-range program was turned over to the newly elected National Council, in effect shelving the problem for the time being. Press reports indicate that the council comprises 56 "right-wing" representatives, 36 "leftists," and 18 who take a middle-of-the-road position.

The congress was confronted with three draft resolutions on the current political situation, reflecting the views of the rival factions. Prolonged discussion and maneuvering produced a compromise in which the moderate-backed "official" draft, drawn up during the executive meetings in February, was accepted with some concessions in emphasis to the left-wing dissidents. The amended resolution probably will reiterate much of the double talk characteristic of the February declaration.

A striking omission in the discussions and statements of the congress was any reference to the Sino-Indian border dispute, suggesting that antagonism between the "nationalist" and pro-Chinese "internationalist" factions is still too strong to be smoothed over in a compromise resolution. In addition, Soviet delegate Suslov reportedly had exerted pressure to prevent discussion of this issue.

While the party's official tactics for the national elections next February remain to be worked out, Ajoy Ghosh's closing address to the conference on 16 April indicates the line the CPI is likely to take under moderate leadership. Ghosh called on

18 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
