Ceylon Plans to Expand Economic Ties With Sino-Soviet Bloc

A considerable increase in Ceylon's economic relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc apparently is planned as part of the Bandaranaike government's general effort to overhaul the island's trade system and to begin work on foreign-assisted projects which have gathered dust during the past year of political upheaval. The anticipated increase in exchanges with the bloc, which is not likely to be large in terms of percentage of total trade, is likely to be made at the expense of the sterling area; the bloc and sterling areas until now have accounted for about 8 and 50 percent of the island's total trade, respectively. The intended shift appears to be motivated by Colombo's desire to apply its neutral foreign policy to the economic as well as the political field.

Negotiations are under way with Soviet officials in Colombo for the direct purchase of petroleum products; such products now are imported and distributed exclusively by a Western consortium. Colombo has also contracted recently for 9,000 tons of sugar from the Soviet Union. Project reports for two Soviet industrial schemes planned under the Ceylonese-Soviet $30,000,000 loan agreement of 1958 were recently submitted to the government; actual construction probably will be soon. Finance Minister Dias Bandaranaike plans an extensive "shopping" tour early next year to discuss further aid offers in Moscow, the East European satellites, and Peiping.

Ceylon's intentions concerning economic relations with Communist China will become more apparent in December when Peiping's team arrives in Colombo to negotiate next year's protocol to the two countries' second rice-rubber agreement (1958-62). There are indications that Ceylon is ready to resume or even raise the level of trade which existed before 1959, when the rice-rubber exchange was reduced, particularly in view of the snags recently encountered in Ceylon's rice negotiations with Burma, the island's other main supplier. Colombo probably will also begin utilizing Peiping's $15,750,000 grant extended in late 1957; the government reportedly has invited a Chinese team to the island to reopen negotiations for a textile mill offered under the grant in 1958 and rejected a year later.

8 Nov 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
