[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

13 August 1960

Copy No. C 71
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized persons, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
13 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev offers aid to Ghana in addi-
tion to that covered in economic aid agree-
ment soon to be announced. (1)

Chinese Communists now moving to soften
their dispute with Indonesia. (2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Federation of Mali--Dispute between
leaders of constituent states of Soudan
and Senegal sharpens to the extent their
federation may be threatened. (3)

III. THE WEST

Peru to support diplomatic break with
Dominican Republic in forthcoming OAS
session but is not yet ready to support a
move against Cuba. (4)

LATE ITEMS

(5) Comment on situation in Laos.
(6) Comment on situation in Congo.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Ghana: Khrushchev on 5 August told the Ghanaian
delegation now in the USSR that Moscow would be willing to
provide assistance for the Ghanaian merchant marine, for a
naval base and school, and for a civil air line. These offers
are apparently in addition to the projects covered in an aid
agreement believed recently concluded and soon to be announced.
Khrushchev indicated at the same time that, should Nkrumah re-
quest it, the USSR would assist Ghana with its Volta River hydro-
electric scheme on terms more favorable than those obtainable
in the West; this project is in the final stages of negotiations with
Western aluminum interests and the International Bank. (Page 1)

Communist China - Indonesia: Peiping is following up its
conciliation on boundary questions with Burma and Nepal with
moves to soften its dispute with Indonesia. Chinese Communist
Foreign Minister Chen Yi has expressed satisfaction with Dja-
karta’s regrets over last month's incident in which two Overseas
Chinese were killed, and he has promised to consider ending
Peiping's abusive radio attacks. In addition, Communist China
has agreed to the designation of a new Indonesian ambassador who
was previously indicated to be unacceptable. (Page 2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Mali: Discord between leaders of Senegal and Soudan--the
constituent states of the newly independent Federation of Mali--
is sharpening to such an extent that it could lead to an early
break-up of the federation. Senegalese leaders have become in-
creasingly antagonized by Soudanese attempts to dominate the
[PAGE 05]
federation, and the Soudanese apparently are backing away
from an earlier commitment to support Leopold Senghor,
Senegal's top leader, for the presidency of Mali in a vote now
scheduled for 27 August. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Organization of American States: Venezuela is demanding
that a resolution calling for a complete break in relations with
the Dominican Republic be passed at the first of the two Organ-
ization of American States (OAS) meetings beginning 16 August
in San Jose, Costa Rica. Peru will support a break in diplo-
matic relations--a step already taken by Lima--but not a break
in commercial relations, according to the American charge in
Lima. At the subsequent meeting on the Cuban issue, which
Peru proposed, it will back a strong resolution condemning Sino-
Soviet interference in the hemisphere. Unless Cuba makes new
attacks on the OAS or on Peru, the Peruvian Government would
not, however, want to support a resolution against Cuba. (Page 4)

LATE ITEMS

*Laos: The Revolutionary Committee's announcement in Vien-
tiane that the Somsanith government is on the point of submitting
its resignation is unconfirmed, and may be overly optimistic.
Lao govern-
ment leaders in Luang Prabang have rejected the terms of the
Revolutionary Committee, and are not going to Vientiane, as earlier
reported. General Phoumi has re-
turned to Savannakhet after conferring in Luang Prabang and is
eager to "get fighting." In order to strengthen his hand in any show-
down or negotiations with the rebellious units in Vientiane, Phoumi
is making urgent plans for the transfer to Savannakhet of the 200 Lao
paratroopers in training in Thailand. Meanwhile, the latest commu-
niqués issued by Captain Kong Le, leader of the Revolutionary Com-
mittee, are considerably more moderate in tone than those imme-
diately following the take-over of Vientiane on 8 August. They
[PAGE 06]
assert the Revolutionary Committee's respect for the monarchy
and the constitution, and do not give support to press reports to
the effect that all American personnel would be expelled from
Laos and that Communist bloc assistance would be sought.
Radio Hanoi reports that the pro-Communist Pathet Lao
movement has expressed "full support" for the coup group in
Vientiane, has proposed the prompt formation of a "national
coalition government," and has called for joint action by Lao
government and Pathet Lao forces to forestall countermoves by
the US and pro-American forces in Laos. (Page 5)

*Republic of the Congo: The relatively uneventful entry into
Katanga of Secretary General Hammarskjold and the advance
guard of his UN occupying force has coincided with efforts by
Congo Premier Lumumba to strengthen his government in Leo-
poldville. However, a conference of the separatist Abako party,
scheduled to begin on 13 August, may lend new impetus to anti-
Lumumba sentiment by declaring the lower Congo area independ-
ent of the central government.

the USSR is
looking forward to the time when, in concert with African states
such as Ghana and Guinea, it might demand the evacuation of UN
contingents from the Congo, presumably after Belgian troops
have been withdrawn, on the ground that the UN should not be
charged with the future administration of the Congo. Moscow,
presumably confident of securing African support for such a
move, could be expected to accompany the demand with new of-
fers of technical and economic aid. (Page 7)
[PAGE 07]
Moscow Expands Offer of Economic Aid to Ghana

Soviet Premier Khrushchev, in talks at Yalta on 5 August
with a Ghanaian delegation, expanded the USSR's earlier offer
of economic and technical aid to include assistance for a Ghanaian
naval base and school and for the Ghanaian merchant marine and
a civil airline. The delegation--which had come to the USSR to
negotiate the earlier Soviet offer, reportedly amounting to $280,-
000,000--agreed with Khrushchev's suggestion that discussions on
the new proposals begin as soon as possible. Soviet aid for the
merchant marine and the civil airline may include the supply of
ships and aircraft, as well as technical assistance for the opera-
tion of such services.

Khrushchev also offered to assist Ghana with its Volta River
hydroelectric and aluminum production project on terms more fa-
vorable than those available in the West. Ghana now is in the final
stages of negotiations with the International Bank of Reconstruction
and Development and a consortium of Western aluminum producers
regarding aid for this project.

Khrushchev's response to Accra's decision to accept Soviet
aid reflects an awareness of the key role Ghana plays in Western
African political affairs. The bloc's aid effort in this region has
so far concentrated largely on Guinea.

The USSR offered in June to carry out some 28 projects in
Ghana, including the construction of hotels and sewer systems,
car assembly and fertilizer plants, an atomic reactor, and a steel
mill. Inasmuch as Moscow and Accra are preparing a joint commu-
nique covering the results of negotiations over this offer, an agree-
ment has evidently been reached under which at least some of these
projects will be implemented.

As in similar arrangements with underdeveloped countries,
Moscow will probably accept local commodities in payment for its
aid. The Ghanaian delegation has made tentative arrangements for
the USSR to buy cocoa directly from Ghana instead of through the
international market in London.
[PAGE 08]
Peiping Displays Softer Attitude Toward Indonesia

To help dispel an appearance of unreasonableness, Pei-
ping is following up its conciliation on boundary questions with
Burma and Nepal with moves to calm its dispute with Djakarta
over Indonesian treatment of Overseas Chinese. This dispute
was sharpened considerably a month ago when two Overseas
Chinese who resisted resettlement measures were killed by In-
donesian troops in Tjimahi, West Java. Foreign Minister Chen
Yi recently told two Indonesian journalists in Peiping he was
satisfied with Djakarta's expression of regret over the incident,
and he promised to consider an end to abusive radio attacks
which have greatly annoyed the Indonesians. President Sukarno
refused for over four weeks to receive the Chinese ambassador,
who was eager to present "urgent messages" from Peiping.

Communist China has also agreed to accept the new Indo-
nesian ambassador who it had previously indicated was not wel-
come. Peiping had stalled on accepting the ambassador, whose
name was submitted at the time of the Tjimahi incident, in ori-
der to show its displeasure over the Overseas Chinese issue.

Chinese Communist propaganda is pointing to Peiping's
ability to resolve disputes with other Asian countries to sug-
gest that Indian rather than Chinese stubbornness is responsi-
ble for the impasse in Sino-Indian border negotiations. Indian
delegates returning from the first session of "fact-finding"
talks in Peiping reportedly contend that the Chinese showed
not the least accommodation on the Ladakh occupation and in-
sisted that an agreement could be negotiated only on the basis
of Chou En-lai's compromise formula, under which Chinese
claims in the Ladakh area would be recognized in exchange
for Indian claims along the McMahon line, in northeastern
India.
[PAGE 09]
Senegalese-Soudanese Friction Shaking Mali Federation

Discord between Senegal and Soudan--the constituent states
of the newly independent Federation of Mali--has recently inten-
sified to such an extent that an early break-up of the federation
is possible. This latest and most serious in a series of such
crises between the federal partners--whose basic outlooks and
temperaments diverge widely--is the result of increasing resent-
ment on the part of the moderate Senegalese over Soudanese at-
tempts to dominate Mali. The Soudanese, whose top leader,
Modibo Keita, is foreign minister as well as head of the Mali
Government, have been placing a disproportionate number of
their people in federal positions. They have also been trying,
quite openly, on at least one recent occasion, to induce younger
elements in the Senegalese Government to work for the more vig-
orous domestic policies and the more aggressive, pan-African-
oriented foreign policy favored by Soudan.

This heightened friction, already reflected in a wrangle over
the naming of a chief of staff for the Mali Army, appears to be
building up toward a showdown in connection with the election,
now scheduled for 27 August, of a federal president by the com-
bined legislatures of Mali, Senegal, and Soudan. A top-level
decision reached last May supposedly cleared the way for the
election to this post of Leopold Senghor, Senegal's principal
spokesman and the chief architect of the Mali Federation. Now,
however, the Soudanese are insisting they agreed only that the
presidency should go to a representative of Senegal.

they have decided definitely to op-
pose Senghor, whom they regard as an obstacle to the "consolida-
tion" of the federation and to a possible future association with
other independent states of former French West Africa.

the Soudanese, who are in a position to pre-
vent any candidate from obtaining the necessary two-thirds major-
ity, plan to seek an indefinite postponement of the balloting or, if
that is not possible, to support Senghor's Senegalese rival, Lamine
Gueye. Senghor's supporters are reacting to these indications with
dire predictions implying a possible move by Senegal to secede
from the federation if Senghor is not chosen.
[PAGE 10]
Possible Developments at OAS Meetings

Venezuela is demanding that a resolution calling for a com-
plete break in relations with the Dominican Republic be passed
at the first of the two Organization of American States (OAS) meetings
beginning 16 August in San Jose, Costa Rica. Peru will support
a break in diplomatic relations--a step already taken by Lima--
but not a break in commercial relations, according to the US
charge in Lima. At the subsequent meeting on the Cuban issue,
which Peru proposed, it will back a strong resolution condemning
Sino-Soviet interference in the hemisphere. Unless Cuba makes new
attacks on the OAS or Peru, the Peruvian Government would
not, however, want to support a resolution against Cuba.

The Trujillo regime now has no supporters among the Latin
American states. In its propaganda efforts and in the statements
of its officials, it is showing a bitterness against the United States
which, in many aspects, closely parallels that of the Castro regime
in Cuba. The two regimes, heretofore generally considered at op-
posite ideological poles, may well find themselves allies at the
foreign ministers' meetings. In a letter to air force officers prior
to his departure for Europe on 7 August, General "Ramfis" Tru-
jillo, the dictator's son, stated that the United States has turned
against both Trujillo and Castro because both attacked US business
interests--"When those people's dollars and cents are touched, no
one can shut them up." The American Embassy interprets the let-
ter, a bitter tirade against the United States, as clear indication
that dictator Trujillo intends to retain control and that he is "to some
extent at least sympathetic to Castro."

Communists and other pro-Castro groups in Costa Rica are
evidently planning disturbances during the conference, including
picketing the conference site and holding public meetings denounc-
ing the OAS. However, there is no large group of dissatisfied in-
dividuals in the Costa Rican capital that would be readily exploit-
able in mob action, and any disturbances are likely to be carried
out by individuals and small groups which could be controlled by
Costa Rica's 2,400-man civil security force.

minor disturbances are probable
and violence is possible, but either will probably be controlled.
[PAGE 11]
Situation in Laos

Emissaries continue to shuttle back and forth between
the Somsanith government temporarily seated in Luang
Prabang and the Revolutionary Committee holding forth in
Vientiane, but these indirect negotiations thus far have been
inconclusive. Claims by the Revolutionary Committee that
the government is about to tender its resignation are unsub-
stantiated and may be overly optimistic. Government lead-
ers may be stalling for time in order to assess their political
and military strength throughout the country before entering
into serious negotiations or initiating possible military counter-
action.

the government leaders in Luang Prabang
have rejected the terms of the Revolutionary Committee and
are not proceeding to Vientiane as earlier reported.

General Phoumi, who has established a
temporary command post at Savannakhet in south central Laos,
is eager to "begin fighting" after a series of quick conferences
with both Lao and Thai government leaders. Phoumi has
ordered the immediate return to Savannakhet of 200 paratroopers
who have been undergoing advanced training in Thailand. He
apparently is counting on using these troops and an additional
400 paratroopers stationed in Luang Prabang and Pakse as the
nucleus of a potential strike force against Vientiane.

There are growing signs that Captain Kong Le, leader of
the coup group, is operating on a shoestring and is attempting
to stampede the government into a quick settlement before his
situation becomes readily apparent. His exhortations over the
Vientiane radio for the Lao people to rise up and support his
reform movement have evoked no discernible response thus far
from either civil or military quarters outside Vientiane. Rebel
strength in Vientiane is about 1,200 men, but all of these ap-
parently are not strongly loyal to Kong Le. The troops, fatigued
[PAGE 12]
from practically continuous duty since 8 August, are be-
coming shabby and are on short rations; there are reports
that some junior officers are becoming disgusted, while
others are clamoring for action.

The latest communiqués issued by the Revolutionary Committee
are considerably more moderate than its
initial statements following the takeover on 8 August. It
announced on 12 August that the term "Revolutionary
Committee" is inappropriate, and that "coup d'etat com-
mittee" is preferable inasmuch as the committee has no desire
to change the system of administration and fully respects
the king and constitution. It also stressed that
no political group or foreign nation was behind the coup.
Press reports to the effect that all American personnel
would be expelled from Laos and that Communist bloc as-
sistance would be sought were termed "completely unfounded."

The situation in Vientiane is outwardly calm, but food supplies
are dwindling and the Revolutionary Committee has warned
merchants against hiking prices. Rumors are rife,
and a local USIS employee reports that the people believe
the "Communists" have taken over the town.

The Communists are exploiting these developments.
According to Radio Hanoi, the dissident Pathet Lao move-
ment has voiced "full support" for the coup group in Vientiane,
has proposed the prompt formation of a "national coalition
government," and has called for joint action by the Lao govern-
ment and Pathet Lao forces to forestall countermoves by the
US and pro-American forces in Laos. Hanoi has lauded the policy of
"peace and neutrality" proclaimed by Kong Le and
has assured the Laotian people of the "sympathy and support
of peace loving people throughout the world." Peiping,
breaking almost three days' silence on the coup, has begun to
carry extensive reports on the situation in Laos. Moscow radio
comments that events in Laos are another expression of the
process taking place in various countries linked to the United
States by "aggressive military blocs."
[PAGE 13]
LATE ITEM

The Situation in the Congo

The arrival in Elisabethville of Secretary General Ham-
marskjold and the first two companies of the UN occupying
force was accomplished without serious incident on 12 August.
Premier Tshombé's conspicuous display of the flag of "inde-
pendent" Katanga, however, together with his continuing ban on
the entry of any representative of the Lumumba government, in-
dicates that he will continue his vigorous opposition to any move
to reunite Katanga with the Congo government as presently con-
stituted.

In Leopoldville, Premier Lumumba has taken steps designed
to bolster his internal position in the face of mounting criticism
of the unitary state he espouses, and growing sentiment for the
type of Congo confederation favored by Tshombé. The Congo
Government on 11 August arrested the editor of a Catholic news-
paper who had earlier been linked with alleged plotting against
the government. On the same day, Information Minister Kash-
amura personally closed down the Belgian news agency outlet in
Leopoldville, charging it with false reporting in connection with
antigovernment demonstrations on 10 August. The leftist Kash-
amura, whose anti-Belgian broadcasts helped inflame Congolese
opinion during the recent Force Publique depredations, stated
that the Belgian facilities would be operated by the Congo Govern-
ment. The government reportedly is also closing down the facil-
ities of the official French news agency.

A conference of the separatist Abako party, scheduled to be-
gin outside Leopoldville on 13 August, may lend new impetus to
anti-Lumumba sentiment by declaring the lower Congo area--where
the Abako has long been dominant--independent of the central gov-
ernment. the Abako cen-
tral committee plans to take such action, with or without the con-
currence of its leader, President Kasavubu.

the USSR is look-
ing forward to the time when, in concert with African states, it
[PAGE 14]
might demand the evacuation of UN contingents from the Congo,
presumably after Belgian troops have been withdrawn. Ambas-
sador Menshikov, in a meeting in early August with the Liberian
ambassador in Washington, inquired if Liberia would support a
demand for withdrawal of UN forces from the Congo after order
had been restored, in order that the Congolese might be "free to
choose" their sources of aid and assistance. Menshikov asserted
that he did not think the UN should be charged with the future ad-
ministration of the Congo. Moscow is probably confident of se-
curing support from African governments, especially Guinea and
Ghana.

Moscow could be expected to accompany such demands by of-
fers of economic and technical assistance to the Congo Govern-
ment, despite disclaimers by First Deputy Foreign Minister Kuz-
netsov to Hammarskjold on 10 August that the Soviet Union would
be willing--in contrast with normal Soviet policy--to channel its
aid to the Congo through the UN.

The Soviet Union has already provided some direct aid
in the form of food, medical assistance, and one transport aircraft.
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House - Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
