[PAGE 01]
24 April 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. LEADING CZECHOSLOVAK OFFICIALS MAY BE DISMISSED
(page 3)

2. SOVIET EXPERTS MAY BE AIDING CHINESE COMMUNIST
ARTILLERY PRODUCTION (page 4)

3. SINGAPORE CHIEF MINISTER THREATENS TO RESIGN IF
BRITISH REFUSE DEMANDS (page 5)

4. PATHET LAO STRATEGY OUTLINED
(page 6)

5. NEW CRISIS IN ATHENS OVER CYPRUS ISSUE
(page 7)

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 8)

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. LEADING CZECHOSLOVAK OFFICIALS MAY
BE DISMISSED

Communist sources are saying that
Vice Premiers Kopecky and Cepicka,
Slovak party first secretary Bacilek,
and Minister of Culture Stoll will soon
be dismissed.

informed the American
embassy that he expects the announcement of the dis-
missals before 1 May.

Comment
Kopecky, Cepicka, and Bacilek are
members of the Czech politburo. As
former heads respectively of the ministries of culture,
justice, and security during the Stalin era, they are vul-
nerable in the current Soviet bloc program to restore le-
gality and to encourage intraparty criticism. According
to press reports, Cepicka, now defense minister, has al-
ready asked to be relieved.

In his report to the Czech central com-
mittee on 29-30 March, party first secretary Novotny warned
that Czech adjustments to the Soviet 20th Party Congress
would not be "without personal difficulties, problems and
perhaps pain" for some members and officials of the party.
Officials connected with the ministries of security, justice
and culture in Poland have recently been dismissed.

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET EXPERTS MAY BE AIDING CHINESE COMMUNIST
ARTILLERY PRODUCTION

Soviet assistance in the development of
a Chinese artillery industry is suggested
by the composition of a military "advisory
group in Peiping first noted in late Decem-
ber 1955.

a group of 34 Soviet army officers, nine of whom
are artillery designers or military engineers. Inconclusive
data concerning the backgrounds of four of the Soviet artillery
experts in Peiping suggest they have had some association with
Soviet development of guided missiles.

The Chinese have been dependent on im-
ports from the USSR for most of their artillery requirements.
Heretofore, Chinese capacity has been limited to light artil-
lery production. Soviet assistance in expanding artillery-
producing facilities would accord with current efforts to help
develop a variety of modern military industries, such as air-
craft and submarine, in China. (Prepared jointly with ORR)

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. SINGAPORE CHIEF MINISTER THREATENS TO RESIGN
IF BRITISH REFUSE DEMANDS

Singapore's Chief Minister Marshall,
who is in London for self-government
talks, told an official of the American
embassy that he had been forced by the
deteriorating situation in Singapore to make demands which
went further than the proposals he made several months
ago. He stated that if the British refuse his demands, he
will probably resign before he leaves London.

Marshall hopes that even if the nego-
tiations fail, the British Colonial Office will make the pre-
tense of continuing discussions beyond 14 May, the anniver-
sary of the arrest of Singapore students two years ago. Other-
wise he fears subversive elements may incite riots on both
1 and 14 May.

Comment
The British sources have said that they
will not grant Marshall's demands on the
critical issue of internal defense. Even if Marshall were to
receive the concessions he has demanded, the British feel
there is a strong possibility that left-wing elements would
force him out of office and that it would then be only a matter
of time before effective power would pass into the hands of
the Communists.

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. PATHET LAO STRATEGY OUTLINED

The Viet Minh advisers in Laos
informed Hanoi that they approved the recent
Pathet Lao approach to the royal gov-
ernment for a resumption of negotia-
tions on the grounds that "the more we can reveal our good
will, the more we can prolong the tension, which is to our
advantage."

any agreement by
Premier Souvanna Phouma to such negotiations would be
based on the International Truce Commission's recognition
of Vientiane's sovereignty over the two disputed northern
provinces, but stated the Pathet Lao would not accept this
view until a settlement was reached calling for its political
integration into the Laotian state.

The Viet Minh advisers recognized that
"the policy of prolonging tension would create "urgent prob-
lems" of morale in the ranks of the Pathet Lao which the
Viet Minh would have to help overcome.

Comment
This supports the view that
the Communists are not now contemplat-
ing large-scale military action to extend their area of con-
trol in Laos. On the contrary, they may feel that the longer
they can hold out, the more susceptible the government will
be to a negotiated settlement favorable to Communist aims,
possibly through the good offices of Hanoi or Peiping.

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. NEW CRISIS IN ATHENS OVER CYPRUS ISSUE

Comment on:

The proffered resignation of Greek
foreign minister Theotokis on 22 April
resulted from charges by the Cyprus
ethnarchy that he had not supported the
Cypriots' demand for self-determination with sufficient
vigor. The opposition has kept Prime Minister Karaman-
lis on the defensive on the Cyprus issue and a refusal to
accept the resignation might lead to his government's over-
throw. Because Greek public attention centers on this issue,
Cypriot leaders may be able to force Athens to follow their
views, particularly since Theotokis' moderation has not
elicited any new British move toward reopening negotiations
on the problem.

Karamanlis and Theotokis reportedly
believe London has been trying to force them out of office,
presumably to make way for a weak coalition of center par-
ties.

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7

[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 23 April)

Isolated incidents continued along the
Israeli frontier. Israel charged that on Sunday Syrians fired
on an Israeli fishing boat on Lake Tiberias, and that Jordanians
opened fire on an Israeli patrol inside Israeli territory on Mon-
day morning. (Press)

UN secretary general Hammarskjold is
scheduled to fly from Damascus to Amman on Tuesday to con-
tinue discussions with governments involved in the Arab-Israeli
crisis. (Press)

While in Syria on Monday, Hammarskjold
is believed to have conveyed an Israeli offer to permit Syrian
farmers to water their livestock in Lake Tiberias, to refrain
from sending police boats within 250 meters of the eastern shore,
and to have Israeli authorities grant Syrians individual licenses
to fish in the Israeli-controlled lake. The Israelis report that
the secretary general agreed to ask the Syrians to recognize their
obligation under the armistice agreement to refrain from firing
across or into the demilitarized zone separating the two countries
along the Jordan River. Israel hopes to be able to resume the
work of diverting Jordan River water within this zone, and For-
eign Minister Sharett is reported to have declared to Hammar-
skjold that Israel would not permit a third work season to pass
without completing work on the diversion canal which begins at
Banat Yacov bridge. Syria has repeatedly declared that resump-
tion of work within the demilitarized zone by Israel would be an
act of aggression. The Cairo press has reported that Syria would
ask Hammarskjold for guarantees that Israel would not again at-
tempt to divert the course of the Jordan River.

a second group of seven or nine
Vampire jet fighters from Egypt were ready to be handed over to
a Saudi unit in the Suez Canal zone. Saudi Arabia had previously
received five Vampires as the first of a group of twenty-five.

24 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
