their action is to strengthen the campaign against Communist guerrilla activities because of Diem's ineffectiveness in dealing with the situation. No actions have been reported against foreigners and the group has allegedly stated that it desires American and Japanese aid.

In recent months, opposition as well as some government circles have increasingly vented long-standing grievances against repressive measures of the Diem government and Diem's authoritarian rule through a family clique which fostered favoritism and corruption. Certain professional army officers were particularly bitter over political interference in command assignments which they felt interfered with the army's effectiveness against the Communist dissidents. They had also increasingly expressed concern that Diem's failure to make sweeping reforms was creating a dangerous political situation in Saigon and contributing to rural apathy which favored the Communist guerrillas. Recent gestures by Diem have been inadequate to rally popular support and to contain Communist guerrilla activities which have been spreading to previously quiescent areas of the country.

While there is no evidence of North Vietnamese involvement in the coup, Hanoi has embarked on an intensive effort to topple Diem, urging stepped-up guerrilla terrorism and offering to cooperate with any groups politically opposed to Diem. Hanoi has had a coup in mind, but it does not appear that the leaders of the revolutionary committee meet North Vietnam's criteria for a group which can be led into a coalition government and eventually absorbed by the Communists. A successful coup would tend to confirm Hanoi's belief that the situation in the South is ripe for Communist exploitation. In this respect, the Communist guerrillas may move quickly to strike at government administrative centers while the effectiveness of South Vietnam's army is reduced by confusion. Thus far, Moscow radio has limited its reporting on the situation in South Vietnam to quoting western press coverage. Hanoi

11 Nov 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2
