South Korea Resumes Attempted Seizures of Japanese
Fishing Craft

South Korea has attempted to resume seizures of Japanese
fishing boats, apparently in a display of irritation over Tokyo’s
refusal to break off negotiations in Geneva with the North Koreans
over the repatriation of Koreans in Japan. Seoul has demanded
an end to the Geneva talks as a prerequisite for resuming dis-
cussions on the normalization of Japanese - South Korean relations,
but has offered no substantive concessions itself. The last seiz-
ure of Japanese fishing boats occurred last January. About 153
Japanese fishermen are being held by South Korea for violation
of the unilaterally imposed “Rhee line”--which extends as much
as 60 miles beyond the South Korean coast line.

Talks between Japan and South Korea in Tokyo were recessed
last February after Japanese Foreign Minister Fujiyama announced
that Japan would permit the voluntary repatriation of Koreans in
Japan to North Korea. Seoul has threatened strong retaliatory
measures should the repatriation actually take place.

Subsequent negotiations in Geneva between Japanese and North
Korean Red Cross officials to determine arrangements for the
repatriation appear to have made little progress thus far. Tokyo
is insisting that the International Committee of the Red Cross par-
ticipate in the repatriation program to assure that none of the Koreans
are repatriated involuntarily. Pyongyang claims that
petitions signed by some 117,000 Korean residents constitute suf-
ficient evidence of their intentions and that only technical problems
related to travel and finance need to be solved.

Despite the lack of progress in the Geneva talks, the Kishi
government is reluctant to break them off prior to the 2 June upper-
house elections because of the Japanese public’s strong support for
repatriation and continued hope for success in the talks. Tokyo is
willing, however, to resume negotiations with South Korea if the
latter indicates its willingness to negotiate seriously on the “Rhee
line” and captive Japanese fishermen.
