II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR Tension With Jordan and Israel

UAR propaganda continued to attack King Husayn following Syria's closure of its frontier with Jordan on 5 June. Syria has taken the action, which closes the route by which Jordan receives virtually all of its imports, in retaliation for Jordanian harassment of Syrians in the border area. Some Syrian newspapers charged that Husayn's "provocative acts" were planned during his recent visits to the United States and Britain. In an effort to arouse Jordan's Palestinian Arabs, who comprise more than half the population, Husayn was accused of helping carry out an "Israeli-imperialist plot" to exploit the situation in Iraq and press the UAR to settle the Palestine question at the expense of the Palestinians. Jordanian authorities have initially taken an attitude of restraint, and have protested the UAR action to Jordan's delegate to the UN and to the UN representative in Amman. If the road blockade continues, Jordan may again seek increased Western aid.

(UAR tensions with Israel have been further increased as a result of an air clash over the Sinai-Negev desert on 7 June, and the reported destruction of an Israeli military vehicle by a mine in the same general area a few days earlier. Both sides have in fact long made air reconnaissance flights over the other's positions in the Gaza Strip, Sinai, and the Negev. In a recent discussion of the problems of the UN Emergency Force, which patrols the Egyptian side of the Gaza-Sinai frontier with Israel, a UN official reported that during an unspecified period there had been 188 Israeli overflights of the Gaza area and at least 13 Egyptian flights over Israel.)

The Egyptians have not yet unloaded the cargo of the Israeli-chartered Danish ship, Inge Toft, which the Egyptian Government ordered confiscated when it attempted to pass through the Suez Canal. The American consul in Port Said believes that forcible seizure of the cargo may be unnecessary, because continued detention of the ship could increase the charterers' expenses to a point where they would want to release the cargo. Unofficial Israeli comment on UN Secretary General Hammarskjold's proposal to refer Israel's case to the International Court of Justice has been unfavorable.
