call for Soviet troops if the Western powers attempted to land troops to separate the Arab and Israeli forces.

King Hussain turned down an invitation to fly to Cairo to join the conference with Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia. Hussain reportedly told Syrian prime minister Ghazzi, who had brought the invitation, that he had no intention of "joining either side." Hussain also reportedly rejected Egyptian, Saudi and Syrian financial aid as a substitute for the British subsidy now supporting Jordan's Arab Legion.

Foreign Minister Sharett told Ambassador Lawson several days ago that Israel "could not live with" a resumption of Egyptian-inspired commando activities within Israel. Sharett left the impression with Lawson that he considers the renewal of guerrilla activities most likely. Lawson concludes on the basis of recent conversations with Prime Minister Ben-Gurion that the prime minister has once and for all ruled out preventive war. The ambassador feels, however, that Ben-Gurion may react with great force against any aggressive move by his neighbors and that he is prepared to face the consequences even if they involve general area hostilities.

Israeli minister of development Bentov on 9 March told the American counselor in Tel Aviv that he was not certain "whether the Soviet Union would supply Israel with arms but said that it was worth a try. If the USSR refused, at least the cards would be on the table. The counselor felt that Bentov had urged an approach to the Soviet Union upon the Israeli cabinet. Bentov expressed the belief that Ben-Gurion might go along with this recommendation. He added, however, that neither the Soviet ambassador in Tel Aviv nor Foreign Minister Molotov could be drawn out on the question of the Soviet attitude.

The American ambassador in Moscow, noting particular Soviet press interest in recent Western moves in the Near East, considers that some form of Soviet diplomatic initiative in the present situation should be anticipated--particularly if it takes a turn for worse. The ambassador suggests that such
