[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

26 December 1960

Copy No. C 77

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
26 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Communist China - Taiwan: Communist shelling of the offshore islands has almost ceased for the past month. Only one firing of 33 propaganda rounds has occurred since 27 November--the lowest ebb since the odd-day firing pattern was established in October 1958. In addition, the "liberate Taiwan" theme has been a negligible ingredient in mainland propaganda since mid-1960. On the few occasions when the Taiwan issue is mentioned, however, Peiping continues to underscore its determination to use force if necessary while expressing hope for a peaceful solution.

In contrast to the Communist behavior, Chinese Nationalist batteries have increased the number of high-explosive shells fired against the mainland since mid-November. Taipei apparently believes it is politically advantageous to keep a state of tension in the strait.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
[PAGE 05]
*Congo: Hammarskjold has sent a letter to Kasavubu implying that he will ask the Security Council to take the UN out of the Congo if Mobutu uses force in an attempt to take Orientale Province--still nominally controlled by Antoine Gizenga's "government." Hammarskjold told US officials, however, that he does not expect civil war in the Stanleyville area, since he believes neither Gizenga nor Mobutu is strong enough to force a fight. Hammarskjold plans to be in the Congo on 3 and 4 January. Khrushchev, after a delay of ten days, responded to Gizenga's appeal for support by reiterating Soviet promises of support and sympathy but avoiding any specific commitment of assistance. Sudan continues to refuse transit to UAR planes bound for Stanleyville, but President Abboud admits that flights over remote areas of the country could probably be made without Sudanese knowledge.

26 Dec 60
[PAGE 06]
*Ethiopia: Although the leaders of the attempted coup against Emperor Haile Selassie are now reported to have been killed or captured, considerable sympathy for the coup effort persists, and the Imperial Government's position may still be precarious. Because of the elaborate precautions considered necessary for the Emperor's safety, the royal family has not attended the funerals of the government ministers killed by the rebels. The Emperor reportedly decided on 21 December to re-constitute the Royal Bodyguard, and some junior officers and men have already been released from custody. This action could seriously antagonize the army, which crushed the revolt. Officials of the government claim to have captured documents which they say clearly indicate Soviet and Czech involvement in the coup attempt, but the officials have not produced the evidence they claim to have.

26 Dec 60
[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
