[PAGE 01]
18 September 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. OUTCOME OF ANTI-PERON REVOLUTION IN ARGEN-
TINA STILL UNCERTAIN (page 3).

2. COMMENT ON SOVIET PROPOSAL TO GIVE UP
PORKKALA NAVAL BASE (page 4).

3. INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT RELAXES PRESSURE ON
NEW GUINEA CLAIM (page 5).

4. PAKISTAN'S ADHERENCE TO TURK-IRAQI PACT TO
BE UNCONDITIONAL (page 6).

5. SAUDI ARABIA SAYS SOVIET UNION REPEATS ARMS
OFFERS (page 7).
[PAGE 04]
1. OUTCOME OF ANTI-PERON REVOLUTION IN ARGENTINA
STILL UNCERTAIN

The outcome of the anti-Peron revolt
of army and navy elements which broke
out on 16 September remains uncertain.
Both sides are claiming victories, but
accurate reporting from the scene of
the fighting in the provinces is lacking.

The rebel forces have set several dead-
lines for Peron to surrender or have the city of Buenos Aires
bombarded from the sea. Latest reports state a bombard-
ment might take place on 19 September. The present location
of the main fleet, which was some 1,000 miles from Buenos
Aires when the revolt broke out, is unknown. Both sides
are claiming the loyalty of these fleet elements. It seems
likely, however, that the major fleet elements are in rebel
hands. Whether there is sufficient ammunition aboard the
ships for a successful bombardment is questionable, since
it has been reported that the navy was stripped of much of
its ammunition following the 16 June abortive revolt against
Peron.

On 18 September, Hugo di Pietro, secre-
tary general of the General Confederation of Labor (CGT),
called on its members to rally to the support of Peron and
"to liquidate the traitors."

American ambassador Nufer on 18
September commented that both sides were making intense
efforts to influence the various military units. Nufer added
that "a government victory doubtless depends on maintenance
of present loyalties, while rebels apparently must induce de-
fections to win." The embassy had earlier estimated that
approximately 30 percent of the armed forces were involved
in the revolt.
[PAGE 05]
2. COMMENT ON SOVIET PROPOSAL TO GIVE UP
PORKKALA NAVAL BASE

The Soviet proposal to return Porkkala
to Finland and renew the Soviet-Finnish
10-year mutual assistance treaty signed
in 1948 is timed to serve the USSR's dip-
lomatic strategy for the Big Four foreign
ministers' conference in Geneva next
month. Molotov is expected to concen-
trate at Geneva on the USSR's proposals for a European se-
curity system, which call for nonaggression pacts and are
aimed at obtaining dissolution of the American base system
established under NATO.

According to press reports, Marshal
Zhukov at a Finnish embassy reception on 18 September
stated: "The time has come to liquidate bases in general."
When asked which bases he had in mind, he cited "the bases
of the United States around the Soviet Union, the Chinese
People's Republic, and other People's Democracies." Zhukov
reportedly said the USSR might evacuate Porkkala before the
end of the year.

Control of Porkkala, which is only about
30 miles from the well-defended Estonian coast, has come
to be of relatively little military significance to the USSR.
Soviet forces in Porkkala are estimated to include 5,000
army and 1,000 security troops, and one jet fighter regi-
ment.

The American embassy in Helsinki
describes the reaction in official Finnish circles as one
of wary suspicion and apprehension rather than pleasure.
The Finnish foreign minister said that nothing was known
as to what the Russians might want in return other than
their proposal to discuss extension of the 1948 Treaty of
Friendship and Mutual Assistance.
[PAGE 06]
3. INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT RELAXES PRESSURE ON
NEW GUINEA CLAIM

It is now clear that the new Indonesian
government intends to relax pressure
for sovereignty over Netherlands New
Guinea. Foreign Minister Anak Agung
told Ambassador Cumming in Djakarta
on 15 September that he had decided
against any Indonesian speech on this
subject at the UN when the General
Assembly agenda, which includes the New Guinea ques-
tion, comes up for a vote. Agung also plans to advise
friendly Asian-African delegations not to make any speech
on the subject.

The foreign minister hopes to start
negotiations with the Dutch next month on "all outstand-
ing questions." Agung also discussed with Cumming the
importance of relieving the Australian government, which
has adamantly opposed the transfer of New Guinea from
Dutch to Indonesian control, of "any concern" over New
Guinea.

The New Guinea question remains an
important national issue, however, and no Indonesian cab-
inet could afford publicly to abandon the demand that the
Dutch relinquish sovereignty over the area.
[PAGE 07]
4. PAKISTAN'S ADHERENCE TO TURK-IRAQI PACT TO
BE UNCONDITIONAL

Pakistan has completed its study of
the Turkish-Iraqi-British pact and is
ready to adhere to it without reserva-
tions, according to a high official of
the Pakistani Foreign Ministry. Public announcement is
planned after the documents have been signed and deliv-
ered to Baghdad, probably within a few days.

Comment

Pakistan has until now insisted on
limiting its military obligations under
the pact to assistance in the event of attack on Turkey or
Iraq. The decision to drop these reservations follows a
month and a half of British persuasion supported by Turkey
and Iraq.

Pakistan's entry as fourth member will
make it possible under the terms of the pact to set up the
planned permanent council of ministers. Both Turkey and
Pakistan can now be expected to renew their efforts to ob-
tain increased American support for the defense arrange-
ment.
[PAGE 08]
5. SAUDI ARABIA SAYS SOVIET UNION REPEATS ARMS
OFFERS

The royal counselor of King Saud in
two recent conversations with Am-
bassador Wadsworth stated that Saud
was being pressed by the USSR for an
answer to its offer of aid and for the establishment of
diplomatic relations. The counselor urgently requested
American military and economic aid, and said that if the
US had nothing new to offer, Saudi Arabia would decide
on the Soviet offers in terms of its own best interest.

The counselor suggested that despite
Islam's antipathy toward Communism, Moslem's top re-
ligious leaders would favor any steps taken to strengthen
Islam. He claimed that the establishment of relations
with the USSR would have important repercussions through-
out the Moslem world because of Saud's prestige.

Comment

Saud and his top officials have re-
peatedly reminded American diplo-
mats of the Soviet approach which reportedly was made
to the Saudi ambassador in Tehran by the Soviet ambas-
sador there and repeated to King Saud when he visited Iran
six weeks ago.

The Saudis are probably giving serious
consideration to opening diplomatic relations with the
USSR. Though the Saudis would be inclined to hesitate
on the question of Soviet military aid, the terms and con-
ditions for the purchase of Soviet military equipment
would probably be the determining factor.
[PAGE 09]
