[PAGE 01]
20 June 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
20 JUNE 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev likely to use occasion of
Rumanian party congress, opening today,
to discuss Soviet policy with satellite and
Chinese delegations.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan--Sohyo plans to call nationwide
strikes on 22 June.
Belgian Congo--Lumumba suffers loss
of prestige but is in position to disrupt
new government; fragmentation continues
at provincial level.
Saudi military group reported planning
attempt to overthrow the monarchy.
Pakistan makes new overture to Afghan-
istan.

III. THE WEST
Algerian rebels to send delegation to
Paris in response to De Gaulle's speech
French Government expects trouble from right-
ists if negotiations begin.
Personnel changes in Cuban foreign office
suggest growing role for Communists
and Raul Castro in foreign policy matters
Venezuelan exiles in Dominican Republic
planning new effort against President
Betancourt; Venezuela, in turn, giving
support to anti--Trujillo Dominicans.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communist Bloc: Khrushchev arrived in Bucharest on
18 June with a strong delegation to attend the Rumanian party
congress, which opens on 20 June. The European satellites,
with the exception of Albania, will be represented by their
party first secretaries, while China and the Asian satel-
lites have sent politburo-level delegations. Peng Chen, the top
Chinese representative, is closely associated with the leadership
and has considerably more stature than the Chinese observer to
the Warsaw Pact meeting in Moscow last February. The compo-
sition of the delegations indicates that Khrushchev will utilize the
time to meet with bloc leaders in order to discuss future Soviet
policy. In private talks Khrushchev will undoubtedly discuss Sino-
Soviet differences and probably seek to work out the essentials for
an eventual compromise, at the same time reaffirming Soviet lead-
ership in the bloc.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Japan: Japanese university authorities are in effect continu-
ing to encourage student violence by refusing to discipline their
students and by blaming the government for the disorders. The
pro-Communist labor federation Sohyo plans to call nationwide strike
on 22 June against the security treaty, which all leftist groups have
declared "illegal." Continued government ineffectiveness in control-
ling the extremists is almost certain to encourage ultrarightist ele-
ments to attack the leftist groups. (Page 1)

Belgian Congo: Leftist leader Patrice Lumumba apparently has
suffered a distinct loss of prestige as a result of his failure to form
a national government. Joseph Kasavubu, president of the Abako
party and leader of a loose anti-Lumumba coalition, claims to have
succeeded in his effort to obtain a majority in the national assembly. However Lumumba with the largest single bloc of assembly seats,

[PAGE 05]
threatens to disrupt the work of any government from which he
is excluded. Political fragmentation is continuing at the provin-
cial level, with a state of emergency proclaimed in two of the
six provinces and minority parties attempting to set up govern-
ments in four provinces. (Page 2)

Saudi Arabia: A group of Saudi military officers is reported
planning an attempt to overthrow the monarchy. The power strug-
gle between King Saud and Crown Prince Faysal has brought increas-
ingly outspoken criticism of the royal family. Several of the senior
princes have advised immediate measures to stimulate economic de-
velopment and bring into the government competent and influential
men from outside the royal family. Crown Prince Faysal has re-
portedly complained that certain Aramco and US Government offi-
cials "treat him as an enemy" and are interfering in Saudi affairs.
(Page 3)

Pakistan-Afghanistan: Pakistan's ambassador in Kabul has sug-
gested to the Afghan foreign minister that if propaganda exchanges
could be reduced, the Pakistani foreign minister--and possibly later
President Ayub--would be willing to visit Kabul to discuss outstand-
ing differences, including the Pushtoonistan issue. While this over-
ture suggests that the Pakistanis are prepared to abandon their hard
line and seek a modus vivendi, a similar effort last January resulted
only in worsening relations. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST
France-Algeria: The Algerian rebel government will announce
publicly on 20 June its intention to send a delegation--headed by
Ferhat Abbas--to Paris in response to De Gaulle's speech of 14
June. Algerian rightists have often threatened an uprising if it ap-
pears that the rebels and De Gaulle are entering into negotiations.
The French Government reportedly feels prepared to handle any
coup attempt by rightists in France and trouble with the settlers in
Algeria.
(Page 5)

20 June 60  DAILY BRIEF  ii

[PAGE 06]
Cuba: The resignation of two under secretaries in the Cuban
Foreign Ministry, announced on 17 June, is probably the precursor
of a general shakeup of top officials in the ministry, including the
removal of Foreign Minister Roa, who has been held responsible for
the failure of various aspects of foreign policy. One of the newly
appointed under secretaries is regarded as a Communist; the other
has recently voiced strong anti-US sentiments on a tour of Latin
America. Both may have been selected by Raul Castro, suggest-
ing that he and the Communists are likely to extend their influence
over foreign policy.

Venezuela - Dominican Republic:
a new effort to
overthrow President Betancourt is in an advanced stage of planning.
Venezuela in turn is reported to be organizing an expedition of
Dominican exiles to invade the Dominican Republic in coordination
with an internal uprising there. Any further plotting against Vene-
zuela by Trujillo, who was deeply involved in the abortive 20-21
April military uprising against Betancourt, could touch off sharp
retaliation by Venezuela. (Page 6)

20 June 60  DAILY BRIEF  iii

[PAGE 07]
Japanese Situation

Japanese university authorities are in effect continuing to
encourage violent student agitation by refusing to discipline their
students and blaming the government for the current disorders.
The view of many university leaders is that Communist instigation
of the student demonstrations is negligible as compared with stu-
dent feeling against Kishi and the security treaty, which all leftists
have said is illegal. There have been public expressions of fear
that the uncontrolled agitation will spread to the high schools un-
less the government takes strong preventive action.

Meanwhile, the pro-Communist labor federation Sohyo plans
to call nationwide strikes on 22 June protesting the treaty and de-
manding the resignation of the Kishi government. The strike re-
portedly will be much larger than the demonstrations on 4 June
which, though nonviolent, had been the largest to date against the
treaty. Continued government ineffectiveness in controlling the left-
ist extremists is almost certain to encourage ultrarightist elements
to attack the leftist groups. Some rightists reportedly are consider-
ing attempting a coup; no group is known to be in a position to carry
out such an action successfully.

The Japanese
Government is concerned that some American interests are seiz-
ing on the turmoil surrounding the cancellation of President Eisen-
hower's visit to press for curtailment of imports from Japan. There
also is concern that foreign loans are being adversely affected.
Presumably in an attempt to forestall such
a reaction, Japan's four major business organizations have issued a
joint statement regretting the postponement of the President's visit
and saying that the Japanese will eliminate violence and restore nor-
mal, parliamentary processes. Concern of influential business ele-
ments may move the Kishi government to take firmer measures to
restore order.

[PAGE 08]
Continuing Crisis in the Belgian Congo

Leftist leader Patrice Lumumba apparently has suffered
a sharp drop in prestige as a result of his failure to set up a
national Congo government, according to the consul general in
Leopoldville. Lumumba's authority to form a government was
withdrawn on 17 June by Belgian Resident Minister van der
Meersch, who then asked Joseph Kasavubu to attempt the task.

Kasavubu, president of the Abako party and Lumumba's chief
rival, derives his support from the Cartel of the National Union,
a loose coalition of several parties united chiefly by their opposi-
tion to Lumumba. The cartel seems to control a majority in the
National Assembly, and on 19 June Kasavubu claimed that he had
succeeded in forming a coalition government which he hoped to
present to the assembly for approval later this week. However,
Lumumba, with the largest single bloc of assembly seats, has a
strong minority position and has threatened to disrupt the work of
any government from which he is excluded. Following a meeting
with Kasavubu on 19 June, Resident Minister van der Meersch flew
to Brussels for further consultations on the Congo situation.

Meanwhile, political fragmentation is continuing at the pro-
vincial level. A state of emergency has been declared in Katanga
and Kivu provinces, and minority parties are attempting to set up
their own governments in Katanga, Leopoldville, Kasai, and Equa-
teur provinces. Lumumba's stronghold in Orientale Province is the
only area which has so far escaped this trend. Violence has al-
ready been reported at scattered locations, and the security situa-
tion may deteriorate further as rival groups continue their struggle
for power.

[PAGE 09]
Increasing Opposition to Saudi Monarchy

The power struggle which has been taking place between
King Saud and Crown Prince Faysal is causing increasingly
outspoken criticism of the royal family, and a group of Saudi
military officers is reported to be making plans for an attempt
to overthrow the monarchy. Dissatisfaction appears to be wide-
spread in the Saudi regular army and air force, but a coup at-
tempt would probably have to be even more broadly based to have
much chance of success. The White Army, separately controlled
and composed of tribal levies, is as strong as the regular army.
The royal guard regiment and the police force presumably would
also have to be neutralized or subverted.

Several of the senior Saudi princes have advised immediate
measures to head off growing disaffection--quickly stimulating
economic development and bringing into the government able, in-
fluential men from outside the royal family. Both Saud and Faysal
have given at least lip service to the idea of making the government
more representative.

While the danger of a coup may have led to new efforts by
other members of the royal family to patch up the Saud-Faysal quar-
rel, it is not yet clear that even a temporary accommodation has
been reached. Faysal, who had to call off his plans for medical
treatment abroad in order to try to cope with the King's pressures,
reportedly believes that Saud has obtained assurances of American
support. Faysal allegedly has complained that certain officials of
the American Government and of the Arabian American Oil Company
"treat him as an enemy" and are interfering in Saudi internal af-
fairs.

"Everybody is scared, and everybody is jittery. They are
scared of the army. They saw what happened in Turkey."

[PAGE 10]
New Pakistani Overture to Afghanistan

Pakistani Ambassador Rahman in Kabul has suggested to
Afghan Foreign Minister Naim that if propaganda exchanges could
be reduced, Pakistani Foreign Minister Qadir and, possibly later,
President Ayub would be willing to visit Kabul to discuss outstand-
ing differences, including the question of Pushtoonistan.
the interview went well and that Naim suggested he
discuss the matter with Prime Minister Daud.

Kabul is unlikely to agree to a propaganda truce merely to
reduce tensions, since this could be taken as a sign of weakness
in the face of Pakistan's propaganda assaults. Naim's visit to
Rawalpindi last January for similar high-level talks resulted in
a worsening of relations, apparently because Naim felt Ayub's em-
phasis on Pakistan's armed strength indicated he was more inter-
ested in intimidating Afghanistan than in reaching agreement by
negotiation. While the Afghans remain suspicious of Pakistani in-
tentions, they probably would accept the Pakistani proposal if they
believed Rawalpindi was ready to recognize publicly the existence
of the Pushtoonistan dispute.

Pakistan is probably unwilling to change its basic position, al-
though Ayub may hope that such feelers will convince other free world
countries that Pakistan is genuinely interested in improving relations
with Afghanistan.

[PAGE 11]
Algerian Rebel Acceptance of French Offer to Negotiate Likely
To Set Off French Rightist Demonstrations

The Algerian rebel government on 20 June will announce qual-
ified acceptance of President de Gaulle's 14 June offer and send
delegates to Paris for cease-fire talks,
The composition of the rebel negotiating
group has not been made public, but will probably include rebel
Premier Ferhat Abbas.

The French security services, although claiming knowledge of
rightist activities in Algeria and France and control of the situation,
are undoubtedly concerned about the rightist demonstrations that
will probably follow the opening of negotiations with the Algerian
representatives. Government concern is centered on Algiers, where
insurrectionists held portions of the city for nearly a week last January;
the government apparently hopes to keep the army free of involvement.

Government plans to neutralize a rightist uprising call for the
use of police and security forces to maintain law and order in Algiers;
French Army units in France, with the possible exception of some
paratroop units in southwest France, are regarded by government
sources as being loyal. Paris officials acknowledge, however, that
rightists--with the backing of some army officers--may attempt to
assassinate French Delegate General Delouvrier in Algiers, and that
they may riot and attempt to take over the Algiers radio station.

[PAGE 12]
Venezuelan-Dominican Situation May Reach Critical Stage

a new effort to overthrow Venezuelan Pres-
ident Betancourt is in the final preparatory stage. Although a
Dominican-based attempt against Venezuela has little chance of
success, Trujillo's conduct has become increasingly erratic and
impetuous since he became aware of widespread plotting against
his regime last January. He was deeply involved in the abortive
20-21 April military uprising against Betancourt, and further
plotting could touch off sharp Venezuelan retaliation.

Venezuela in turn is
organizing an expedition of Dominican exiles to invade the
Dominican Republic in coordination with an internal uprising
there.

a coup was being organized
and that it included military elements. Dissident elements in the
Dominican Republic apparently have been encouraged by the 8 June
report of the Inter-American Peace Committee of the Organization
of American States (OAS) accusing the Trujillo regime of "flagrant
and widespread violation of human rights"--a finding based on
charges presented by Venezuela earlier this year.

There is little evidence within Venezuela, however, that dis-
united Dominican exiles there are prepared to launch an invasion.
It also seems unlikely that Betancourt would support such a move
before the OAS acted on the charges of intervention against Trujillo
which Colombia and Venezuela plan to print shortly--unless he is
provoked by Dominican plotting. Moreover, Betancourt has had con-
siderable success in bringing about the diplomatic isolation of Tru-
jillo; since last April, Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Peru have
broken relations with Ciudad Trujillo.

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
20 June 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
