[PAGE 01]
27 February 1953
Copy No. 59

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Israel wants specific UN condemnation of Soviet anti-Semitism (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Burmese suffering heavy losses against Chinese Nationalists (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Shah reportedly plans to leave Iran (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Importance of Finnish-USSR trade to increase in 1953 (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Large-scale diversion of West German bearings to Orbit through Austria suspected (page 6).

9. Norway views new Balkan alliance as precedent for Scandinavia (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Israel wants specific UN condemnation of Soviet anti-Semitism:

Israel is drafting a UN resolution which is to be a restatement of the basic principles of the UN charter and to conclude with a paragraph on the anti-Semitic character of Soviet persecutions. It is seeking roughly 12 sponsors for this resolution, including the United States, Britain and France.

Comment: The United States has been interested in a UN resolution on Communist denial of basic human rights. Any resolution which specifically refers to anti-Semitism is likely to bring up Zionism, thus beclouding the issue and inviting Arab and Moslem opposition.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Burmese suffering heavy losses against Chinese Nationalists:

Contrary to War Office press releases, Burmese troops are suffering heavy losses and repeated defeats in their engagements with Chinese Nationalists.

Comment: The Burmese Government has recently claimed several victories against the Chinese Nationalists and the recapture of several towns in the northern border area. Continued defeats could persuade Burmese leaders of the necessity of accepting some form of Chinese Communist assistance.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Shah reportedly plans to leave Iran:

Prime Minister Mossadeq suggested to the Shah on 24 February that he should leave Iran as soon as possible, returning only after the country becomes more stable. Minister of Court Ala, in reporting this to Ambassador Henderson, stated that the Shah assented eagerly and plans to leave on 28 February for the holy cities in Iraq and then go to Europe. Spain has been asked by the Iranian Government to extend a formal invitation.

Mossadeq suggested a regency council composed of himself, Minister of Court Ala and Gholam Reza, a half-brother of the Shah.

Comment: Mossadeq has long wanted to limit the Shah's constitutional powers and previous moves have been designed toward that end. The Shah's departure could be the first step in abolishing the monarchy, and it removes the rallying point for what conservative opposition remains.

[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE

6. Importance of Finnish-USSR trade to increase in 1953:

The USSR will replace the United Kingdom as Finland's principal trading partner in 1953 as a result of the recently signed Finnish-Soviet trade protocol under which Finland's exports to the Soviet Union will total approximately $152,000,000 during the current year. Finland's exchanges with the Soviet bloc will rise this year to an estimated one third of its total foreign trade.

An anticipated $12-15,000,000 export surplus to the USSR will be made up either by additional deliveries from the Soviet Union or through increased deliveries to Finland from other Orbit countries under trilateral trade agreements.

Comment: Orbit trade accounted for approximately 23 percent of Finland's total foreign trade in 1952. Drawing Finland more closely into the Orbit trade pattern could increase its vulnerability to Soviet pressure.

[PAGE 06]
The fact that the USSR will become Finland's principal trading partner is due primarily to the cutback in British imports of Finnish pulp and paper and the generally depressed world market for most of Finland's traditional exports.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Large-scale diversion of West German bearings to Orbit through Austria suspected:

The Austrian Ministry of Trade is currently making an end-use check of $200,000 worth of West German ball and roller bearings imported into Austria in 1952. Large-scale sales of strategic bearings to Soviet bloc representatives and to the Administration of Soviet Enterprises in Austria are suspected.

Comment: On 10 February the American Embassy in Vienna reported the halting by Austria of three shipments

[PAGE 07]
of List I and List II bearings shipped from West Germany via Switzerland and destined for Rumania and Czechoslovakia. Last week, however, Austrian officials stated that because of legal difficulties they could not continue such action without a written directive from the United States High Commission.

9. Norway views new Balkan alliance as precedent for Scandinavia:

The Norwegian Prime Minister's private secretary, who is now in Belgrade, informed Ambassador Allen on 25 February of Norway's hope that the "strategic alliance" of Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia might furnish a precedent for a somewhat similar link between Norway, Denmark and Sweden. He thought his government would in principle favor Yugoslav membership in NATO.

Comment: Sweden, despite certain recent moves toward covert cooperation with the West, will probably continue suspicious of any formal tie like that suggested.
