permitting a considerable degree of provincial autonomy and call for general elections under UN sponsorship. Reaction by the Soviet representative at the UN to the neutralization proposal of Hammarskjold has been reserved. The Congolese spokesmen at the UN, when apprised of specific neutralization proposals, strongly objected. Although Gizenga and Tshombe have not released statements on their reactions, a maximum amount of pressure would probably be needed to secure their compliance.

The military situation in the Congo continues to pose difficulties for the UN forces, which have recently been weakened by troop withdrawals. On 4 February, a UN Nigerian unit was ambushed by a pro-Lumumba force near Kindu in Kivu Province. Although an uneasy truce was called after an all-day exchange of fire between the two units, both sides have continued to maintain their battle positions. An improvement in the security of the outlying areas cannot be expected until more troops under UN control arrive in the Congo. Malaya and Liberia have expressed a willingness to supply additional military aid to the UN force, and the Republic of Togo is scheduled to provide a "token" unit.

(Backup, Page 7) (Map)

South Korea: The recent reshuffle of the cabinet, which brought five new ministers and four vice ministers into the government, is an attempt of the Chang Myon administration to rally more parliamentary support. Popular expectations were high following the ouster of Syngman Rhee last April, but the Chang Myon government, beset with factionalism and corruption and handicapped by a demoralized police establishment, has not shown the dynamic leadership needed to gain popular support. Popular demands for reprisals against those associated with the Rhee regime has led to ex post facto legislation. Action under these laws could exclude from public life large numbers of the limited supply of trained personnel.

With an assist from a heavy propaganda barrage from the North the belief is spreading particularly among younger

6 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF
iii
