Khrushchev May Attend UN Session

Since the US election, Soviet bloc sources have encouraged speculation that Khrushchev would use the UN as a forum for establishing contact with President Kennedy. Last September, Khrushchev put forward a proposal for a special session of the UN General Assembly in the spring of 1961 to be attended by heads of government for a discussion of disarmament. The Soviet delegation attempted to clear the way for such a session by pressing for an early resumption of the assembly after the holiday recess in order to complete work on all items except disarmament, which would then be considered by the heads of government. Although Foreign Minister Gromyko reiterated this proposal for a special meeting in his foreign policy report to the Supreme Soviet on 23 December, bloc propaganda has not stressed the idea. Instead, Soviet spokesmen have indicated that Khrushchev would return to New York for the resumption of the assembly and would expect to meet with the President.

An Izvestia correspondent suggested this procedure

although such a meeting could be confined to a general discussion, the two leaders might reach agreement to resume negotiations on Berlin. Shortly before the inauguration, the Soviet military attaché in Turkey stressed to his American counterpart the need for an early meeting between the President and

About the same time, Khrushchev and the satellite leaders will probably return to New York. Soviet officials did not exclude a meeting between Khrushchev and the President.

Khrushchev's apparent desire to establish early contact with the President was also reflected in his conversations with Western diplomats at the end of December and in early January. He made it clear, however, that his main purpose would be to lay the groundwork for a four-power summit meeting. While leaving open the possibility of his attendance at the UN, the Soviet leader may wish to avoid a firm commitment to return to New York until he has had more time to estimate the position of the new US administration on specific East-West issues.

6 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
