Taiwan for Bangkok and Vientiane on 2 February to promote closer ties with Phoumi in Vientiane.

According to one report, Chinese Communist troops supported the Burmese attack on the irregulars at Keng Lap and Mong Pa Liao but have withdrawn from the area and are returning to China. Peiping has made no public reference to the fact that Chinese troops have been involved in action against the irregulars, but the New China News Agency (NCNA) reported on 4 February that irregular forces had withdrawn into Laos following clashes with the Burmese Army. The NCNA dispatch cited Hong Kong press reports to the effect that the irregulars, under Taipei's direction, plan to join the Boun Oum government and fight against the Pathet Lao. Peiping could use the movement of irregulars into Laos as a pretext for more open intervention there but would be unlikely to do so at least until the irregulars become actively engaged in the fighting.

In Vientiane, former Premier Phoui Sananikone is reported anxious to undertake the formation of a more broadly based government under certain conditions. According to one version, these conditions include approval of the Boun Oum government and the United States, participation of Souvanna Phouma, and acceptance of Pathet Lao representatives into the government at some future date. Phoui was forced out of office in late December 1959 as the result of pressure by the army, the King, and General Phoumi's now moribund Committee for Defense of National Interests. As a leader of the moderate, old-guard politicians in Laos, Phoui is probably hopeful that he can emerge as a compromise premier in a broadened government. However, the group he represents has progressively lost ground to extremist forces of both right and left.

There are rumblings of discontent in the Laotian military establishment. Numerous ranking officers have been shunted off to relatively unimportant positions during the course of General Phoumi's purge of those officers who failed to demonstrate unswerving loyalty to him during the periods

6 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
