LATE ITEM

Adenauer Reconsiders Decision to Run for West German Presidency

Chancellor Adenauer wants to remain as chancellor of West Germany instead of "moving upstairs" to the presidency. He informed leaders of his Christian Democratic Union (CDU) of his change of mind on 4 June. The CDU leadership and Bundestag faction, already badly split on whether Finance Minister Etzel or Economics Minister Erhard should succeed Adenauer as chancellor, has called an extraordinary meeting for 5 June to discuss the question. In view of the presidential election date of 1 July, the party is under pressure to reach a decision on its candidate as soon as possible.

On 7 April Adenauer reluctantly acquiesced in the CDU's desire that he accept the party's nomination for the presidency--in the apparent hope that he could name his successor and guide the transition to a new government. However, sharp differences developed between Adenauer and the party rank and file over his successor. Adenauer has strongly supported Etzel, who is little known to the German public and a relatively colorless personality, while the majority of the CDU Bundestag members have backed Erhard.

When Etzel was brought into the cabinet in 1957, Adenauer was reported to be grooming him as his successor. Adenauer saw Etzel as a strong supporter of his own policy of European integration, based on good relations between Bonn and Paris, and felt that Etzel was more capable than Erhard of handling foreign affairs in view of Etzel's experience as a vice president of the Coal-Steel Community.

The party rank and file, aware of the CDU's need for a popular vote-getter in the 1961 elections, maintained that Erhard, with his reputation as the author of German prosperity, could best fill this role. In the 1957 campaign, Erhard played a significant role, second only to Adenauer's. When Erhard was nominated by party leaders for the presidency in February at Adenauer's insistence, the 270 CDU members of the Bundestag

5 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 12
