Japanese General Elections

Japan's upper-house elections, while resulting in no significant shift in party strengths, are an important psychological victory for Prime Minister Kishi's Liberal-Democratic party. Although the Socialists as well as the Liberal-Democrats gained seats at the expense of minority groups, the steady upward trend in popular vote for the Socialists over the past decade was reversed. The Liberal-Democrats won 71 contests and will hold 132 seats in the upper house; the Socialists won 38 and will have 85 seats; 30 seats will be held by minority party members and independents. The Communist party gained one seat, giving it a total of three members in the 250-member body.

Prime Minister Kishi's ability to manage intraparty dissidence has been strengthened by the election results. However, it is not yet clear whether dissident leaders such as Hayato Ikeda, Takeo Miki, Mitsujiro Ishii, and others, will accept posts in the new cabinet, which Kishi plans to form before the new Diet convenes. Inclusion of these leaders is essential for a stable government and would strengthen Kishi's ability to cope with Socialist opposition to ratification of the US-Japan Security Treaty.

The Socialists, with clear-cut control of one third of the upper house seats, will be able to block amendment of the constitution to legalize rearmament. Both the left and right wings of the party, however, are criticizing party leaders for the scanty gains which many observers are interpreting as a defeat. The right wing is now in a better position to moderate party policies, and this may make it more difficult for the Socialists to offer united opposition to government policies.

The personalities of the candidates and local issues largely determine the decisions of Japanese voters. The results, nevertheless, seem to reflect at least some public dissatisfaction with the Socialists' endorsement of Communist policies for Asia.

5 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
