The Situation in the Congo

Hammarskjold's decision to return Dayal to Leopoldville--despite the danger of undermining the UN's newly improved relations with the Leopoldville government--reflects his sensitivity to Nehru's views. Despite Dayal's unpopularity with virtually all Congo factions, Hammarskjold has long favored returning him to the Congo at least for a token period.

Gizenga's determination to resist Kasavubu's call for a meeting of parliament in Leopoldville appears to have sharpened differences among his followers which forced the adoption of strict security measures. The American Embassy in Leopoldville reports, however, that Gizenga has released from prison Colonel Yangoie, the army officer who in April negotiated with General Mobutu's representatives concerning the desirability of reconvening parliament. The embassy speculates that Yangoie's release was prompted by a desire to avoid unrest in the army.

The embassy notes that recent arrests in Stanleyville stem from opposition to Gizenga among moderates, notably those in the Orientale provincial government. The easing by the Leopoldville government of the economic blockade of Stanleyville reportedly permitted an influx of goods to the provincial government which strengthened its hand in relation to Gizenga's "national" government. While the Gizenga regime appears doubtful of its ability to control a new meeting of the Congo parliament and continues to be troubled by factionalism, the American Embassy believes it is not likely to collapse soon.

In Katanga, Belgian interests appear under pressure from both the UN and the Katanga government. Hammarskjold's personal representative in Brussels has told Ambassador Stevenson that the new Belgian Government seems to be yielding to financial interests and the press and is doing little to bring about a progressive withdrawal of Belgian advisers from the Congo, particularly Katanga. In Elisabethville, the Munongo government has severely criticized officials of Union Miniere

19 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
