[PAGE 01]
9 November 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Brazilian resolution on Tunisian question in UN reportedly unacceptable to France (page 3).

FAR EAST

5. Peiping plans to exploit capture of American pilot near Manchuria (page 5).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]SOUTH ASIA

6. Appointment of new general secretary of Indian Communist Party reported[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. British and French oppose proposals for unconditional withdrawal from Austria (page 7).
8. Letourneau warns of growing French opposition to Indochina war (page 7).

NORTH AMERICA

9. Need seen for increased Canadian contribution to NATO (page 8).

LATIN AMERICA

10. Prospects for ratification of US-Brazil military pact only fair (page 8).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Brazilian resolution on Tunisian question in UN reportedly unacceptable to France:

A French Foreign Ministry official has expressed his personal view that the Brazilian draft resolution on the Tunisian question in the UN is "shocking." The American Embassy in Paris believes this view is representative of Foreign Ministry thinking.

The principal objection to the resolution lies in its treatment of the Tunisian question as if the dispute were one between independent states.

Comment: The Brazilian resolution, calls on both parties to settle the dispute between themselves but to avoid any action that might aggravate the situation.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST
[PAGE 06]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]5. Peiping plans to exploit capture of American pilot near Manchuria:

The British Charge in Peiping reports that the Chinese Communist press is playing up the case of an American pilot, allegedly shot down over Chinese territory, as "living evidence" of American aggression against China.

The Charge believes that the Chinese intend to publicize the case "to the utmost," probably with a "confession" from the pilot.

According to Far East Air Force records, the pilot was shot down over North Korea near the Manchurian border[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

Comment: A major theme of Chinese Communist propaganda has been the violation of Chinese territory by American planes. A "confession" from this pilot could be used by Peiping to buttress claims of this type.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]SOUTH ASIA

6. Appointment of new general secretary of Indian Communist Party reported:

Comment: A change in Communist Party leadership was foreshadowed by a Politburo meeting in Madras from 11 to 19 August, at which Dange was recommended for the post of general secretary. The Politburo decided at the same time to continue the use of parliamentary methods but to increase agitation among peasant, labor, and student groups, and to make plans for going underground if the party should be banned.

Dange, a Politburo member and veteran Communist leader with wide experience in both political and organizational fields, is probably better equipped to coordinate these activities than any other candidate[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. British and French oppose proposals for unconditional withdrawal from Austria:

Britain and France accept the American view that any proposal in the UN for the unconditional withdrawal of troops from Austria must be strongly opposed. The British urge efforts toward preventing such a resolution from being presented in the General Assembly. Should one be presented, they agree that it must be amended to require prior four-power agreement on simultaneous withdrawal.

Both London and Paris, however, object to the American view that withdrawal should be further conditioned on the relinquishment by all powers of claims to German assets in Austria.

Comment: The Austrian Government has stated that it will support the resolution calling for resumption of negotiations toward a state treaty, but the American Embassy in Vienna believes that the Austrians would support a simple evacuation proposal should one be made.

Four-power agreement for a simultaneous withdrawal would presumably include provision for a "waiting period" until Austrian security forces are established.

8. Letourneau warns of growing French opposition to Indochina war:

Minister Resident Jean Letourneau is discouraged by the growing opposition in the French National Assembly to the military effort in Indochina. He fears that there is strong sentiment for an armistice, and is not at all certain that the necessary 1953 budget will be approved. He admits that a desire to concentrate exclusively on the French position in Africa is gaining ground.

Comment: Last May Letourneau thought that the Assembly would be willing to shoulder the financial burden in Indochina for some time provided there was a steady return to France of French troops and officer cadres. His present sentiments tend to confirm Premier Pinay's recent warning that the government's most difficult task is to reassure parliament that the financial drain of the Indochina war will not now prevent France from competing successfully with Germany.
[PAGE 08]
NORTH AMERICA

9. Need seen for increased Canadian contribution to NATO:

The United States Special Representative in Europe states that the Canadian submission to the NATO Annual Review Committee shows the Canadian effort as incommensurate with that of other countries.

Comment: The Canadian Cabinet has already refused to approve any contribution of economic and financial aid. The United States Ambassador in Ottawa has suggested that a NATO task force be sent to Canada to discuss the manner in which production could be coordinated more closely with European NATO needs. He felt such a procedure would strengthen the hands of the two sympathetic cabinet members with their economy-minded colleagues.

LATIN AMERICA

10. Prospects for ratification of US-Brazil military pact only fair:

The American Embassy in Rio de Janeiro reports that the chief opposition party in Brazil is now split on the question of ratifying the military pact with the United States. The Embassy adds that prospects for ratification during the present session of Congress, which ends in mid-December, appear improved, but that it is not "all clear sailing."

Comment: This is the most pessimistic estimate of prospects for ratification yet received, and the first suggesting that the ratification is seriously in doubt.

Some misgivings regarding the pact which were engendered in the course of political debate were reportedly dissipated by a meeting of political and military leaders with Foreign Office officials on 31 October.
[PAGE 09]
LATIN AMERICA

10. Prospects for ratification of US-Brazil military pact only fair:

The American Embassy in Rio de Janeiro reports that the chief opposition party in Brazil is now split on the question of ratifying the military pact with the United States. The Embassy adds that prospects for ratification during the present session of Congress, which ends in mid-December, appear improved, but that it is not "all clear sailing."

Comment: This is the most pessimistic estimate of prospects for ratification yet received, and the first suggesting that the ratification is seriously in doubt.

Some misgivings regarding the pact which were engendered in the course of political debate were reportedly dissipated by a meeting of political and military leaders with Foreign Office officials on 31 October.
[PAGE 10]
