Comment: The fate of the Pinay government will be determined largely by the success of this drive, the money from which is urgently needed to provide a minimum investment program and meet the administrative and military deficits. It is primarily important to the government for its psychological effect, however, because it tests popular confidence in the anti-inflation program.

6. Franco reportedly plans to assume position of regent:

General Franco plans to name the minor son of Don Juan as heir-apparent to the Spanish throne and to assume the position of regent himself. This action will allegedly be taken before 18 July, the anniversary of the outbreak of the Civil War.

Comment: Such a step would permit Franco to remain in power another 16 years.

The Pretender, Don Juan, has consistently refused to relinquish his rights to the throne in favor of his son or to recognize the validity of the 1947 Law of Succession.

If Franco carries out this plan, he will risk creating an incident serious enough to threaten the security of the regime. Such action would therefore indicate his confidence in the security of his position.

LATIN AMERICA

7. Argentina bars broadcast of US denial of press censorship:

The director of the Argentine government-controlled radio on 18 June refused to allow the US Embassy in Buenos Aires to broadcast the State Department's official denial that Senora de Peron's "The Reason for my Life" has been banned in the United States. The previous day the director had cut the statement from the script of the Embassy's radio program on the grounds that permission for its use had to come from higher authorities.

The Embassy comments that it is now evident that Argentine officials will not allow the denial to be broadcast or to be published in the Spanish-language press.

Comment: Charges that the United States has banned Senora de Peron's book currently highlight Argentina's anti-US campaign. Only two small English-language newspapers in Buenos Aires have published a denial of the charges.
