CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev has sought to parry President Eisenhower's proposal to establish international control of outer space for peaceful purposes. He said the USSR would be willing to discuss this question only as part of a general disarmament agreement which would ban nuclear weapons, suspend nuclear tests, and liquidate foreign military bases.
(CONFIDENTIAL) (Page 1)

Khrushchev has made another important proposal for reorganizing the Soviet economy. By eliminating Machine Tractor Stations, a key element in the organization of Soviet agriculture, he hopes to cut costs and spur production.
(CONFIDENTIAL) (Page 2)

The USSR has stepped up its diplomatic and propaganda offensive against the Baghdad Pact council meeting in Ankara. On 23 January the Soviet ambassador in Karachi made the first official protest to Pakistan on the alleged establishment of American missile bases there, and the Soviet ambassador in Tehran outlined to top Iranian officials the details of a "new" economic aid policy which offered "anything you want" without any strings.
(CONFIDENTIAL) (Page 3)

At least six Soviet BULL piston medium bombers landed at Anadyr airfield in northeast Siberia on 26 January. Since it appears that these aircraft are being used in a support role, it is possible these flights may indicate that final preparations are being made for Arctic exercises by Long Range Aviation elements.
(TOP SECRET EIDER)

The National Bank of Egypt has apparently been offered a Soviet loan at current banking interest rates to provide foreign exchange up to the equivalent of about $15,000,000. Despite its foreign exchange shortages, no decision has been taken by Cairo, probably because it is still hopeful that a financial settlement can be reached with the British in the talks scheduled to begin on 30 January.
(CONFIDENTIAL)

A new shipment of arms from Syria is en route to the Algerian rebels.
An Egyptian military adviser in Damascus notified Cairo on 23 January that a Soviet ship would reach Alexandria that day to offload arms, ammunition, and a "broadcasting station" for the Algerians. This may be Syrian equipment of French or German manufacture made surplus by the acquisition of Soviet materiel.
(TOP SECRET EIDER) (Page 5)
