West German Socialist Leaders Pessimistic Over Berlin

At a meeting of the Executive Council of the Social Dem-
ocratic party (SPD) on 29 September, Mayor Willy Brandt
of West Berlin, the party's chancellor candidate in the 1961
national elections, indicated his pessimism about the Berlin
situation.

Brandt was skeptical of the value
of possible Western countermeasures. On the following day,
however, he publicly supported Bonn's denunciation of its trade
agreement with East Germany. Brandt also stated at the meet-
ing that he had persuaded leaders of several veterans' organ-
izations to abandon plans for a mid-October meeting in West
Berlin because such a gathering would make the situation
worse.

SPD Deputy Chairman Herbert Wehner agreed with Brandt
that the Berlin situation would probably get worse and saw no
possibility of hindering this from the Western side. One SPD
leader urged a reversion to a position of advocating new nego-
tiations with the USSR. Although he specified no details, he
may be thinking along the lines of the party's 1959 "Germany
plan," which advocated the military neutralization of Germany.
Wehner, however, took the view that the SPD would be certain
to lose the 1961 elections if it should move away from its en-
dorsement of Germany's membership in NATO--which the SPD
indicated during the Bundestag foreign policy debate last June.

Although Brandt, apparently with general support, also
favored negotiations, he cautioned against saying anything pub-
licly because Chancellor Adenauer would use such a statement
to accuse the SPD of "defeatism" and "softness on Communism"--
charges which have hurt the party in the past. Brandt noted,
however, that the "big front of neutral countries" is forming in
the UN and that this group might exert enough pressure to place
the German problem within the framework of international con-
siderations again. For this reason, Brandt said he would con-
duct himself in such a way during the present crisis that the door
will always stand open for negotiations.

10 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
