[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

10 March 1951

Copy No. C1-7

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. About sixty Soviet-type jet aircraft sighted over Korea (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Yugoslavia charges USSR with applying military pressure (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. About sixty Soviet-type jet aircraft sighted over Korea:

The US 5th Air Force has announced that on 9 March American Sabre jet fighters sighted a total of "about sixty" MIG-type jet aircraft in flights over northwest Korea. According to the 5th Air Force report, MIG's were seen on three separate occasions in groups of twenty-five, twenty and fifteen. The enemy planes reportedly refused combat, flying back across the Yalu River into Manchuria when challenged.

Comment: If the press report is true, this is the largest number of Soviet-type jet aircraft seen over Korea in one day. During the past week, there has been an increase in enemy jet activity over Korea: seven engagements with MIG-15's were reported, as compared with three the previous week.
[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE

3. Yugoslavia charges USSR with applying military pressure:

The Yugoslav Foreign Office has issued a lengthy White Paper accusing the USSR of applying military pressure against Yugoslavia and supplying the Satellite armies with arms and troops for the purpose of overthrowing the Yugoslav Government. A government spokesman has stated that the document will be forwarded to the UN.

Comment: This is another indication that the regime is concerned about an attack this year and is attempting to forestall it. In his recent Reuters interview, Tito asserted that the question of rearmament of the Satellites in violation of their peace treaties should be discussed at a Council of Foreign Ministers and indicated that, if
[PAGE 05]
the problem was not solved, it might be brought before the UN. By issuing the White Paper at this early date, the Yugoslav Government may be attempting to put pressure on the Soviet Union to discuss the problem in a Council of Foreign Ministers meeting. On the other hand, this move may indicate that the Tito regime believes that a Big Four solution to the problem is impossible and therefore is filing its case with the UN now in order to facilitate UN action in the event of an attack.
