[PAGE 01]
10 February 1961
Copy No. C 79
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
10 February 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. USSR: Moscow may be considering release of U-2 pilot Powers. (Page i)

2. USSR - Communist China: Annual trade talks begin in Peiping; Sino-Soviet trade expected to drop. (Page ii)

3. USSR-Indonesia: Earlier reports of Soviet agreement to provide Djakarta with TU-16 jet bombers and MIG-21 jet fighters now confirmed. (Page ii)

4. France-Algeria: De Gaulle to meet Bourguiba for preparatory talks on Algeria. (Page iii)

5. Congo: Ghana now supports disarmament of all forces in Congo except UN troops. (Page iii)

6. Portugal: Riots of 4-5 February in Angola have aroused further criticism of Salazar regime. (Page iv)

7. USSR-France: Moscow protests intercept of Brezhnev's plane by French aircraft off Algiers. (Page iv)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

USSR: Moscow may be planning to release U-2 pilot Gary Powers, in spite of the security consideration involved, as a further gesture toward improving relations with the US.

told American attorneys that US-Soviet relations would improve in coming months and a commutation or remission of Powers' sentence might then be possible. Powers' Soviet defense attorney told US lawyers that he would file application for commutation of sentence "at an appropriate time."

USSR - Communist China: A Soviet trade delegation headed by Vice Minister of Foreign Trade Kumykin arrived in Peiping on 8 February to begin "preliminary talks" on trade and economic relations with Communist China. Negotiations for the annual trade protocol usually begin by December or January but this year were delayed by Peiping's unwillingness to proceed while readjustments were being made in its over-all trade policy. The preparatory talks normally require from one to three months of hard bargaining before the annual trade pact is signed. This year's discussions are likely to be especially difficult as a result of the deterioration in Sino-Soviet economic relations which began in mid-1960 when Moscow abruptly called home its technicians who were at work in China. Developments since the withdrawal of the technicians indicate that a new stage in the relations has been reached in
[PAGE 05]
which there are indications that Peiping may be adjusting its foreign trade to reduce its very heavy dependence on the Soviet Union and the rest of the bloc. While trade with the USSR is expected to drop considerably in 1961, it will continue to account for a major share of Chinese foreign trade. (Backup, Page 1)

under the Soviet-Indonesian arms pact signed in Moscow on 6 January the USSR agreed to deliver high-performance TU-16 jet bombers, MIG-21 jet fighters, and air-to-air and air-to-surface missiles to Indonesia in 1961 and 1962. The USSR has allowed for a 10-year payment period beginning in 1965 and is to accept Indonesian goods in return for most of the equipment. Indonesian ability to absorb and effectively use this modern equipment will depend on the USSR's carrying through a training program, which is outlined in the agreement, in the use of this equipment and also on an improved Indonesian maintenance and logistic capability. The Indonesians are now able to utilize less than 30 percent of bloc jet aircraft delivered under the 1958 arms deal. It is, of course, possible that the Indonesians may find the more advanced air force equipment too expensive and time consuming to maintain and use and therefore may subsequently request a modification of the agreement. However, the past pattern of such Soviet agreements suggests that the USSR will for its part carry out the terms of the agreement. The more favorable terms of this agreement were also reportedly extended to cover the $277,000,000 naval equipment pact concluded in September 1960. Since Khrushchev's visit to Indonesia in February 1960, Moscow has sought to develop cordial relations with Djakarta while exploiting President Sukarno's aspiration to be considered a leader of the Afro-Asian bloc. (Backup, Page 2)

10 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
France-Algeria: The prospective meeting between De Gaulle and Tunisian President Bourguiba, seen by De Gaulle as a means of preparing the way for negotiations with the Algerian rebels, could complicate French relations with the rebels. The rebel government has almost certainly not authorized Bourguiba to discuss any substantive aspects of the Algerian problem, and one of its officials already has expressed resentment of what he terms Bourguiba's "newspaper diplomacy." Bourguiba himself seems uneasy over the loss of prestige he will suffer if the encounter with De Gaulle is without real results, but he is anxious to gain credit for promoting a settlement. He has therefore asked the US and UK to encourage the French to be forthcoming.

Congo: Ghana is now advocating disarmament of all forces in the Congo except those serving the UN. This is a shift away from the position held by other militant African neutralists, who maintain that only those Congolese troops which do not support Lumumba should be disarmed. Ghana continues to insist, however, that Lumumba and other political prisoners should be released at an early stage of any program to restore order in the Congo. Katanga President Tshombé continues to express vehement opposition to any disarmament plan. The government headed by Joseph Ileo, which was formed at Kasavubu's behest in Leopoldville on 8 February, is largely a regrouping of the Ileo cabinet which failed to obtain parliamentary approval last August. A few posts apparently have been left open for Mobutu and for supporters of Tshombé and Lumumba, but none of these factions has so far commented on the formation of the new government. (Backup, Page 3)

10 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
SOVIET IL-18 FLIGHT TO RABAT

Location of incident as reported by the Soviet aircraft.

10 FEBRUARY 1961
[PAGE 09]
Portugal: The riots in Angola over the week end of 4-5 February have aroused further criticism of the Salazar regime from its supporters.

(Backup, Page 4)

USSR-France: The swiftness of Moscow's action in protesting the "attack" by a French jet fighter on the IL-18 carrying Soviet President Brezhnev to Guinea via Morocco suggests that the USSR hopes to use this incident to exploit anti-French sentiment in these countries. Within a few hours after the incident occurred on 9 February, Moscow published the note which Foreign Minister Gromyko delivered to the French charge denouncing the action as an "act of international banditry." Brezhnev was en route to Guinea for an official visit at the invitation of President Sekou Toure. He is stopping over in Rabat as the guest of King Mohammed V. An original transit stop at Rabat reportedly was extended to a 24-hour layover. The Soviet aircraft position at the time of the incident as 37°52'N-02°50'E--about 79 statute miles north of Algiers, would place the aircraft within the area described by French officials as the "zone of French responsibility" which they say extends north to the 38th parallel--88 statute miles north of Algiers. The French have long maintained a wide-ranging program of surveillance, search and seizure of ships and aircraft in the North African-Mediterranean area which they suspect of carrying arms to the Algerian rebels. They have boarded and

10 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Sino-Soviet Trade Talks Begin

The belated start of this year's Sino-Soviet trade talks reflects both internal Chinese economic difficulties and the uncertainties resulting from the Sino-Soviet dispute.

Peiping had great difficulty in meeting export commitments to the bloc last year and was forced to postpone or cancel many deliveries, as well as to delay all decisions on trade plans for 1961. After surveying their export capabilities, the Chinese began making preliminary offers on certain commodities about mid-December. In January, formal trade talks began with Bulgaria and East Germany. The present negotiations with the USSR suggest that adjustments in trade policy which have been under way in Peiping for the past few months are to be formalized in a series of new agreements.

Chinese trade with the USSR did not reach the planned goal of about $2 billion last year. Both Chinese imports and exports were affected, but the sharp rise in China's short-term indebtedness to the USSR suggests that while Soviet exports to China were maintained at a high level for much of the year, Chinese deliveries did not keep pace. The Soviet Union allowed this indebtedness to mount, but it may not tolerate further increases as long as the Chinese insist on maintaining an independent course in ideological matters.

Trade prospects for 1961 point to a marked reduction in total Chinese trade, an increase in trade with the non-Communist world relative to that with the bloc, and a substantial cut in imports from the bloc, particularly from the USSR. Import reductions probably will be chiefly in machinery and equipment--which accounted for about $600,000,000 or some 60 percent of China's imports from the Soviet Union in 1959. A continuing cutback of these deliveries--a consequence of the withdrawal of Soviet technicians--would greatly reduce China's rate of industrial and technological progress.

10 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 12]
Soviet Military Aid to Indonesia

Moscow, in keeping with its past performance in certain other underdeveloped countries--such as the UAR, Afghanistan, and even Yemen--apparently is willing for political reasons to provide modern weapons to the Indonesian armed forces regardless of Indonesian ability to utilize such materiel.

Since the Soviet Union's extension of a $250,000,000 economic credit to Indonesia during Khrushchev's visit to Djakarta last February, Moscow has engaged in a program with far-reaching political implications to ensure Soviet participation in Indonesia's economic and military development. It has effectively capitalized on the Indonesian President's sensitivity to what he considers US hostility to himself. The Soviet Union probably hopes that this approach, combined with its economic aid and well over $500,000,000 in military assistance since February 1960, will strengthen Sukarno's resolve to bring members of the Indonesian Communist party into his cabinet.

Previously the anti-Communist posture of Army Chief of Staff General Nasution and the Indonesian Army had forestalled Sukarno's intentions in this regard. However, on Sukarno's orders, General Nasution led the Indonesian mission to Moscow in January which resulted in the army's acceptance for the first time of a substantial amount of bloc military equipment. Moscow may feel that Nasution's acceptance of this materiel will undercut his opposition to President Sukarno's plans. In addition Soviet officials also impressed Nasution with their support of Indonesia's intention to recover West New Guinea.

Since the conclusion of the January arms agreement, Moscow radio has launched a steady propaganda barrage in support of Indonesia's position on Guinea. Subandrio told the US ambassador in Djakarta that accommodation with the bloc "had been unavoidable" since no alternative was available to the Soviet offer of political support on the question of New Guinea. Moscow probably hopes that Soviet assurances of continued full diplomatic support for Djakarta in the New Guinea campaign will strengthen the Communist party in Indonesia in its efforts to expand its role throughout all levels of the government.

10 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 13]
Situation in the Congo

the Ghanaian Foreign Ministry outlined a five-point program for ameliorating the Congo situation. The program makes the usual neutralist demands for the release of Lumumba, for the withdrawal of all Belgians, and for the early reconvening of the Congolese parliament. However, Accra also proposed that all forces in the Congo, except those serving with the UN, should be disarmed and that all military assistance should be channeled through the UN.

In contrast to its neutralist allies, Ghana has continued to support the UN effort in the Congo. Moreover, there has been some indication that Nkrumah would accept Lumumba's participation in the government in some capacity other than premier. On the other hand, Nasir and other participants at the January Casablanca conference still insist that forces of the "legitimate Congolese government"--that of Lumumba and his supporters--should not be disarmed, although Nasir recently told the American ambassador in Cairo that he was prepared to cooperate with recent Western proposals for the Congo.

Although UN representatives of the Leopoldville government recently showed less opposition to the proposals than they had previously indicated, Katanga would resist UN efforts to disarm its forces with all the means at its disposal. At the same time, Tshombe apparently is becoming more closely identified with the separatists in his cabinet, and the Belgians believe that he would refuse to enter into any agreement with the Leopoldville government unless Katanga's independence were recognized first.

10 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 14]
Dissatisfaction of Portuguese Military With Salazar Regime

the political situation in Portugal was very bad and that drastic changes were needed in its African policy.

the military, while able to handle disorders of the kind that took at least 31 lives in Angola over the previous week end, could not solve the African problem by repression or cope with a general uprising. Portugal must henceforth give satisfaction to "valid complaints" from overseas on the part of both Portuguese and Africans.

Moniz would raise the question of needed radical changes at a cabinet meeting scheduled for 7 February and might even issue an ultimatum to the government to effect these changes or forfeit support by the military.

Dissatisfaction among the armed forces with Salazar's policies is further reflected in an 8 February statement to the US consul in Oporto by an who had predicted Salazar's fall six weeks before the abortive coup of March 1959 that "a military movement" against the premier had been expected last week.

such a move was being "freely" discussed at a military base near Lisbon, and said it might take place in the next few weeks. However, the US Embassy in Lisbon reports its service attaches have received no impression of an early attempt at a coup from contacts in the upper level of defense officials and among the middle and junior ranks of the armed forces, where it believes such a move would be most likely to originate.

On 6 February three leaders of a group which had signed a letter calling on President Thomaz to grant Portugal a government willing to restore the fundamental liberties, told Thomaz personally that if he wanted to rally Portuguese popular support in the face of a deteriorating domestic situation and threats to the overseas provinces, he would have to dismiss Salazar and bring some of the opposition into the government. Similar views reportedly have long been held by junior and even some high-ranking military officers.

10 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Director, The Joint Staff
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

The National Security Agency
The Director

The United States Information Agency
The Director

The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
