2. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN

Jordan's three-day demonstrations by armed mobs following formal termination of the Anglo-Jordanian treaty on 13 March illustrate the force which could be directed against King Hussain if he should attempt to implement his reported demands that Prime Minister Nabulsi dismiss the four principal left-wing members of the cabinet. National Socialist, Baath, and Communist groups participating in the demonstrations were well armed, and Jordan's police, one of Hussain's main sources of supportive in controlling the demonstrators, were ineffective. The anti-Western and anti-American temper of large elements of the crowds was particularly evident.

Events showed clearly that with the passing of British power in Jordan, the United States has become the chief target of Egyptian- and Soviet-inspired extremists. The left-wing parties which dominate the cabinet, together with other nationalist groups, are apparently prepared to prevent Jordanian acceptance of the American proposals on the Middle East and to frustrate the Richards mission--tentatively scheduled to arrive in Jordan about 22 April. Nabulsi and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Rimawi have publicly rejected the proposals by name, and the Jordanian Communist Party (JCP) reportedly plans to organize a general strike and demonstrations upon arrival of the Richards mission.

Coincidentally with this display of the anti-Western temper of the "street" in support of the Nabulsi government, the illegal JCP has openly flaunted its contempt for Hussain's personal efforts during February to curb it. The JCP for the first time paraded under its own banners during the recent demonstrations, and despite Hussain's personal order to confiscate all Communist publications and to ban their import, two Amman bookstores on 8 March had an assortment of Soviet magazines on public display.

Britain, which is now planning to move its 1,300 remaining troops out of Jordan in the next few months, appears anxious to discuss Jordan's future at the Bermuda conference.
