[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
2. Iran and Poland settle press differences (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Chinese Nationalists seize Polish tanker (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Egypt prepared to break off Suez talks over British technicians' uniforms (page 4).
5. Greece and Turkey strengthen fleets with British aid (page 5).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

2. Iran and Poland settle press differences:

Comment: The Iranian threat to break diplomatic relations because of press reports offensive to Iran was considerably sharper than usual in such matters.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Chinese Nationalists seize Polish tanker:

Chinese Nationalist naval vessels intercepted the 8,300-ton Polish tanker Praca on 4 October and escorted it to a naval base in southern Formosa. The tanker is believed to have been en route from Rumania to Shanghai with a cargo of kerosene.

Comment: This is the first non-Chinese Soviet-bloc vessel intercepted by the Nationalists, who warned in a 11 September news broadcast that they would "detain any Satellite 'blockade runners" they could catch.

The loss of the Praca will be serious to the Orbit, which has few ocean-going tankers. Orbit governments do not recognize Nationalist China; thus Poland might find it difficult to take diplomatic steps to recover this vessel.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Egypt prepared to break off Suez talks over British technicians' uniforms:

Egypt is prepared to break off the Suez talks with Britain over the question of the uniforms to be worn by the British technicians while at work, according to the British embassy in Cairo. Egyptian leaders also consider that availability of the base is another point on which the talks may break down; they will not automatically make the base available to the West in the event of UN action to resist aggression.

The British cabinet has stated that it cannot go further in meeting Egyptian demands. General Robertson believes that the Egyptians may be leading up to a suspension if not a break in negotiations.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: Despite the apparent deadlock and expressed pessimism, the considerable progress toward an agreement suggests that further efforts to reach a settlement will be made.

5. Greece and Turkey strengthen fleets with British aid:

The Turkish government has reportedly accepted a British offer of a cruiser, according to Ambassador Warren.

Meanwhile British officials in Athens had announced that, in response to a Greek request, London had extended the period of the loan of eight British destroyers and four submarines for ten years. One of the provisos of the extension was that the United States pay the cost of modernization and maintenance.

This statement was released without prior discussion with the American embassy and despite the specific request of the Greek defense minister that public reference be deferred until the American position could be learned.
