Indonesian Air Force Operations

Combat aircraft in operational units of the Indonesian Air Force (AURI) total 12 F-51's and 13 B-25's. Transport aircraft total 30 C-47's and trainer aircraft 66 T-6's. Additionally, there are 8 DH-115 jet trainers and 18 miscellaneous types. A majority of training craft are believed nonoperational. Reconnaissance aircraft include 8 PBY-5A's and 15 light and liaison types. There are 59 miscellaneous aircraft among which are 6 helicopters.

Permanent home stations of operational squadrons are shown on map #2. In the conduct of missions in support of operations against the dissidents, however, mission aircraft have been temporarily deployed to other fields in Sumatra, Celebes, and Borneo.

The AURI has supported government military actions against the rebels with small-scale, sporadic bombing and strafing raids employing piston-engine light bombers and fighters. In some cases these attacks have been successful in breaking up concentrations of insurgent troops and vehicles and thereby assisting in the advance of central government ground forces. One achievement of air strikes has been the demoralization of dissident forces. AURI transport aircraft (supplemented by transports from the Indonesian civil air line) carried out two successful paratroop drops, the first in connection with the recapture of Pakanbaru in Central Sumatra on 12 March, and the second when paratroops were dropped in the Medan area in support of government operations to retake the city after the brief rebel uprising there. AURI transports also have been noted in some missions in support of ground forces, carrying both troops and supplies. AURI aircraft appear to have been used fairly extensively for reconnaissance missions.

What success has been achieved by AURI in support of government ground operations has been due largely to the absence of a rebel air defense capability. Even so, there are reports that one B-25 light bomber and two F-51 fighters have been damaged or destroyed by rebel fire. The government air effort is hampered by obsolete aircraft; shortage of spare parts; and low standards of leadership, tactical proficiency and maintenance.

14 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
