[PAGE 01]
28 July 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
28 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev planning visit to Rumania on 23 August.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iraq bans Communist-inspired purge committees in government offices.
Imam of Yemen accepts invitation to visit Nasir on trip home.
India--Government decision impending on whether to intervene in Kerala.
African protests increasing against French plan to test nuclear device in Sahara.

III. THE WEST
French Air Force apparently intends to proceed with proposed reconnaissance of Libya for Algerian rebel activity.

LATE ITEM
Soviet missiles fail to reach intended impact area following two valid countdowns at Tyura Tam.
[PAGE 04]
28 July 1959
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR- Rumania: Khrushchev plans to go to Rumania for the celebration of the 15th anniversary of its "liberation" on 23 August, according to reports from various Western diplomats stationed in Bucharest. Although Khrushchev has visited Rumania twice before, such a trip would be his first official state visit and follows the pattern of his recent formal trips to Poland and Albania.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Iraq: Maj. Gen. Abdi, military governor general of Iraq, has banned the Communist-inspired "Committees for the Defense of the Republic." These committees were formed on an unofficial basis in government departments to weed out anti-Communist "undesirables." Among the prominent committee members have been present Minister of Guidance Samir, and the director general of police.
Army headquarters ordered the arrest of army personnel participating in any demonstrations or meetings.
Iraqi authorities are considering suppression of several Communist-front groups such as the League of Women's Rights, the Federation of Students, and the Democratic Youth Federation.

Yemen- UAR: The Imam has accepted Nasir's invitation to visit him on his return trip from Italy to Yemen, now predicted for early next month.
Nasir probably requested the meeting in order to assure the Imam that UAR support of his son, Crown Prince Badr, is not aimed at usurping the Imam's authority. Reports of UAR connivance with Badr during his father's absence may have disturbed the Imam and influenced his decision to return home by way of Cairo[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
[PAGE 05]
Kerala: A final decision by India's central government to intervene in Communist-governed Kerala State appears near. Intensive discussions among the top national leaders may reach a climax during a cabinet meeting scheduled for 29 July, although imposition of President's Rule may be deferred until after Parliament reconvenes on 3 August. Such action would be followed some time later by a call for new state elections. Both Congress and Communist party leaders continue their propaganda pressure on the government as demonstrations in Kerala and other key states take on a more violent tone.

Africa- France: A growing number of African nations are protesting proposed French atomic tests in the Algerian Sahara. Morocco has lodged a strong note of protest with the French Embassy in Rabat. In Libya, the prime minister recently condemned French plans, and the local press is unanimously critical of them. The provisional agenda of the forthcoming conference of nine independent African states at Monrovia already includes the subject of Saharan nuclear tests, and the African nations are expected to endorse a resolution critical of France's proposed activity. (Page 2)

III. THE WEST

France-Libya: The French Air Force apparently intends to proceed with its proposed overflights of Libya on 29 July and 5 August to look for Algerian rebel activities in Libya, particularly possible air bases. In view of French emotions over the proposed US arms deliveries to Tunisia, France may insist on the overflights despite warnings that US Air Force units in Libya cannot "look the other way." The British say Paris has not informed them of its latest proposed overflights. Paris may have decided against discussing the matter with London in view of the British-Libyan mutual defense treaty.

28 July 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: Two valid eight-hour countdowns were conducted on 25 and 27 July, culminating in attempted launchings of what appear to have been ICBM test vehicles. In neither case was there confirmation of the launching.

Although initial assessment of COMINT evidence indicated the missiles left the pad, further examination of the evidence injects uncertainty as to what actually happened.

The closeness of the two operations and their similarity suggest that the launch attempt on 25 July was not successful and that the missile did not leave the pad. The numerous delays in the 27 July operation likewise suggest that the technical troubles continued and that the missile still has not been launched.

While some doubt remains as to whether a missile left the pad in either operation it is definite that in neither case was the missile successful in reaching its intended impact area.

28 July 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Reportedly Plans Visit to Rumania

Khrushchev reportedly plans to visit Bucharest in late August in conjunction with the celebration of Rumania's 15th "liberation" anniversary on 23 August. Reports from British, US, and Austrian diplomats stationed in Bucharest indicate that active plans were under way for this visit at least ten days before Khrushchev canceled his 9-27 August visit to Scandinavia. The American air attaché in Bucharest learned from a supposedly reliable source early in June that a visit by Khrushchev was definitely planned for late August. Despite the seeming conflict in travel plans, the projected Rumanian visit probably had no bearing on the decision to cancel his Scandinavian trip.

Within the past five months Khrushchev has made major state visits to East Germany, Albania, and Poland. This would be his first official state visit to Rumania, although he has visited that country twice before. Khrushchev would undoubtedly avail himself of the opportunity to survey at firsthand the status of Rumania's accelerated domestic program and might discuss matters which will be considered at the third Rumanian Communist party congress, probably to be held in December.

Unconfirmed reports persist that Khrushchev may also visit Sofia in conjunction with Bulgaria's "liberation" ceremonies on 9 September. His commitments in the near future include a session with a visiting British Labor party delegation headed by party leader Hugh Gaitskiell on 29 August, and possibly attendance at a reported bloc summit meeting in Moscow early in August.

28 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Africans Critical of French Nuclear Tests in Sahara

French plans to hold nuclear tests in the Sahara are arousing a growing storm of criticism among African leaders who profess fear of the effects of radiation. They also probably see in the issue a popular subject for anticolonialist propaganda. Several nations have already lodged official protests, the press has given increased coverage, and labor unions have called for mass protests. In early August, a conference in Monrovia of nine independent African states is expected to pass a resolution condemning France.

In the most recent action, Morocco--where the prospective tests will almost certainly heighten agitation for the evacuation of foreign forces--last week lodged a strong note of protest with the French Embassy in Rabat. In Libya the prime minister's press bulletin has condemned the French, and the Libyan press appears unanimous in its criticism of Paris. Tunis is also deeply concerned, and the local American Embassy believes the foreign secretary will push the matter at the August conference in Monrovia.

Ghana and Liberia made official protests to France earlier in July, and the subject of nuclear testing was discussed at the recent meeting at Sanniquellie of West Africa's three leading spokesmen. The topic is already on the provisional agenda of the Monrovia conference, and a critical resolution will probably be supported by all the participants with the possible exception of Ethiopia. The subject was given attention in April 1958 at the first conference of independent African states at Accra and was on the agenda of the Accra meeting last December.

The issue has attracted considerable popular attention, aroused in part by extensive press treatment. In early July, after university studies on the possible effects of nuclear blasts were released, crowds, stimulated by government officials, demonstrated in front of the French Embassy in Accra. Similarly, in Nigeria the press has developed a strong campaign and the leading university has published studies on the dangers of radiation.

28 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 10]
28 July 1959
Copy No. 63

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
