[PAGE 01]
14 January 1953
Copy No. 58
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Soviet official approaches Indonesian regarding Korea (page 3).
2. Marshal Papagos contradicts reports that Yugoslavia requested formal military agreement (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
3. Accused Soviet doctors prominent in medical profession (page 4).

FAR EAST
4. Chinese Communist 42nd Army may have withdrawn from Korea (page 5).
5. IL-28 division in Manchuria practices squadron formation bombing (page 5).
6. Chinese Nationalists attain relative stability on Formosa (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Conspiracy to oust Libyan Prime Minister may be developing (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet official approaches Indonesian regarding Korea:
Soviet UN delegate Zorin recently suggested to the Indonesian delegate that he should ask the Americans what new proposals could profitably be made concerning Korea. Zorin referred to the Reston letter to Stalin as being "obviously inspired" and as mentioning a "new approach." He expressed the belief that President-elect Eisenhower had a free hand in seeking such a "new approach," and pointed out that Stalin's reply had indicated that the Soviet Government would be interested in learning what the United States had in mind.

Comment: This is the first indication from a Soviet official that Stalin's statement on Korea could have been intended as an actual bid for renewed negotiations. It could, however, be simply another Soviet divisive tactic.

2. Marshal Papagos contradicts reports that Yugoslavia requested formal military agreement:
Marshal Papagos has stated categorically that Yugoslavia has not asked for a formal defense commitment from Greece, thus contradicting a previous statement of Defense Minister Canellopoulos. Ambassador Peurifoy believes, however, that both countries intend to conclude explicit understandings on the employment of troops in peace and war implying at least moral commitment.

According to the Turkish Foreign Ministry, its Ambassador in Athens was informed by the Greek Foreign Minister that an agreement was reached in the Greek-Yugoslav conversations for the immediate and joint occupation of Albania in the event of war.

[PAGE 04]
SOVIET UNION

3. Accused Soviet doctors prominent in medical profession:
The American Embassy in Moscow notes that the nine doctors accused in the plot to assassinate Soviet leaders are all prominent members of their profession. Major General Yegorov was the former chief of the Kremlin's Medical and Sanitation Administration; V. N. Vinogradov was professor of the Academy of Medical Sciences and member of the Moscow Medical Institute; and Major General Vovsi was the Red Army's Chief Therapeutist in 1946.

Comment: The announcement by TASS that "the investigation will be completed in the near future" suggests that additional developments can be expected.

Editorials in Moscow's main newspapers accuse the doctors, most of whom are Jews, of acting under the direction of the Joint Distribution Committee, "a Jewish bourgeois nationalist organization set up by the American Intelligence Service." Apparently the Kremlin was dissatisfied with the campaign in 1949 to stamp out Zionist sentiment inside the USSR. These accusations may presage further restrictions on JDC which still operates in Hungary.

Both the Ministries of State Security and Health are blamed for not uncovering the plot earlier, presumably prior to the deaths of alternate Politburo member A. S. Shcherbakov in 1945 and top Soviet leader A. A. Zhdanov in 1948. The TASS notation that this terrorist group was uncovered "some time ago" suggests the involvement of V. S. Abakumov, who was replaced as MGB Minister in the summer of 1951. Whether Abakumov will be publicly accused, or whether even higher leaders will be implicated is not yet indicated. L. P. Beriya's reputation may also suffer in view of his long connection with the Soviet security apparatus.

[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

4. Chinese Communist 42nd Army may have withdrawn from Korea:
The Chinese Communist 42nd Army may have withdrawn from Korea. This army was last located north of Pyongyang and appears to have been replaced in that area by the 46th Chinese Army which arrived in Korea in early October. The 42nd Army was one of the first Chinese units to enter the Korean war, and would be the first withdrawn since the spring of 1951.

Comment: The Chinese Communist 23rd and 24th Armies have recently arrived in Korea and may be relieving other Chinese units in the east.

5. IL-28 division in Manchuria practices squadron formation bombing:
The Chinese Communist 8th Air Division at Tsitsihar in Manchuria included "squadron formation bombing" by IL-28 twin-jet light bombers.

This activity, observed for the first time, is beyond the stage of primary training and may indicate that the progress of the 8th Air Division has been more rapid than was anticipated.

Comment: Some Chinese Communist IL-28 units will probably be ready for combat in Korea by early February, while crews for all of the 100 IL-28's now in Manchuria may be trained by early summer.

[PAGE 06]
6. Chinese Nationalists attain relative stability on Formosa:
The American Minister in Taipei, reviewing Chinese Nationalist progress on Formosa, reports that in internal security and political stability the island compares favorably with other areas of the Far East. He believes that American aid has been an important factor in this success, and comments that Chinese cooperation with American agencies has been "fully satisfactory."

Substantial economic progress was made during the fourth quarter of 1952, and the Nationalist Government has submitted a plan to make Formosa independent of American economic aid, although not of military aid, by 1957.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Conspiracy to oust Libyan Prime Minister may be developing:
American Minister Villard in Tripoli reports evidence of increasing dissatisfaction in the cabinet and parliament with Prime Minister Muntasser's one-man rule of Libya, and indications that a conspiracy may be developing to oust him.

Villard lists major obstacles to a successful attempt, but states his inability to assess the strength of the alleged conspiracy. Muntasser is reportedly seriously concerned over the growing opposition.

[PAGE 07]
EASTERN EUROPE
