[PAGE 01]
4 July 1955

Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Soviet Aviation Day air show (page 3).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]2. "disturbance" in Northeastern Siberia[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).

FAR EAST
3. North Korea calls for discussion of Korean question by Big Four (page 5).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]5. Hammarskjold again advises Peiping to release American airmen (page 7).
6. New Communist air force radio station established at Foochow[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 7)

SOUTHEAST ASIA
7. Viet Minh vice premier reported threatening "action" against South Vietnam (page 9).
8. Solution to army-cabinet crisis in Indonesia may be delayed (page 9).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
9. Preliminary British views on proposed Cyprus talks (page 10).

WESTERN EUROPE
10. Bonn may consider reduction of military forces in unity negotiations (page 11).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet Aviation Day air show:

A twin-jet transport was the only type aircraft displayed at the Soviet Aviation Day air show on 3 July not previously observed in practice fly-bys.

More than 400 aircraft participated in the show at Moscow's Tushino airport under an overcast sky and threatening rain. The American embassy characterized the show as "quite impressive," both as a spectacle and as a display of strength.

The new plane, probably a medium transport, has a fuselage resembling that of the British Comet, a tail resembling that of the BADGER (jet medium bomber), and slightly swept wings. The engines are buried in the wings, well out from the fuselage, and have round air intakes somewhat smaller than those on the BADGER.

The show included 12 jet heavy bombers (BISONS) and 54 jet medium bombers (BADGERS), types which were first displayed on May Day 1954.

Also included were the following types which had been observed for the first time in practice fly-bys earlier this year:
7 turboprop heavy bombers (BEARS)
50 twin-jet, probably all-weather, interceptors (FLASHLIGHTS)
47 day fighters, possibly supersonic, (FARMERS)
4 large twin-rotor helicopters (HORSES)

The number of new-type planes did not exceed the number observed in previous practice fly-bys.
[PAGE 04]
2. "disturbance" in Northeastern Siberia:

Comment: that the disorder was connected with a place of detention for prisoners awaiting trial.

Verkhoyansk, situated in an isolated area of Northeastern Siberia, is a supply point for the Ege-Khaya Mining Directorate, an important tin producing component of the Chief Directorate of Far Northern Construction (Dalstroy). Increased activity has been noted in this area since 1954, and additional numbers of forced laborers have probably been brought in.
[PAGE 05]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]The last known active resistance in the USSR occurred in the summer of 1953 when major strikes developed at forced labor camps in the northern coal mining area near Vorkuta and at the copper mining center of Norilsk[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

FAR EAST

3. North Korea calls for discussion of Korean question by Big Four:

North Korea's Foreign Minister Nam Il told two Japanese newspapermen on 2 July that the settlement of the Korean question should be discussed at the Big Four meeting, according to a radio Pyongyang broadcast.

Two government-controlled North Korean newspapers have also called for discussion of the Korean question "without fail" at the July meeting. One of these papers observed that "a series of gratifying facts, including the Austrian State Treaty . . . have further enhanced the conviction that all international problems can be solved by way of negotiations. In this connection, the Korean question cannot be an exception."

Comment: Recent North Korean propaganda suggests that the USSR may call for a withdrawal of foreign troops from Korea, possibly coupled with partial disarmament of North and South Korea. However, references to solution of the "Korean question" have been notably vague and fail to come to grips with matters such as the timing of troop withdrawals and all-Korean elections. Soviet references to the agenda for Geneva have included "Asian peace and security" without further specification.

Although South Korea may be willing to reopen talks on unification, neither side has significantly modified demands which led to the breakdown of the talks on Korea at the Geneva conference in the spring of 1954.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
5. Hammarskjold again advises Peiping to release American airmen:

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold has telegraphed Chou En-lai that continued delay in releasing the 11 American airmen detained in China would be likely to hamper a "constructive approach to wider problems." Hammarskjold's message warned Chou that the question of releasing the airmen was not an appropriate matter for bargaining.

Hammarskjold expressed the hope that it will be possible for him to avoid making to the UN a report of failure in the airmen's case.

Comment:

6. New Communist air force radio station established at Foochow:

The appearance of this station indicates an intention to deploy tactical aircraft into the area opposite Formosa and the offshore islands in the near future.
[PAGE 08]
Comment: Runways at two fields--Nantai and Lungtien--near Foochow are now considered serviceable. Foochow will probably direct future operations at these two fields and at Chenghai near Swatow, which is also considered serviceable.

The latest photo reconnaissance suggests that runways at two fields near Amoy--at Chingyang and Lungchi, which may also be controlled by Foochow, will be completed soon.

Aircraft have not yet been spotted at any of the five fields.
[PAGE 09]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

7. Viet Minh vice premier reported threatening "action" against South Vietnam:

Viet Minh vice premier Pham Van Dong is reported to have told a British journalist that unless the Vietnamese government agreed to pre-election consultations on 20 July, the Viet Minh would "take action." When asked to elaborate on this point, Dong reportedly said that he meant there would be a "popular uprising" in the south.

The French Foreign Ministry fears that if the 20 July deadline passes without some action by South Vietnam, the Viet Minh may indeed take serious action.

Comment: A French liaison officer in Hanoi recently said that the Communist journalist, Wilfred Burchett, had made a similar observation.

The French would be eager to inform the United States of such threats in the hope of winning American support for pressure on the Diem government to accept the obligations of the Geneva agreement.

Pro-Viet Minh sympathy in the south is not believed to be strong enough to support a "popular uprising."

8. Solution to army-cabinet crisis in Indonesia may be delayed:

The army-cabinet crisis in Indonesia, which developed on 27 June over the installation of a new chief of staff, may be the subject of protracted negotiations.

Senior Indonesian army officers issued a communique on 3 July proposing that the crisis be solved by a conference of top army and government leaders which would include the suspended acting chief of staff--Colonel Lubis,
[PAGE 10]
President Sukarno, and Vice President Hatta, according to an Indonesian news agency. Meanwhile the cabinet set up its own committee on 2 July to deal with the situation.

In their proposal for a conference, army leaders announced that the crisis should be solved "in accordance with the constitutional position of the army which in normal times is subordinate to the government." The army leaders are reported to feel, however, that they are in a strong position since the government has no armed force with which to oppose them, and there has as yet been no break in their solid front.

Government spokesmen have avoided comment on reports that the newly-installed chief of staff was prepared to withdraw voluntarily. A continuation of the crisis will tend to lower the government's prestige as well as that of President Sukarno.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

9. Preliminary British views on proposed Cyprus talks:

Britain seems to contemplate a "simple exchange" of views with Greece and Turkey, provided both accept its invitation to discuss Eastern Mediterranean affairs, including Cyprus. Turkey accepted on 2 July.

Working level British officials have indicated, however, that Britain would be prepared to discuss the "Cyprus constitutional issue" without making any commitments. If pressed, Britain may propose a declaration promising eventual self-determination and a constitution providing for a legislature with an elected majority.

Comment: Britain is evidently most concerned now to recover maneuverability on the Cyprus question, as well as to reduce the present tension in the colony itself.
[PAGE 11]
The date of the proposed talks has not been set. Britain may calculate that the atmosphere following the Geneva meetings may be such as to improve the chances of temperate conversations with Greece.

Greece probably will accept the invitation, although it will be reluctant to associate itself with Turkey on this issue. The Greek government is expected to insist from the beginning of the talks on immediate self-determination for Cyprus. Popular demands for union of Cyprus with Greece will make it politically difficult for Athens to compromise or accept any delay.

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Bonn may consider reduction of military forces in unity negotiations:

In future negotiations on German unity, West Germany would be prepared to discuss reducing German forces below the 12 division limit and a reduction in the total number of Allied forces stationed in the Federal Republic.

Comment: This is the first time a responsible Bonn official has indicated that his government would consider reducing military forces in Germany in the context of an East-West agreement on security and German unification.

In the recent quadripartite discussions in Bonn on a Western position on German unity at the summit meeting, West Germany made it plain that it will continue to demand free elections and freedom of alliance in any unity formula.
