[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
25 February 1959
Copy No. C 63
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Page Denied
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 February 1959
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Ghana: (Moscow has moved quickly to set up a diplomatic mission at Accra following Prime Minister Nkrumah's statement last month that Ghana now is prepared to implement its January 1958 agreement to exchange missions with the USSR. The first Soviet ambassador, M. D. Sytenko, is expected to arrive in early March followed shortly by his staff, and Moscow is already pressing for "many more" than the 20 visas granted by Ghana thus far. Guinea also seems headed toward early diplomatic ties with the USSR, and Liberia may reluctantly follow suit rather than see its younger neighbors gain a possible advantage.)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*South Vietnam - Communist China: (South Vietnamese marines garrisoning one of the islands in the disputed Paracel group in the South China Sea on 22 February seized three Chinese Communist motorized junks and 70 men in the area of another of the islands. The captured Communists are being taken to South Vietnam for "interrogation." This action apparently was taken to support South Vietnam's claims to the Paracels and to counter further Chinese Communist colonization of these islands. Peiping is likely to respond with strong propaganda protesting these captures and restating its own traditional claim to the Paracels. The Communists may also dispatch patrol vessels to protect their growing colony in the islands.)
[PAGE 05]
Rhodesia-Nyasaland: (The settler-dominated government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland is being subjected to a severe challenge by African nationalist riots in Nyasaland. Rhodesian troop and police reinforcements have restored order, but the nationalists with their civil disobedience campaign will probably provoke renewed rioting in their effort to secure Nyasaland's secession from the Federation. In addition to widespread local African agitation for a separate status for Nyasaland, there is growing European settler support in the Rhodesias for a breakup of the Federation and dissociation from Nyasaland, a poor and overpopulated trouble spot.)

DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: In his speech in Moscow on 24 February, Khrushchev laid down his terms for negotiations on major East-West issues. He disparaged the West's proposal for a conference of foreign ministers and called instead for a heads-of-government meeting to discuss a German peace treaty, European security, withdrawal of troops from foreign territories, and disarmament. He again stressed the USSR's unwillingness to discuss German reunification but agreed to consider measures to prevent the rebirth of German "militarism." Khrushchev charged that the United States and Britain are seeking to prevent agreement in the Geneva talks because they wish to resume nuclear tests; he warned that the USSR would be compelled to follow suit "in the interests of our security."

DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
CHINA
MILES 0 200
NORTH VIETNAM
LAOS
CAMBODIA
SOUTH VIETNAM
HAINAN
PARACEL GROUP
PATTLE
ROBERT
TRITON
DUNCAN
LINCOLN
ROCKY
WOODY
MIDDLE
SOUTH
SOUTH SAND
TAIWAN
PHILIPPINES
SOUTH CHINA SEA
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
No Back-up Material

II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Vietnam Seizes Chinese Communist Vessels and Men

(South Vietnamese marines, reacting to recently stepped-up Chinese Communist activity in the disputed Paracel Islands group in the South China Sea, seized three Chinese Communist motorized junks and 70 men there on 22 February. The Chinese were taken into custody at Duncan Island by a small Vietnamese marine detachment based on nearby Pattle Island. They were to be taken to the South Vietnamese mainland on 23 February for questioning. A Vietnamese marine company of approximately 100 men is being dispatched to the area for a thorough search of Duncan Island for a possible arms cache.)

(Peiping, which has maintained a small group of guano gatherers on Woody Island--about 45 nautical miles northeast of Duncan--recently began the development of fishing grounds in the Paracels and to increase colonization of the islands. The resulting build-up of the Woody settlement into a major colony, accompanied by Chinese Communist probes in the other islands, has upset the modus vivendi which has existed since early 1956 when South Vietnam established a base on Pattle to protect its claim to the Paracels. Nationalist China, a third claimant to the Paracels, has also taken note of Peiping's expanded activities.)

(Peiping can be expected to protest South Vietnam's action and restate its own claim to the area. Chinese Communist patrol vessels may also be dispatched to protect Peiping's colony.)
[PAGE 09]
Page Denied
[PAGE 10]
RHODESIA AND NYASALAND
[PAGE 11]
African Extremism Is Growing in Central Africa

(The latest series of African nationalist riots in the British protectorate of Nyasaland, which forms part of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, is the gravest challenge faced by the Federation since its founding in 1953. The nationalists, under the leadership of Dr. Hastings Banda, have embarked on a program of civil disobedience in an effort to secure Nyasaland's secession from the white-dominated Federation. The federal government has acted quickly to restore order by reinforcing local police forces with Rhodesian police and troop units, both white and African, and has mobilized white territorial reserve units in case of further trouble.)

(There is no evidence that related nationalist agitation is planned in either Northern or Southern Rhodesia at this time. However, Dr. Banda, acting through the Nyasaland African Congress, will probably provoke further riots throughout Nyasaland and may take advantage of his growing influence in African circles throughout the Federation--particularly among the mine workers in Northern Rhodesia--to organize civil disobedience in widely scattered areas.)

(The riots in Nyasaland, and the growing disillusionment on the part of Africans in the Rhodesias over unfulfilled white promises of racial partnership, may have a significant bearing on the course of constitutional discussions to be held in London in 1960. Already, influential British circles--especially those associated with the Labor party--distrust Rhodesia's racial policies and oppose an early grant of independence to the Federation as presently governed. The agitation in Nyasaland, in addition to the reported growth of sentiment among Europeans in Rhodesesia for a more compact independent white state, may force a complete review of the issue and result in a new approach to Central Africa's political and social problems.)
[PAGE 12]
LATE ITEM

Khrushchev Calls for Summit Meeting

Khrushchev took advantage of a day's recess in his talks with Prime Minister Macmillan to set forth in a speech on 24 February his terms for negotiations with the West. He disparaged the Western proposal for a four-power foreign-ministers' conference and said, "We cannot agree with this." He charged that the Western powers hope to involve the USSR in a "labyrinth of diplomatic negotiations so that we will get bogged down for several years."

Khrushchev called instead for a meeting of the heads of government, because "they can take the necessary decisions." He did not list the participants of such a conference, except to say they should include "the powers who are fully responsible for ensuring universal peace."

The first task of a summit meeting, according to the Soviet premier, should be to conclude a German peace treaty which would include a solution of the Berlin question. He again stressed the USSR's unwillingness to discuss reunification but agreed to consider measures to prevent the rebirth of German "militarism." Other items on the proposed summit agenda would include European security, withdrawal of troops from foreign territories, disengagement of the forces of both "military groupings," and disarmament measures such as a reduction of armed forces and a prohibition of nuclear weapons and tests.

Khrushchev's speech provided further evidence that Moscow plans to conclude a separate peace treaty with East Germany either prior to or simultaneously with the transfer of access controls to the East Germans. He claimed the signing of a treaty "will invalidate all the obligations regarding Germany's occupation--both ours and those of our allies." The press attaché of the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin said on 19 February that the USSR wants to "establish the sovereignty of the German Democratic Republic beyond all legal doubt" and that this would be accomplished by the conclusion of a separate peace treaty. The attaché hinted that the treaty would be signed before 27 May.

Khrushchev strongly attacked the Western position in the Geneva nuclear talks as "absurd and unacceptable." He charged
[PAGE 13]
the United States and Britain with seeking to prevent an agreement so that they may resume nuclear tests and warned that while the USSR would regret it, "we shall be compelled to do the same in the interests of our security until a wise settlement is found."

Khrushchev did not divulge any information on his talks with Prime Minister Macmillan, but he underscored the USSR's readiness to sign a nonaggression treaty with the United Kingdom for a term of 20 or 50 years or longer.
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 15]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
