Western Positions on Communist China and the UN

The Macmillan government's public position remains as stated by Lord Home in the House of Lords on 8 February. He argued that despite Peiping's lack of credentials as a peace-loving government, "the facts of international life require that Communist China should be seated in the United Nations." He added that Britain had supported the moratorium only because the choice had been "between the admission of Communist China and the breakup of the United Nations. So long as that was the choice there was only one answer."

Britain's grudging support of the moratorium has come under increasingly heavy fire from the Labor opposition, from many Conservative MPs, and from public opinion generally. Noting that the policy conflicts with Britain's 11-year-old recognition of Peiping, where a charge is maintained, the government's critics find the issue a most popular one on which to belabor American Far Eastern policy and to charge British subservience to Washington. The British preoccupation with achieving a disarmament agreement provides powerful support for the argument that Communist China's isolation from the international community should be reduced. British officials tend to believe that bringing Peiping into contact with pacifying influences in the UN might lessen the chances of an attack on Taiwan or other areas. The British also desire to get more closely instep with African and Asian members of the Commonwealth, whose leaders will participate in the prime ministers' meetings opening in London on Wednesday, 8 March.

The American Embassy, as a result of its detailed examination of the British position, concludes that the British have anticipated that the new US administration might make some changes in US China policy, and want to appear to have influenced Washington rather than to have followed "obediently" behind.

The French Foreign Ministry official in charge of Chinese affairs stated on 21 February that the British attitude as stated
4 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
