[PAGE 01]
1 December 1960

Copy No. C
75

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China--Completion of 1961 trade plans with bloc partners further delayed; could reflect economic difficulties or Chinese unwillingness to make commitments pending outcome of Moscow Communist conference.

Communist China signs large-scale economic cooperation pact with Cuba.

USSR apparently seeking increase in trade and cultural exchanges with Thailand.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

The situation in the Congo.

LATE ITEM

Earth satellite vehicle launched from Tyura Tam under circumstances which suggest recovery attempt will be made.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
1 December 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China:
there has been an additional delay in the completion of Communist China's 1961 trade plans.
The Chinese had expected to be able to begin trade negotiations with bloc partners by mid-November. On 11 November, Peiping told Moscow that the 1961 trade plan was still under review and asked for Soviet indulgence. Then, on 23 November, Budapest inquired as to when the Chinese might be able to begin discussions on 1961 trade agreements. The delay may reflect an unwillingness on the part of the Chinese Communists to commit themselves to 1961 trade arrangements until the outcome of the Moscow meeting among Communist parties is known. Economic difficulties may also contribute to China's vacillation over future trade.

Communist China - Cuba: Communist China is backing up its all-out propaganda support for the Castro regime with large-scale trade and aid agreements--the largest it has concluded with a nonbloc country. Under an economic cooperation pact signed in Peiping on 30 November, the Chinese provide Cuba with a $60,000,000 interest-free line of credit to be used between 1961 and 1965. In addition, the Chinese agreed to import 1,000,000 tons of Cuban sugar in 1961--the same amount the USSR is to accept annually under its five-year trade pact with Cuba. Under an agreement signed last July, Peiping was to accept up to 500,000 tons of Cuban sugar annually during the next five years. The new agreement was signed by Cuban National Bank president Che Guevara at the conclusion of his visit to Communist China.
(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
USSR-Thailand: Soviet Ambassador Nikolayev met with Thai Marshal Sarit in Bangkok on 22 November in a follow-up discussion to their first meeting on 31 October in which Sarit responded favorably to proposals for an improvement in Soviet-Thai relations. The more recent discussion apparently centered on the necessity to expand trade relations between the two countries. While no agreement was announced concerning a specific trade agreement, Sarit's second meeting with the Soviet ambassador within a month suggests that Moscow is seeking an increase in trade and cultural relations. Thai Foreign Minister Thanat, commenting on the meeting,

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Congo: The Mobutu interim government, as yet unsuccessful in its efforts to apprehend the escaped Lumumba, is considering strong measures in reaction to his disappearance and to the efforts of his followers to secure their control over Orientale Province. On 29 November, Mobutu's commissioners reportedly decided to undertake military operations against Lumumba's politico-military stronghold at Stanleyville, which has been the scene of disorders since Lumumba's escape. An attempt by Mobutu to move troops to Orientale Province would pose the threat of civil war and probably would be opposed by the UN Command.

On 29 November, after Lumumba partisans arrested and manhandled large numbers of Europeans on 28 November, the UN representative at Stanleyville requested UN aircraft with which to evacuate 1,000 Europeans. On 30 November, however, according to the US embassy, the UN reported Stanleyville "quiet", with evacuation no longer necessary.

1 Dec 60
DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the bloc in the immediate future.

C. The situation in Laos continues in a critical phase, and general military conflict between the Phoumi and the Pathet Lao-supported Souvanna Phouma forces may ensue at any time.

D. Other developments affording increased opportunities for exploitation by the Communist bloc:

CONGO  The flight of Lumumba from Leopoldville suggests that he intends to establish a base of operations in Stanleyville and defy the authority of the Leopoldville government. If Lumumba succeeds in this course, (there are indications that Kasavubu intends to attack Stanleyville) Lumumba is likely to request material support (including arms) and trained technical personnel from (a) the radical African nationalist states and (b) the Sino-Soviet bloc. Both the African nationalist states and the bloc would probably feel it in their own interest to endeavor to comply with such a request.

1 Dec 60
DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: An earth satellite vehicle was launched from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at about 0230 EST (0730 GMT) on 1 December 1960. The time of launch suggests that an attempt will be made to recover all or part of the vehicle, probably in the Orsk area as was done in the case of Sputnik V launched on 19 August 1960. This is the first successful launching from Tyura Tam since Sputnik V which was recovered 25 hours after launch. Subsequent attempts on 10 and 14 October resulted in failures in flight of probable earth satellite vehicles. An operation on 28 July 1960 is now also believed to have been a probable in-flight failure of an earth satellite vehicle. The last probable ICBM flight tests occurred on 5 and 7 July 1960 (Pacific Ocean shots).

1 Dec 60
DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 08]
BEST COPY
Available

[PAGE 09]
Communist China Concludes Aid Pact With Cuba and Agrees to Increase Sugar Purchases

Communist China is backing up its all-out propaganda campaign in favor of the Castro regime with new economic agreements to provide tangible evidence of its support. Under an economic cooperation pact signed in Peiping on 30 November, the Chinese extended a 240,000,000 ruble ($60,000,000 at the present rate) interest-free line of credit to be used to supply equipment and technical assistance between 1961 and 1965--the largest economic aid credit that Peiping has extended to a non-Communist country. In addition, China agreed to double the amount of Cuban sugar it will buy in 1961 from 500,000 to 1,000,000 tons--the same the Soviet Union agreed to take annually under its five-year trade pact with Cuba. The bloc now is committed to take 2,200,000 tons of Cuba's estimated production at 5,500,000 tons in 1961.

Although no payment arrangements have been revealed, it is possible that the Chinese agreed to the same terms as the USSR--20 percent in cash and 80 percent in barter goods. The new agreements were signed by Cuban National Bank president Che Guevara at the end of his visit to Communist China.

The Chinese Communists, who lavish hospitality on all visitors, accorded exceptional attention to Guevara. Mao Tse-tung and Chou En-lai both held private talks with him, and the ambassador-delegate to Cuba escorted him on a tour of the country. Peiping again drew a parallel between its history and conditions in Latin America. Asserting that Latin Americans can learn many lessons from China's example, Guevara hailed the achievements of China's communes and other social systems and forecast that Latin Americans would adopt "one of these methods or something similar" when they obtained their "liberation."

Although slow in establishing economic ties with the Cuban regime, Communist China apparently intends to make every effort to carry out its new commitments. In

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
