[PAGE 01]
C O / E D
29 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
29 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev considering visit to
Cambodia en route home from
Peiping.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Nehru blames Indian Communists
for contributing to trend toward
violence.
Laotian-French relations deterior-
orate.
Sudanese prime minister urged to
establish mixed civilian and mil-
itary government.
Guinea--President Touré encoun-
tering pressure from pro-Soviet
element in Guinea Government.
Algerian rebels prepared to discuss
cease-fire with France.

III. THE WEST
Argentine strike failure temporar-
ily strengthens position of Pres-
ident Frondizi.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
29 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Cambodia: Khrushchev is considering making a
brief visit to Cambodia following his visit to Peiping. The
official noted that a formal invitation from Prince Sihanouk has
been outstanding for some time and the possibility of an accept-
ance by Khrushchev at this time had recently been discussed by
Foreign Ministry officials in Moscow.

Khrushchev had offered to visit India after his Peiping trip, and if Khru-
shchev is to make that trip he could use the opportunity to stop
over briefly in Cambodia to reciprocate for Premier Sihanouk's
visit to Moscow of July 1956. Such a gesture on Khrushchev's
part would appeal to Premier

II. ASIA-AFRICA

India: Indian Prime Minister Nehru, in a strongly worded
outburst at a meeting of the executive committee of the Congress
party, deplored the growing trend toward violence as illustrated
by the assassination of Ceylonese Prime Minister Bandaranaike,
the recent disturbances in the West Bengal state assembly, and
the Sino-Indian border disputes. Nehru directly blamed Indian
Communists for contributing to this trend. The Congress party
executive committee has unanimously passed a resolution on
India's border position, and New Delhi is considering steps to
curb Chinese Communist propaganda in India.

(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
Laos: Strong feelings within the Laotian Government over
French inadequacy in military training and over French efforts
to play down the seriousness of the current crisis are threat-
ening further to impair relations between the two countries.
The French are reacting strongly to an American newspaper
article, based on an unattributed interview with Laotian Pre-
mier Phoui, stating that Laos would sever "major relations"
with France if the Communist threat were contained and US
support continued. While Laos is unlikely to carry out this
threat, the incident will widen the French-Laotian rift to the
detriment of joint Western efforts to strengthen

(Page 3)

Sudan: The leader of the powerful conservative Ansar re-
ligious sect intends to approach Prime Minister Abboud to
protest against the weakness and instability of the present mil-
itary regime and to ask for a shift to a mixed civilian and mil-
itary government. Under similar pressure from several in-
fluential political leaders, Abboud has publicly declared his
willingness to "study" plans for such a transition, but has in-
dicated his opposition to any immediate changes. At the same
time, in spite of elaborate government security precautions,
a group of dissident junior officers is continuing its efforts to
line up enough support for a new coup attempt.

Guinea: President Sekou Touré, who seems to be attempt-
ing to follow a generally neutralist foreign policy, is reported
to be encountering increased pressure from the pro-Soviet
element in the Guinea Government. Leading this element
is National Assembly President Diallo Saifoulaye, whose pres-
tige has been heightened by his successful negotiation in Moscow
last month of the $35,000,000 Soviet loan agreement. Touré is
scheduled to visit the US late next month and then the UK. The
results of his visits may have an important effect on Touré's
relations with the Saifoulaye element.

(Page 4)

29 Sept 59  DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
Algeria-France: In its formal reply to De Gaulle's pro-
posals for Algerian self-determination, the Algerian rebel
provisional government stated on 28 September that it is pre-
pared to discuss with the French the terms for a cease-fire.
While in effect accepting De Gaulle's program as a basis for
negotiation, the statement attacked those provisions which
provide for the partition of Algeria from the Saharan depart-
ments should it eventually elect independence, and reaffirmed
the rebels' willingness to continue the war.

The rebel statement--which will probably gain strong
backing from the Asia-Africa bloc--is directed toward the
long-time rebel goal of direct negotiations with France. In
keeping with his previous practice on major policy, De Gaulle
is unlikely to feel the need of a further public statement on his
part. There is a hint, however, that Paris has indicated to
the Algerians that the 16 September
proposals are not "the last word."

III. THE WEST

Argentina: President Frondizi's position has been at least
temporarily strengthened by the failure of the Peronista and
Communist labor leaders to obtain majority worker adherence
to their obviously political strike of 23-24 September. Econ-
omy Minister Alsogaray considers this failure a setback to the
plans of extremist labor leaders but feels that labor troubles
will continue. The government plans new measures to control
union activity and to end the wave of terrorism by agitators.

29 Sept 59  DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru Lashes Out at Communists

Indian Prime Minister Nehru, apparently more than ever
convinced that Communists are basically committed to policies
involving the use of violence, seized the occasion of a top Con-
gress party policy-making committee meeting on 26 September
to denounce Indian Communists in unusually strong terms and
to serve notice that his patience with them is becoming short.

Quoting instances of violence in the West Bengal state as-
sembly and elsewhere, Nehru said that this kind of tactic, if
permitted in the future, could lead to a repetition of such ac-
tions as the assassination of Ceylonese Prime Minister Ban-
daranaike. However, he did not accuse Communists of as-
sassinating Bandaranaike. Nehru said that the throwing of
shoes in the West Bengal assembly was a "disgrace" and
"that if this kind of thing happens even in the sacred precincts
of the assembly, it is the end of democracy."

Indicating a growing inclination to take firm action against
the Communists, Nehru said, "I want to make it perfectly clear
that while we shall maintain democratic methods in every way
and we shall give every opportunity to every party, we will not
tolerate this kind of thing happening, whatever the conse-
quences."

Also demonstrating continued concern over Chinese Commu-
nist intentions, Nehru called on the Indian people to give up
bickering and strife and to stand united in the face of a serious
threat from "a big country" across the frontier. A resolution

[PAGE 08]
on the Sino-Indian border dispute, originally released on 25
September, was recalled to make India's stand on the border
issue more explicit. The revised resolution, issued on 28
September, regretted Chinese abandonment of the principle
of coexistence, rejected China's interpretation of the border,
and expressed the hope that China would "withdraw its unjustified
claims."

[PAGE 09]
The Situation in Laos

The strong dissatisfaction of the Phoui Sananikone govern-
ment with France's performance in Laos was again manifested
in a background briefing Phoui recently gave to New York Times
correspondent MacGregor. The Laotian premier allegedly cas-
tigated the French in strong terms and stated that "major rela-
tions" with France would be severed once the Communist threat
were contained and if American support for Laos continued.
The French have indicated serious concern over the article
published following this interview; they fear the article will
have a disruptive effect on their position in Laos.

Phoui's unfavorable attitude stems largely from Laotian dis-
satisfaction with the poor record of the French military mission,
which has consistently been maintained at a fraction of the strength
authorized under the 1954 Geneva agreement. Furthermore, Lao-
tian leaders associate the French Army with the military debacle
at Dien Bien Phu. In addition, Laotians resent what they consid-
er to be the colonial arrogance and foot-dragging of French mil-
itary personnel in Laos. The Laotians would prefer that all mil-
itary training be taken over by the United States.

Recent efforts by French representatives in Vientiane to be-
little Laotian claims of North Vietnamese involvement in Commu-
nist insurgent operations and to blame the crisis on the shortcom-
ings of the Phoui government have added to tension between the
two countries. While an open rupture in relations is unlikely,
joint Western efforts to strengthen Laos will be hampered.

Meanwhile, the UN subcommittee in Laos is going ahead with
plans for field inspection trips in some of the areas of fighting.
The austerity of living conditions in Vientiane and the confused
and inept manner in which the Laotian Government is making the
necessary arrangements for the subcommittee to carry out its
mission are said to have put subcommittee members in a bad humor.

[PAGE 10]
Pro-Communist Elements in Guinea Stepping Up
Pressure on Touré

Elements within the Guinea Government which favor a pro-
Soviet orientation are making a serious behind-the-scenes bid
for greater influence, according to Ambassador Morrow in
Conakry. These elements are being led by National Assembly
President Diallo Saifoulaye, an extreme leftist with some grass-
roots support who is reportedly waging a quiet campaign to un-
dermine President Sekou Touré's prestige. Other members of
the group are presumed to be Minister of Interior and Security
Keita Fodeba, Minister of Public Works Ismael Toure--the
President's brother, and Guinea's Minister Resident in Ghana
Diallo Abdoulaye--all of whom have been identified in the past
with the pro-Communist clique. Like Diallo Saifoulaye, they
are all also members of the powerful political bureau of Guinea's
only political party, the Democratic party of Guinea (PDG), of
which Sekou Touré is secretary general.

Ambassador Morrow believes President Touré is attempting
to follow a neutralist foreign policy, but is having increasing dif-
ficulty holding this line--especially since Diallo Saifoulaye suc-
cessfully negotiated a $35,000,000 long-term Soviet credit in
Moscow last month. At the PDG's annual congress in Conakry
earlier this month, especially invited delegations from five bloc
countries played a prominent role while representatives from
Western countries, except for a group of French Communists,
were conspicuously absent and apparently not invited.

Sekou Touré is scheduled to make a 10-day official visit to
the United States commencing on 26 October and then to visit
London en route back to Conakry. The results of these visits,
and especially his sojourn in the US, may have an important
bearing on Touré's ability or inclination to withstand the pres-
sures emanating from the pro-Soviet group in his regime.

[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Argentine Government Strengthened by Failure of General
Strike

The failure of the majority of Argentine workers to sup-
port Peronista and Communist labor leaders in their recent
general strike call has strengthened the position of President
Frondizi's government. The strike leaders' list of demands
was directed mainly at forcing Frondizi to abandon austerity
measures under the US-backed stabilization program. The po-
litical stability of the government is largely dependent on the
success of this program in promoting economic recovery.

The Communists appear to have contributed relatively
little to the strike. This may cause the Peronistas, who
have been disunited over a number of issues, to reassess
the value of the labor unity pact they signed with the Commu-
nists in August.

Economic Minister Alvaro Alsogaray views the failure of
the strike as a "great victory" for the government but anticipates
continued labor troubles. Real wages, for example, had fallen
in July 1959 to about 60 percent of their level a year earlier.
Alsogaray announced on 26 September that the government plans
new measures to control labor unions and to end the wave of
terrorism by agitators. Numerous bombings occurred during
the strike, but there was no major violence requiring the
promised assistance of the army commander in chief.

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
