[PAGE 01]
1a .. May 1951
Copy No. C..J,,. q
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL.
1. Indonesia favors USSR and Communist China participation in
Japanese peace treaty, but will sign regardless (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Major Communist effort seen in central sector (page 3).

NEAR EAST
3. India will probably abstain on strategic embargo against China
(page 4).
4. USSR urges Iran to accept planes to combat locust plague
(page 4).
5. French officer accuses Israel of being unfriendly to France (page 5).
6. Iraq sends an air squadron for "Syria's protection" (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Projected French military expenditures for 1952 greater than fore-
seen (page 6).
9. Spanish relations with France near breaking point (page 8).
11. Norwegian Foreign Office favors admission of Greece and Turkey
to NATO (page 9).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL.

1. Indonesia favors USSR and Communist China participation in Japanese
peace treaty, but will sign regardless:
The Indonesian Foreign Minister has informally
told the US Ambassador in Djakarta that, in
line with Indonesia's independent foreign
policy,. his government would like to see
both Soviet Russia and Communist China participate in the Japanese
peace treaty. He added9 however, that if this should not prove feasible,
Indonesia would be willing to go ahead without them.

Comment~ Subardjots statement represents
the first time an Asian nation has committed itself to partlcipate in a
Japanese peace treaty which was boycotted b3-.t,be. USSB and from which
Communist China was excluded. In spite of some reluctance, it is
nevertheless expected that all other Asian nations invited to sign a
treaty will do so.

FAR EAST

2. Major Communist effort seen in central sector:
In an estimate of the enemy's capabilities,
the US Far East Command states that "the
latitude and scale of enemy reconnaissance
activity and aggressive patrolling in the
past 24 hours strongly indicate a new of-
fensive effort. '' It concludes that while the enemy is still capable of
launching a major attack along the eastern approaches to Seoul, the
recent shift of major Chinese Communist forces to the Chunchon area
in the central sector points fto the Chum~hon= Wonju corridor as the
projected zone for the enemyv.s initial major effort.

Comment~. While it is indicated th~t the
major Communist effort will be in the central sector~ strong diver-
sionary attacks probably will be launched on both the eastern and

[PAGE 04]
western flanks of the UN Une. In the eastern sector~
~-=--~----cc---~ the North Korean V Corps. has probably been ~~~----cc-~~~=------==~~ ordered to join the III Corps in Us eastward attack towards the coast.
On the west~ the North Korean VI Corps is believed to be moving
southward into the. battle. area to support the I Corps. .A .. Chinese
prisoner taken on the Kimpo Peninsula states that his unit (possibly
an element of a mew major Chinese Commu:nistforce,9 the 2nd Army
Group) will attempt to outflank the strong UN position at Seoul by
launching an attack across the flan River down the weakly-defended
Kimpo Peninsula west of Seoul.' · ·

NEAR EAST

3o India will probably abstat~11 OIDl strategic embargo against China~
On 16 May~ the Secretary-General of the
Indian Ministry of External Affairs infor med
the US Embassy hll New Delhi that India's
stand regarding an embargo on strategic
materials destwed for China would be determined by political con-
siderations arnd not by Us views on. arniame:nts. The Secretary-General stated further that while llmdia could hardly vote again.st a UN resolution
i:n view of Us attitude toward peace 9 it could :not easily vote for the.
reS!Dlution after havimig .refused to brairnd Communist China as an ag-
gressor o He therefore believed it likely that India would abstain.

Comment~ fudia has not looked with favor
upon the idea of an embargo against Chin.a, Thus, if I:ndia abstains
from votill1lg on the proposed embargo~ it niay feel free to deal with
Chtna as it sees fit. In any evefillt9 m.dia may be expected to interpret
the embai::go terms ifill an independent maooer.

4o USSR urges Iran to accept planes to combat locust plague~
The Iraniarn Minister of Agriculture has
advised the US E:mbassy in Tehran that the
USSR is strongly urgilll\g Iran to accept the

[PAGE 05]
use of eight small. Soviet plames equipped for spreading poison bait.
The Irarntans are seriously comi.sidering the offer •. These planes
would be used imi. Eastern Irarrll.2 alo:«ig the route that the locusts
usually travel north toward the Soviet b.ordero

Comment~ fu. making this off er, the Soviet
GoverKm1emi.t was probably corrll.cerrued lest the locust plague, which nas
beemi. unusually severe i:n Ira:ru this year~ spread il'Olto the USSRo In
April~ the Iranial]S accepted a Soviet off er of two men and spme ma-
terial to assist illl combaU1lllg the plagueo The Soviet Government is
doubtless aware of the irnteUigem~e rumd pr(Q)paganda possibilities in-
herell1t irn Us off er o

5o French (Q)fflc:er accuses Israel of beirrllg unfriendly to France~
Comment~ Israel has publicly protested
Colonel Bossavy9 s ruHmigs aIDld the IsraeU Ambassador in Washington
has told the US Deparitmernt of State that Israel was concern1Jed over
"French pro =Syriam acUvUn.es., " Reports from the French UN repre-
se:ntatn.ves arnd from the French Consul Gerneral in Jerusalem have on
occasiorn revealed. str(Q)l!ll.g amitt;,.,IsraeU se!'lltilmenmt. While France is
maki:ng formal efforts il:o remiin o:n cordial terms with Israel~ its
interest il!'Jl rebuildi:rrng Freroich i:ruUuell1lce ill1l Syria ami.d Lebanon~ as well
as the ru:tti=IsraeU atUtude of some of its official representatives, make
the maill1l1ternance of a semblalrllce of l!lleutralitty difficult

[PAGE 06]
6 I ~ • ..3- .f "S i V ,1.. "-• Ho . raq seJTh\.11.S m air squaw.O)Th JJ.Or y.r a s prou.ec11,11.on .
0:n 16 May~. the Chief of Operations of the
iraqfl .Ge:neral.Staf.f imormed the US M.ilitary
Atttache 1:n Bagdad that the ground elE!ments
of Olllle Iraqi air squadrrnm and a 40 mm. air-
craft uThU would ardve iJm Damascus on 17 May. The Iraqi Officer
stated that fc.M.s actiol!ll was Hpurely defensive" arud only for Syria's pro-
ted:ion, The US Ambassador imi Bagdad is inclined to take the Iraqi
statemerrllt at face value~ altlmugh he re~ognizes the danger of volatile
Arab pubUc opi.111!.iorn and the nsubil:errane.an growU~gs" to the effect that
viole:nt acUoIDJ. mav be the only way of dea!irng wfLth "repeated Israeli
aggreSSlltOIDl. . " I
that twelve pla~)l-11e_s_w_e_r_e-----.'fi_mi_:vo~l.--v-e---.d.----.-----------------_J

Comment~ Iraq11 s precipitous acUon will
exacerbate ilie Israelll.~Syrian dispute. Syria will derive some en.-
courageme~llil: from Iraqi support all'ildJ at the same time 9 the new threat
will :raHy publJi«:: (()pli111!.iOll'il ilTh Israet The support given by Iraq will in-
duce other Arab sitaltes to c«msider somewhat more seriously the pos-
sibiUty of: doill'ilg Ukewll.se if for 111!.0 other reason than to prevent Iraq
from achievill'ilg a special posHiomi, il\1\ Syria.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Projected Fre111ch miHitary expemdfltures for 1952 greater than foreseen~
Ac~ordimig fco the US Embassy in Paris, the
level of Fre1mch mUUary experndUures :now
beilmig projected for 1952 will probably reach
$4 b:UUcQl!Tii., This would be 50 percent above
the 1951 level and 160 5 percemt of the l!llaUollllal im~ome. A military
effort of this magltllHcude ii.s expected to resull.t in a budget deficit of $3. 1
bilUon for 1952. The Embassy commemits that the .$2. l billion deficit
for 1951 has already ~alled for afc leasit $285 million more in infla-
tionary borrowillllg il:ha1l1l the French say their economy should carry. In
view of the prolo!]g'ed bickerillllg over the extent of FreJ.mch commitments

[PAGE 07]
following the October 1950 US= Fren~h fcalks 9 some French officials
hesitate to prese!ffit w1e US with this p:rrojecUolill a:;i\d again risk US dis-
appointment trm the evem(t (Of later reductioITT.So

Comme:nt~ The temrtaUve figure of $4 billion
for miUfcary expemJ.dUures ii1111 1952 :represernts more fchan. a 15 percermt
increase onrer the March ECA estimate fl(llr 19520 The military programs
on which the prrojeic'il:ed expe1nJ.d.iltu:res are based are already under way, ·
and 1there ts no reasiDJim at this Umc to expect that the il!.ew Assembly will
cufc back rearmamemr(t wheim He meets bl!. Julyo

[PAGE 08]
9. Spanish relations with France near break!iW ,eoint:
The US Embassy in Madrid reports that Spanish-
French relations were strained almost to the
breaking point by the Spanish Government's
threat to close French schools in Spain in
retaliation for the French failure to evict Basque Nationalists from a
Spanish government-owned building in Par:l.s. Only General Franco's
last-minute decision to "postpone indefinitely" this retaliatory measure
averted the recall of the French Ambassador in Madrid. Spain alleges
that the premises in question are a focal point of Basque anti- Franco
and pro-strike activity. · The US Embassy comments that this, together
· with an anti-French campaign in the Spanish press, marks the inception
of an official campaign to blame the Spanish strikes on French laxity
in controlling antfi .. Franco "subversive elements" in France •

Comment: The French action in granting
asylum to active Spanish anti-Franquists has always been considered
by Franco to be a hostile act. The recent upsurge of government
strikes in Spain has made him even more sensitive on this point. This
particular incident is part of the larger Spanish effort to shift the blame
for the country's chronic economic ailments to ''foreign and Spanish
elements working against the best" interests of Spain. " In the past,
Franco has effectively used appeals to Spanish national pride and latent
xenophobia, but in the present case this tactic would seem to have less
chance of success.

[PAGE 09]
11. Norwegian Foreign Office favors admission of Greece and Turkey to
NATO:
The Norwegian Foreign Office will recommend
to the Cabinet and the Foreign Affairs Com-
mittee of Parliament that Norway support the
admission of Greece and Turkey to full mem-
bership in NATO..

Comment: The Foreign Office recommenda-
tion represents a complete reversal of Norway's previous position.
Heretofore, Norway has felt that the inclusion of these Mediterranean
countries in NATO would weaken the defense system by over-extending
it and would alter the nature of the alliance from one primarily against
Communism to an outright anti-USSR pact. Now, although still con-
cerned lest the northern flank receive only subsidiary treatment,
Norway has broadened its concept of the needs of a comprehensive
defense system.
