more than 1,600,000--is likely to deepen the divisions within South Africa's white population. The 10 million Africans in the Union, who were excluded from the vote, appear to be indifferent to the republic question, regarding it as a squabble within the white community. Tension is high among the white population in Natal Province, stronghold of the country's English-speaking minority, and talk of the province's secession has been widespread. Verwoerd is likely to be subject to increased criticism from relatively moderate Afrikaners, many of whom regard the narrow referendum victory as an insufficient mandate for the establishment of a republic. However, traditional Afrikaner solidarity will probably keep defections to a minimum and Verwoerd may receive increasing support from racial conservatives in the English-speaking community.
(Page 1)

Nigeria-USSR: Nigeria, which became independent on 1 October, has rebuffed a Soviet bid for the immediate establishment of diplomatic relations. Nigeria's moderate Prime Minister Balewa refused to commit his government to such ties despite the insistence of Moscow's delegates to the independence celebrations that they had been "instructed" by Khrushchev to establish an embassy in Lagos. As has been the practice of Soviet delegations attending independence ceremonies of other African states, the delegates made wide contacts and reportedly distributed lavish gifts to prominent personalities.

Although pressures for diplomatic ties with the USSR will undoubtedly increase in the future, Balewa will probably resist the immediate establishment of relations. On the other hand, because of Nigeria's announced policy of nonalignment, Balewa is likely to give serious consideration to establishing such relations at a time of his own choosing, probably within the next year.

Laos: King Savang appears to have abandoned his plan to promote a political reconciliation between the Souvanna Phouma government and General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. While highly critical of Souvanna's recent actions,

8 Oct 60  DAILY BRIEF
