The Situation in Laos

King Savang appears to have abandoned any effort to force a political compromise between the Souvanna Phouma government in Vientiane and General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. In a 6 October audience with Ambassador Brown in Luang Prabang, the King indicated that for the present, at least, he has resigned himself to permitting events to take their own course. Savang said that Souvanna, who saw him on the same day, had asked him to send a cable to Savannakhet ordering Phoumi and Prince Boun Oum to dissolve the Revolutionary Committee and proclaim their allegiance to the government. The King refused, telling Souvanna that it was his responsibility either to seek reconciliation with the committee or to subdue it by capturing Savannakhet.

Savang severely criticized Souvanna, not only for permitting Vientiane forces to violate the 28 September cease-fire agreement with Phoumi, but also for allowing the Pathet Lao to gain a position of such great strength. He added that Captain Kong Le was still a force in Vientiane and that the Pathet Lao were pulling the strings there.

Souvanna meanwhile has claimed to several sources that there is not enough time to reach a settlement with Phoumi before the negotiations with the Pathet Lao which were to begin on 7 October. One of the chief negotiators for the Pathet Lao side is reported to have arrived in Vientiane. The First Military Region commander, whose headquarters is in Luang Prabang, claims he warned Souvanna of the dangers of negotiating with the Pathet Lao at the present juncture but that he made little impression on the premier. This commander is reported by other sources to be ready to abandon his at best nominal loyalty to Vientiane at the opportune moment.

Pro-Savannakhet officers are also reported plotting to take over control of the Second Military Region, with headquarters in Xieng Khouang Province. Only ten days ago an internal turnover in the region's command had swung the region over to Souvanna. In Vientiane, General Ouane, the armed forces commander, has indicated qualified willingness to find some way to cooperate with Phoumi in preventing further Pathet Lao gains.

8 Oct 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
