[PAGE 01]
27 October 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ZHUKOV REPLACED AS SOVIET DEFENSE MINISTER

5. AGGRESSIVE EAST GERMAN ACTIONS CHALLENGE
STATUS OF WEST BERLIN

6. EAST GERMANY REDUCES ECONOMIC GOALS

7. MAO TSE-TUNG'S VISIT TO MOSCOW

8. BURMA SET FOR LONG DELAY IN REACHING BORDER
ACCORD WITH PEIPING

9. SITUATION IN LAOS

11. MANAHAN'S CHANCES FOR WINNING PHILIPPINE
PRESIDENCY SEEN GROWING

12. HEALTH MAY FORCE OUSTER OF TOP SOUTH KOREAN
LIBERAL PARTY LEADER

13. EARLY WEST GERMAN-POLISH INFORMAL TRADE
TALKS REPORTED

14. THE SITUATION IN GUATEMALA

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. ZHUKOV REPLACED AS SOVIET DEFENSE MINISTER

There has been no official statement from
the Soviet Union on the replacement of
Marshal Georgy Zhukov by Marshal Rodion
Malinovsky as USSR minister of defense
other than the 26 October radio announce-
ment of the shift late Saturday evening, Mos-
cow time, followed by a brief item pub-
lished on the back page of Pravda on Sunday
morning. Whether Zhukov has been demoted
or whether he relinquished the defense post
in order to assume broader political respon-
sibilities is not yet clear. The longer the delay
in clarifying Zhukov's position, the greater
is the tendency to speculate that the change
amounts to a demotion for him.

Western Communist correspondents in Mos-
cow state that a central committee meeting will convene within
the next few days, possibly on 28 October, to discuss Zhukov's
status.

Zhukov reportedly hurried to a meeting
with party leaders immediately after he arrived back in Mos-
cow from his state visit to Yugoslavia and Albania. Khrushchev,
Bulganin, and Mikoyan, who are normally very punctual, ar-
rived nearly an hour late at the Iranian embassy, after having
had the Iranian ambassador twice change the hour of his recep-
tion. It may have been at this party meeting that Zhukov first
learned of the decision to replace him as defense minister.

American correspondents, whose attempts
to report speculation concerning Zhukov's status were cut off
by Soviet censors on the 26th, are now permitted to hint at
a possible demotion.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3
[PAGE 05]
American service attachés noted an extra-
ordinary number of security and militia personnel and one
armed MVD patrol at the Iranian reception on the 26th, and
report that a large number of military officers entered and
left the Kremlin on the nights of 22, 23, and 24 October.

Policy differences may have figured prom-
inently in the decision to relieve Zhukov of the defense post.
General military policy--for example, the question of economic
priorities as they affect the Soviet military establishment, and
perhaps particularly Khrushchev's policy with regard to the
Middle East situation--may have been an area of serious dis-
agreement. There have been confirmed reports of recent
differences over long-range economic planning in high echelons
of the party and government.

Ambassador Thompson points out that in re-
cent weeks the military press has been carrying a conspicuous
number of references to the leading role of the party in military
affairs, and he considers it possible that Zhukov has overreached
himself in attempting to establish the independence of the mili-
tary.

The above evidence, while suggestive of
Zhukov's demotion, is still not conclusive, and must be weighed
against the evidence cited in the CIA intelligence memorandum
of 26 October supporting the view that the Kremlin would be
hesitant to demote Zhukov on the eve of the 40th anniversary
celebration.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
5. AGGRESSIVE EAST GERMAN ACTIONS CHALLENGE
STATUS OF WEST BERLIN

A new, harder East German policy is de-
veloping which appears designed to strengthen
East Germany's claim to sovereignty and
to erode away the quadripartite status of Ber-
lin. The regime, apparently with Soviet backing, has taken a
number of steps in recent weeks aimed at forcing Bonn and the
Western powers to recognize East German rather than Soviet
authority over the territory of the German Democratic Republic.
Probably as a consequence of Khrushchev's strong endorsement
of the Ulbricht regime last August, the government has recently
shown markedly greater assurance, both in its tougher domestic
policies and its more aggressive attitude toward West Germany
and West Berlin.

Strong actions affecting access to Berlin taken
by the regime include: increased controls over interzonal road
and rail traffic, including confiscation of parcel post and freight
shipments; generally more stringent controls on Berlin intersec-
tor traffic in violation of four power agreements; the disrup-
tion of plans for a church conference scheduled for both parts of Ber-
lin on 26 and 27 October; and threats to assume control over the
Berlin air corridors used by allied aircraft.

The East German government reportedly de-
cided not to go through with a plan to seal the Berlin sector
borders for two weeks beginning at dawn on 26 October, because
of the disruption of interzonal trade, which is very important
to the East German economy.

While most measures to date have affected
primarily German interests, the US mission in Berlin con-
siders it likely that Allied interests will be increasingly affected
if the trend continues, whether or not the Russians add direct
harassments of their own to those of the East German regime.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
6. EAST GERMANY REDUCES ECONOMIC GOALS

The goals of the East German Five-Year
Economic Plan (1956-60) for industrial
production have been reduced from a
planned increase of 55 percent in output
by 1960 to 34 percent, according to a 17
October speech by Party Secretary Walter Ulbricht which
has just been released.

Since the inception of the Five-Year Plan
in 1956, East German industrial production has fallen behind
plan, largely because the goals for investment, labor pro-
ductivity, and raw materials output were set too high. The
revised production goals appear to be feasible, but the in-
ternal resources of the East German economy are not ade-
quate for the planned investments, which have been only
slightly reduced. The Soviet Union will continue to assist
East Germany, which has received a total of $785,000,000
in credits since 1953.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
7. MAO TSE-TUNG'S VISIT TO MOSCOW

Peiping's announcement that Mao Tse-
tung will visit Moscow early next month
in connection with the Soviet anniversary
celebrations on 7 November paves the
way for a Communist "summit" confer-
ence among Khrushchev, Mao, Tito, and Gomulka, who rep-
resent the four principal points of view on relations among
"socialist" states.

Now that Mao's presence is assured, Tito
and Gomulka are almost certain to be there. Both Tito and
Gomulka regard Mao as sympathetic to certain features of
their individual positions on "different roads to socialism,"
and will look to Mao for some support in their contentions
with Khrushchev. On the other hand, Khrushchev can count
on Mao's support for the central issue of "socialist" solidari-
ty against the West.

Last January and February, Chou En-lai
visited Moscow and Warsaw with the aim of preventing fur-
ther deterioration in Soviet-Polish relations. Since then,
Moscow's relations with both Warsaw and Belgrade have im-
proved considerably, in line with Peiping's advice to avoid
invective and work out problems quietly and gradually. Mao
will encourage the Communist leaders to continue this course.

Mao may follow his visit to Moscow with a
tour of the East European satellites, and there have been re-
ports he will also go to Belgrade.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]
8. BURMA SET FOR LONG DELAY IN REACHING BORDER
ACCORD WITH PEIPING

Burmese officials appear resigned, in the
light of Chief Justice Myint Thein's recent
unsuccessful mission to Peiping, to a pro-
tracted period of negotiations before a de-
finitive border settlement with Communist China can be achieved.

The Burmese are deeply disappointed over
their failure to nail down a definitive border settlement. In
the absence of new Chinese incursions into territory claimed
by Burma, however, Rangoon is in a poor position to take
drastic steps, such as a renewed press campaign, in an ef-
fort to incline China toward early settlement.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11
[PAGE 13]
9. SITUATION IN LAOS

Laotian Prime Minister Souvanna
Phouma's efforts toward a quick set-
tlement with the Pathet Lao hit a snag
on 25 October when the council of
ministers--the cabinet plus Crown Prince Savang--de-
cided the communiqué proposed by Souvanna and Pathet
chief Souphanouvong required major revision to safe-
guard the government's interests. The council also dis-
avowed the political agreement signed on 22 October by
government and Pathet Lao negotiators which had been
described by the American ambassador as a "sell-out"
to the Communists.

The council's revision of the communi-
qué tightens loop-holes the Pathets would probably have
exploited to evade their commitments regarding restora-
tion of the government's authority in the disputed prov-
inces. It also serves to reduce the effectiveness of the
communiqué as a propaganda vehicle in the Pathets'
neutrality campaign.

The crown prince believes the revised
communiqué will be unacceptable to the Pathets. They
may, however, consider that the original draft was so
favorable that they have latitude in which to negotiate
further. It seems unlikely that they will react to this set-
back by breaking off negotiations.

In any event, the Pathets can be expected
to launch an intense propaganda campaign portraying the
United States as the only obstacle to the unification of Laos.
In addition, Souvanna may react by threatening to resign,
charging that America has frustrated his efforts, and thus
raise the prospect of another prolonged government crisis
if a settlement is not quickly achieved.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
11. MANAHAN'S CHANCES FOR WINNING PHILIPPINE
PRESIDENCY SEEN GROWING

The American embassy's latest survey
of the Philippine political campaign in-
dicates that although President Garcia
may hold a lead in the race for the presi-
dency, his lead is small and appears to be diminishing. The
presidential candidates of the Liberal and Progressive par-
ties, Jose Yulo and Manuel Manahan, are, in the embassy's
judgment, running neck-and-neck. Manahan's popularity,
in particular, continues to rise and should this popularity
be converted into votes on 12 November, he may run ahead
of Yulo and conceivably could win the necessary plurality.

Although Garcia and Yulo are supported
by long-established party machines--traditionally the decid-
ing factor in Philippine elections--the embassy believes that
voters will exercise more independence of judgment this year
than ever before. The increased price of rice and other basic
commodities as well as chronic socio-economic pressures are
probably playing a major role in electing a "new order" to power.
Manahan may also be able to play on the continuing popular de-
sire for a "clean new force" which manifested itself in the 1953
election of the late Ramon Magsaysay.

Liberal party candidate Yulo reportedly has
the support of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the Philippines.
Unless this support involves instructions to parish priests, how-
ever, the embassy believes the parish-level clergy and popular
Catholic action groups will back Manahan.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 14
[PAGE 16]
12. HEALTH MAY FORCE OUSTER OF TOP SOUTH KOREAN
LIBERAL PARTY LEADER

Yi Ki-pung, the leader of the ruling
Liberal party in South Korea, may
soon be forced to retire from active
politics because of his rapidly failing
health. Yi has been observed to have great difficulty in
walking or even in standing for more than ten minutes at
a time. Many of his associates reportedly are urging
him to relinquish leadership of the party.

Yi's retirement would almost certainly
lead to the fragmentation and possibly the disintegration
of the large but poorly disciplined Liberal party. Many
party members were recruited by Yi from the opposition
Democratic party of Vice President Chang Myon and from
independent circles. Subsequent maneuvering by the var-
ious factions for factional advantage could precipitate po-
litical instability which even President Rhee may have
difficulty in containing.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 15
[PAGE 17]
13. EARLY WEST GERMAN-POLISH INFORMAL TRADE
TALKS REPORTED

Informal trade talks between West Ger-
man and Polish officials will begin on
29 October in West Berlin,

Bonn has indicated many times that a
"first step" in improving relations with Poland would be
the establishment of a West German trade mission in War-
saw. The government has been strongly criticized by both
the political opposition and the independent press on the
grounds that its diplomatic break with Yugoslavia creates ob-
stacles to a rapprochement with Poland. An official gov-
ernment periodical recently stated that the break with
Belgrade did not mean that Bonn would never establish rela-
tions with countries which had recognized East Germany
"under different circumstances."

Members of the Polish delegation are
emphasizing the nonofficial status of the meeting. In re-
cent weeks, the Polish leaders have insisted that the re-
sumption of full diplomatic relations must accompany any
exchange of trade missions.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 16
[PAGE 18]
14. THE SITUATION IN GUATEMALA

Constitutional government was tenuously
restored to Guatemala late on 26 October,
but Communists may benefit from the bitter
divisions among anti-Communist political
and military forces which were revealed in
the violent disturbances last week.

The military junta resigned on 26 October
and the congress installed Guillermo Flores
Avendano as interim president until a perma-
nent president can be elected and inaugurated. Flores is the
constitutional successor to Luis Arturo Gonzalez, the president
ousted by the junta on 24 October after two days of rioting over
the disputed, and now annulled, presidential election of 20 Octo-
ber. His installation was the result of an agreement between
the beleaguered junta and Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, whose fol-
lowers had nearly succeeded by mob action in forcing the junta
to relinquish power directly to him. A new presidential election
is promised for the "near future" and Ydigoras seems confident
of winning it. He has been assured that, this time, the election
will be really free.

The army, formerly a decisive power in
Guatemala, is now weakened by internal factionalism. The 26
October "solution" to the political dilemma probably does not
have the support of more than a bare majority of officers,

Guatemalan Communists are "delighted"
with last week's events. They exercise influence in the leftist
Revolutionary party (PR) and in various labor and student
groups which were active in the mob action. The PR, which
has been promised the right to participate in the new election,
is confident. Many observers believe it might win, especially
if given time to organize.

27 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 17
[PAGE 19]
