[PAGE 01]
19 April 1958
Copy No. 140
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
19 April 1958
DAILY BRIEF
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR--Summit tactics: In bringing a protest to the
UN Security Council against alleged flights of United States
bombers carrying nuclear weapons across the Arctic to-
ward Soviet frontiers, the USSR has reverted to a stand-
ard Soviet device designed to place the United States on
the defensive during important negotiations. This move
has the same purpose as Gromyko's attack last June on
NATO commander Norstad on the day when the US delegate
to the London disarmament talks was scheduled to outline
the American response to the USSR's proposal for a test
suspension. Moscow is seeking to discredit US intentions
and generate distrust of US leadership at the opening of the
diplomatic talks on summit preparations.

*Foreign Minister Gromyko has told the three Western
ambassadors that he wants separate meetings with them and
that, if the West insisted on joint meetings, he would pro-
pose the inclusion of other ambassadors such as those from
Poland and Czechoslovakia. Presumably Gromyko hopes to
use this device to probe any divergence of views among the
three Western powers and to emphasize the Soviet position
on parity of representation at a summit meeting. Despite
the USSR's previous position that ambassadors should only
discuss procedural arrangements for a foreign ministers'
meeting, Gromyko queried Ambassador Thompson about ap-
propriate topics for negotiation.

[PAGE 04]
USSR - Pakistan: The most recent move in the Soviet
propaganda campaign against Western military bases is a
formal note of protest to Pakistan, attacking the establish-
ment of American bases on Pakistani territory. Soviet pres-
sure probably is intended to embarrass current American-
Pakistani negotiations on the establishment of a United States
Air Force communications facility and may cause the Pak-
istanis to stall or seek greater concessions in the Washington
military and economic aid talks in late April.

[PAGE 05]
*USSR - Yugoslavia: The latest issue of the Soviet party
journal, Kommunist, has broken the uneasy Yugoslav-Soviet
ideological truce by condemning virtually every significant
section of the program for the Yugoslav party congress next
week. The Yugoslavs, who had made concessions on the for-
eign policy sections of the program following a discussion in
Moscow between Khrushchev and the Yugoslav ambassador,
will reply in kind. The Soviet attack is the most complete
repudiation of Yugoslav dogma since the reconciliation in 1955.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Lebanon: The authorities continue to be plagued with
internal security problems, created in large part by infil-
tration of weapons and armed parties from Syria. Although
the pro-Western government has suppressed several out-
breaks of violence by elements who oppose President Chamoun,
further attempts at civil disturbance by these elements seem
likely. Opposition elements are presumably aware that Gen-
eral Shihab will support the present government.

[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

France: Speculation continues that President Coty
may call on the Social Republican, Jacques Soustelle, to
make the initial attempt to form a new government during
the period between the two local election dates of 20 and 27
April. Such a move would permit Soustelle to exploit anti-
American sentiment to try to rally support for the return of
General de Gaulle. This prospect might in turn prod the
major nonextremist parties into earlier efforts to reach a
compromise solution and avert a long crisis.

Haiti: President Duvalier seems to be in a weaker posi-
tion than at any time since his inauguration last October.
He is uncertain of continued support from the army, because
of growing tension among the officers and friction between
the President and his recently appointed chief of staff.

Britain-Maldive Islands: London fears further delays
in construction of an air staging base on Gan Island in the
Maldive Islands, a vital alternative to transit facilities on
Ceylon which Britain is relinquishing. Britain is prepared

[PAGE 07]
to conciliate the Maldivians by granting considerable
autonomy in foreign relations. The Maldivians have al-
ready sought support from India and Ceylon and may stir
up a propaganda campaign which would damage Britain's
relations with countries in the Indian Ocean area.
(Page 11) (Map)

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Protest Against Alleged US Bomber Flights

The USSR's request for an immediate United Nations
Security Council meeting to consider a Soviet protest
against alleged flights of American bombers carrying nu-
clear weapons across the Arctic toward Soviet frontiers
appears aimed at disrupting Western unity in the current
Moscow talks on preparations for a summit conference.
By portraying American policy as provocative and irre-
sponsible, Moscow hopes to generate distrust of United
States leadership and force Britain and France, under
pressure of public opinion, to break with American views
on prerequisites for summit talks.

The appeal to the UN was foreshadowed by Khrushchev's
statement during an interview on 14 April with the Belgian
ambassador and Queen Mother Elizabeth that American
planes were carrying atomic bombs toward the USSR. He
said he would produce documentary evidence to support this
charge later. He conceded that the US planes in question had
not overflown Soviet territory, but claimed that other Amer-
ican aircraft had done so recently.

The Soviet press and radio are renewing earlier warn-
ings of "catastrophic consequences" in the event of war for
those Western European nations that permit the establish-
ment of nuclear stockpiles and missile sites on their terri-
tory. Moscow has also denounced the Paris meeting of
NATO defense ministers as heightening international ten-
sion and hindering summit talks.

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Soviet Protest to Pakistan

On 17 April, Moscow made its first formal protest to
Karachi on the establishment of American military facili-
ties on Pakistani territory. This is in line with Soviet at-
tempts to hamper Western efforts to strengthen military
cooperation of Baghdad Pact and SEATO countries and is
probably intended to embarrass current American-Paki-
stani negotiations on military assistance. Soviet Ambassa-
dor Shpedko declined Prime Minister Noon’s offer to escort
him to any suspected location in order to disprove the charg-
es.

Moscow propaganda has made frequent reference to the
establishment of American air and "atomic" bases in Pak-
istan, including the repetition of erroneous Indian allega-
tions regarding jet airfields in Gilgit and Kashmir. Moscow
is exploiting Pakistan's economic troubles by charging they
are the product of military obligations forced on the country
by its ties to the West.

Continued strong Soviet pressure on this subject might
cause the Pakistani Government to delay signature of the
communications agreement now under discussion, pending
a review of the situation. The Pakistanis also might use
Soviet protests to seek additional military and economic aid
from the United States during the forthcoming visits to Wash-
ington in late April and early May of the finance minister
and the commanders of the army and air force.

[PAGE 11]
USSR Attacks Yugoslav Party Program

The latest issue of the Soviet party journal Kommunist
condemns virtually every significant section of the Yugo-
slav party program and undoubtedly heralds Moscow's in-
tention to read Belgrade out of the Communist world un-
less the Yugoslavs make extensive alteration in the pro-
gram next week at their party congress. It now appears
probable that the bloc parties will not be represented by
official delegations at the Yugoslav congress. The attack
on Yugoslav dogma will probably strengthen the hand of
the hard-line Communists in Eastern Europe and place
Gomulka in a difficult position with his party and with the
bloc generally in view of his announced intention to re-
ceive Tito in Warsaw next month.

The Soviet announcement in early April that Voro-
shilov, chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme
Soviet, would visit Yugoslavia in May could be evidence
that Moscow hopes to maintain good state relations with
Belgrade, whose stand on foreign policy is still valuable
to the USSR.

The Yugoslavs undoubtedly will vigorously defend their
program particularly since they have recently made con-
cessions on certain of its foreign policy aspects following
a meeting between Khrushchev and the Yugoslav ambassa-
dor in Moscow on the draft program. Although Tito will
regret the sharpness of the Soviet attack, he has the oppor-
tunity by standing up to the USSR to strengthen his currently
declining domestic support as well as his international po-
sition.

In view of its stand in the past that Khrushchev was
the most sympathetic Soviet leader toward the Yugoslav brand
of Communism, Belgrade may interpret this article as a
sign that Khrushchev has yielded to the "Stalinist wing" of
the Soviet party.

[PAGE 12]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 13]
Lebanese Security Situation

Despite the success of the Lebanese Government in
suppressing or warding off attempts by the anti-Chamoun
opposition to create serious incidents, the internal secu-
rity situation remains critical. Pro-Syrian tribes near
the Syrian border have been engaged in sporadic fighting
with anti-Syrian elements since 10 April; Lebanese secu-
rity forces have refrained from interfering. The situation
in the south has improved somewhat as a result of the gov-
ernment's success in countering moves by the opposition
Druze faction to create disorder. Army commander Shi-
hab's prompt support of the gendarmerie in this case, as
well as his reported stern warning to opposition leaders to
desist from inciting further incidents, has apparently tem-
porarily spoiled their plans to embarrass President Chamoun
by generating more serious outbreaks.

The arming of the populace, both pro-Chamoun and op-
position elements, continues at a rapid pace. Chamoun has
said he provided arms to "friendly" elements, and the Shah
of Iran has disclosed he furnished 2,000 rifles to the Pres-
ident. The Egyptians and Syrians are smuggling arms into
Lebanon, as well as giving guerrilla training to opposition
partisans. Lebanese authorities claim to have arrested the
leader of a Syrian-inspired team sent to assassinate Chamoun
and have learned that up to 400 Syrian fedayeen and 300 Druze
tribesmen have been planning to infiltrate Lebanon over the
Ramadan holidays--18 to 21 April.

Chamoun has indicated that while at present he hopes
to amend the constitution and secure re-election during the
first two weeks of May, he may postpone taking action un-
til July if he feels he lacks sufficient strength. A potentially
dangerous situation may arise through Chamoun's stated in-
tention to "provoke" the opposition into taking actions which
would embarrass it.

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
III. THE WEST

Coty May Ask Soustelle to Try to Form New French
Government

Speculation continues that French President Rene Coty
might call on Social Republican Jacques Soustelle next week
to make the initial attempt to form a new government. The
American Embassy understands that Coty has informally
sounded out Independent leader Pinay, but that Pinay de-
clined, probably assuming his chances will increase as the
crisis worsens.

Present anti-American sentiment affords Soustelle a
good opportunity to try to rally support for the return to pow-
er of General de Gaulle. Coty might call Soustelle in an
effort to force the major nonextremist parties--particularly
the Independents and Socialists--to speed up their efforts to
arrive at a compromise choice and thereby avert a prolonged
crisis.

Coty, moreover, is under pressure to make some move
to clear the way for serious party negotiations. It is believed
in Paris that the choice of Soustelle, whose party's organi-
zation at the grass-roots level is too weak to permit it to
play a significant role in the 20 and 27 April local elections,
would have less influence on the second-round vote than most
other selections. Nevertheless, there is a possibility that
an investiture try by Soustelle would significantly aid the
right-center, thereby supporting the latter's view that there
is countrywide support for its tough position in Tunisia and
Algeria.

[PAGE 16]
Growing Friction With Army Threatens Haitian President

Haiti's President Duvalier appears to be in a weaker
position than at any time since his inauguration last Octo-
ber. Duvalier's power struggle with the army probably of-
fers the most immediate and serious threat to his position.
On 16 April the army was placed on a 100-percent alert,
which was somewhat relaxed the following day. Tension is
increasing because of arrests and transfers of officers,
many of them ordered by Duvalier in order to replace men
whose personal loyalty he doubts with others firmly com-
mitted to him. These moves have thrown Duvalier into con-
flict with Chief of Staff Flamber, who on at least one occa-
sion is said to have refused to carry out an order from Du-
valier. A break with Flamber might lead to a coup attempt
by the army and in any case would give the Duvalier regime
little chance of surviving an antigovernment move by any of
the President's several political opponents.

Rumors persist that ousted Chief of Staff Kebreau is
plotting against Duvalier with the support of Dominican dic-
tator Trujillo, who has repeatedly denied involvement in
Haitian politics. An anti-Duvalier radio propaganda cam-
paign has recently begun from the Dominican Republic.

[PAGE 17]
INDIA
CEYLON
KATUNAYAKE
LACCADIVE IS.
MALDIVE IS.
GAN
19 APRIL 1958
MILES
80419

[PAGE 18]
Britain-Maldives

Difficulties with the government of the British-protect-
ed Maldive Islands have caused Britain to halt reconstruc-
tion of the wartime airstrip on Gan Island, and London fears
that completion of this vital air-staging base will be serious-
ly delayed. The Gan base will be an essential refueling stop
on the transit route to the Far East once facilities at Katuna-
yake, Ceylon, are abandoned. Britain is committed to re-
linquish use of these by 1962 but intends to quit them earlier.

The new Maldivian Government, which came into power
last December, has been attempting to renegotiate the 1956
base agreement with Britain, with arrangements for reset-
tlement of the nearly 600 displaced islanders being the prin-
cipal controversial issue. The Maldivians have not been
placated by a recent British economic aid offer and have
tried to arouse public support in India and Ceylon.

The British evidently fear the Maldivians, who are in-
fluenced by Cairo radio, will stir up a propaganda campaign
damaging Britain's relations with countries in the Indian
Ocean area. In order to speed negotiations, London is pre-
pared to grant the Maldivian request for revision of the pro-
tectorate agreement to permit independent conduct of for-
eign cultural and economic relations.

[PAGE 19]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
19 April 1958

NATO commander Norstad on the day when the US delegate
to the London disarmament talks was scheduled to outline
the American response to the USSR's proposal for a test
suspension. Moscow is seeking to discredit US intentions
and generate distrust of US leadership at the opening of the
diplomatic talks on summit preparations.

*Foreign Minister Gromyko has told the three Western
ambassadors that he wants separate meetings with them and
that, if the West insisted on joint meetings, he would pro-
pose the inclusion of other ambassadors such as those from
Poland and Czechoslovakia. Presumably Gromyko hopes to
use this device to probe any divergence of views among the
three Western powers and to emphasize the Soviet position
on parity of representation at a summit meeting. Despite
the USSR's previous position that ambassadors should only
discuss procedural arrangements for a foreign ministers'
meeting, Gromyko queried Ambassador Thompson about ap-
propriate topics for negotiation.
