[PAGE 01]
NOT RELEASABLE TO
FOREIGN NATIONALS

CONTINUED CONTROL

4 April 1959

SC No. 01947/59
Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

THIS DOCUMENT CONTAINS CODE WORD MATERIAL

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Denied

[PAGE 03]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Reaction to Tibetan Situation

Afro-Asian reaction to events in Tibet continues to be strongly opposed to Communist China. Statements by the press and by important personages concentrate on Peiping's ruthless suppression of the Tibetan people, on China's new form of imperialism, and on its attack on the Buddhist religion.

Indian public opinion is still running well ahead of the government in condemning Chinese actions. In Indonesia, the next largest neutralist country, the press is concerned with the fact of "Asians kicking Asians around" and feels that Peiping may lose most of its friends. In Buddhist Ceylon, where comment has been sparse, former Prime Minister Dudley Senanayake said on 3 April that two lessons were to be learned from Tibet--the danger of a new imperialism and the recognition of how the Communist world treats religion. The first editorial reaction in Egypt says that the Tibetan revolt is against subordination and imperialism in a new form. (As far away as Tunisia, official reaction is that the Tibetan affair is "shocking" and recalls events in Hungary.)

Among those Asian nations which have ties with the West, Taiwan has reacted most strongly. It is attempting to create the impression that it is aiding the Tibetan rebels, and has suggested taking the issue to the United Nations. The South Korean foreign minister has extended his sympathy to the Tibetans in their fight against Communist tyranny. Manila continues to deplore the savage methods used by the Chinese in suppressing the Tibetan revolt.

Throughout the Asian world there is speculation regard-
ing the future of Sino-Indian relations and the extent to which

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 04]
Peiping has destroyed impressions it had attempted to create by giving widespread publicity to the five principles of peaceful coexistence.

The Yugoslav press says the Tibetan revolt indicates serious "deficiencies" in the policies of Chinese leaders. Belgrade feels that the uprising has dealt a "heavy blow" to China and to the struggle for socialism. Peiping, in turn, has accused Yugoslavia of "distortion" and referring to Tibet as a separate "country." (CONFIDENTIAL NOFORN)

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 05]
[PAGE 06]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
  Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
  Scientific Adviser to the President
  Director of the Budget
  Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
  Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
  Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
  Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
  Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
  The Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
  The Counselor
  Director, International Cooperation Administration
  The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
  The Secretary of Defense
  The Deputy Secretary of Defense
  Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
  The Secretary of the Army
  The Secretary of the Navy
  The Secretary of the Air Force
  The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
  Commandant, United States Marine Corps
  The Director, The Joint Staff
  Chief of Staff, United States Army
  Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
  Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
  Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
  Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
  Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
  Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
  Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
  Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
  Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
  The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
  The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
  The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
  The Chairman
National Security Agency
  The Director
National Indications Center
  The Director
United States Information Agency
  The Director

[PAGE 07]
TOP SECRET
