[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

17 May 1961

Copy No. Ctd
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

17 May 1961

5. Japan: Ikeda under pressure to obtain from Washington expanded Japanese administrative participation in Ryukyus. (Page iv)

7. Lebanon: Comment on resignation of cabinet. (Page iv)

8. Albania: Propaganda on trial of alleged agents for US, Greece, and Yugoslavia implies criticism of Moscow. (Page v)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]
Japan: A decision by Japan's ruling Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) on 15 May calls for a US-Japanese conference on Okinawan welfare. This may increase the pressure on Prime Minister Ikeda to urge enlarged Japanese administrative participation in the Ryukyus when he comes to Washington in mid-June. Two LDP committees, after hearing a delegation of Ryukyuan legislators, adopted a policy statement favoring greater autonomy for the Ryukyuan government and integration of Japanese and Ryukyuan administrative functions. Leftist organizations in both Japan and Okinawa have requested travel permits for their members to make exchange visits to focus public attention on the Okinawan issue prior to Ikeda's departure. (Backup, Page 6)

Lebanon: The resignation of Prime Minister Salam and his 17-member cabinet on 16 May gives President Shihab an opportunity to select a smaller, more efficient group less troubled by the internal dissension which handicapped its predecessor. Salam's unwieldy cabinet, which had served since last August, was widely criticized for its lack of accomplishments, and its resignation has been expected for some time. Salam, however, remains a likely candidate for the premiership in the new government.

17 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 10]
*Albania: Ten alleged Albanian agents of the US, Greece, and Yugoslavia were put on public trial on 15 May in connection with an abortive attempt last year to overthrow the Hoxha regime, first publicly mentioned at the February congress of the Albanian Workers' (Communist) party.

Summaries of the first day's activities carried by the Albanian domestic radio service dramatized Albanian claims of US, Greek, and Yugoslav hostility and subversion over the last decade against the Tirana government. The regime apparently hopes to use the trial to justify its long-standing anti-Yugoslav position and to demonstrate to the Soviet bloc the error of its current policy of maintaining normal state relations with Yugoslavia. Criticism of Moscow's 1955-57 rapprochement with Belgrade is implicit in the indictment.

17 May 61    DAILY BRIEF    v
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 16]
Okinawan Issue Grows in Japan

The statement by the Foreign Affairs Research Council and Okinawan Problems Committee of the Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) supports popular election of the Ryukyuan chief executive, now appointed by the US High Commissioner; increased US aid to Okinawa; US-Japanese cooperation to improve a social security system and facilities for economic development in the Ryukyus; and integration of Okinawa and Japanese elections. In its election platform last fall the LDP had confined its policy statement on Okinawa to a general expression of sentiment in favor of closer US-Japanese cooperation to raise Ryukyuan living standards.

Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Ohira reportedly assured a visiting delegation of Okinawan legislators on 9 May that Ikeda would discuss problems of administrative rights and missile stockpiling in the Ryukyus with US leaders during his visit next month. The legislators, representing the two major Okinawan parties, were appointed by the Ryukyuan legislature to present to Ikeda a resolution calling for Okinawan representation in the Japanese Diet, opposition to bringing Mace short-range missiles to Okinawa, and the continuation of Japanese assistance in teacher training.

Officials of the Foreign Ministry continue to maintain they are doing their best to discourage partisan attempts to make Okinawan relations a more active issue in Japan. They have reportedly tried to dissuade the Legislative Secretariat of the Diet from further study of the legality of Okinawan participation in the Diet. However, Foreign Minister Kosaka recently renewed Tokyo's request that a tripartite council be established to handle matters concerning Japan, the US, and the Ryukyus. Popular sentiment for closer relations with Okinawa may reach a point where Ikeda would be expected to report some progress following his return from Washington.

Arrangements are being made for a small delegation of Foreign Ministry officials and Diet members representing the three major parties to visit Okinawa as guests of the US High Commissioner before Ikeda leaves for the US.

17 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]

[PAGE 20]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 21]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
