Dominican Republic: Present government leaders are making a strong effort to convince international opinion that the regime no longer merits the police state label. The presence of American newsmen has served as a brake on police excesses that terrorized the dissidents immediately after the assassination. Some of those arrested then have apparently been released. The 6 June presidential decree canceling the army commission of John Abbes is clearly designed to dissociate present leaders from his hated symbol of police brutality. Last year Abbes was "replaced" as head of the Military Intelligence Service for similar reasons; he continued as de facto head of the organization.

Indications of loyalty to the Trujillo family have been observed among low-income groups in the capital as well as in the countryside, where units of the peasant militia were observed on 4 June to be performing patrol duties with considerable enthusiasm. It is among the usually politically inarticulate lower classes that the "father image" of the late dictator has its greatest strength. Middle-class elements with at least some formal education, from which future Dominican governments will have to draw their personnel, are believed very largely to be anti-Trujillo in sympathy.

Dissidents in the capital and in provincial cities appear thoroughly intimidated and unwilling to make their views publicly known, thus giving the impression to the casual observer that the regime is unopposed.

American embassies in London, Paris, and Madrid reported on 5 June that officials there had received no information from their embassies in the Dominican Republic on the police terrorism that took place immediately after the assassination. The Dominican dissidents are not known to have established contact with any but the US mission.

have no doubt that General "Ramfis" Trujillo exercises dominant control. "Ramfis," who explicitly denied in his 3 June press conference that he holds anti-US views, is known to harbor deep resentments against the United States. If he and other government leaders fail in the current effort to obtain at least passive US support, "Ramfis" is likely to resume his past efforts to reach an accommodation with the Soviet bloc and in any other way available

7 June 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
