reservations about a strengthened ICC, arguing that helicopters proposed for the commission could be used to transport arms to royal government forces.

the Chinese foreign minister said Peiping intends to denounce, "with all possible vigor," the first public sign of a US effort to obtain any kind of role in Laos for the UN.

Chen Yi also stated recently that he envisages a coalition Laotian cabinet headed by Souvanna Phouma and consisting of five or six Souvanna followers, three Pathet Lao representatives, and three ministers drawn from the Boun Oum government. Chen's remarks were probably intended to persuade the Cambodians and other neutralist delegations that Peiping's position is a moderate one and that it supports Souvanna as the leader of neutralist Laos. Neither Chen Yi nor any other bloc spokesman would consider these remarks binding.

Airlift operations on 5 June involved only three flights, of which one and possibly two were into Laos. The Soviet AN-10 transport that flew to Canton on 3 June was scheduled to arrive there again on 6 June. It had returned to Irkutsk on 4 June. Four of the six LI-2s that flew to Canton from Hanoi on 1 June were again scheduled to arrive at Canton on 6 June, probably to meet the AN-10. Although the exact nature of this operation remains undetermined, it is almost certain that the LI-2s are ferrying into North Vietnam the cargo the AN-10 is off-loading in Canton. The most recent shuttle operation of this type was conducted in mid-December, when three AN-12s landed at Canton. At that time their cargo was apparently off-loaded at Canton and ferried into North Vietnam by Soviet transports which were involved in airlift operations out of Hanoi. Since that time Soviet heavy transports engaged in Laotian support operations have flown directly to North Vietnam, most of them landing at Haiphong. There was one exception, in late December, when an AN-12 did not complete its scheduled flight into Haiphong from Canton because of mechanical difficulty. The

7 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
