Nigerian Leaders Bargaining on Coalition Government

The failure of any one of Nigeria's three major political groupings to win an absolute majority in the federal parliamentary election on 12 December has precipitated a period of bargaining for a share in the government which is expected to be in power when Nigeria becomes independent next October. The most likely outcome is a coalition cabinet dominated by the Northern People's Congress (NPC), which won a substantial plurality of the 312 seats contested, and including representatives of the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC), which came in second in the balloting. The NPC is the organization of the Northern Region's conservative Moslem rulers, while the NCNC represents the more dynamic Christian and pagan tribesmen who control the Eastern Region's government. The two parties reached an "understanding" some time before the election on sharing power; however, this accord was subject to considerable strain during the hotly contested campaign.

Incumbent Prime Minister Tafawa Balewa, the deputy president of the NPC, has been nominated by the British Governor General--who believes an NPC-controlled government is essential to Nigeria's stable development--to form the new cabinet. However, the dominant NPC personality is Sir Ahmadu Bello, premier of the Northern Region, who was not a candidate for the federal legislature. Both Tafawa Balewa and Sir Ahmadu indicated to the American consul in Kaduna on 14 December that the NPC was prepared to accept the NCNC as a coalition partner provided NPC's terms were met.

Meanwhile, rumors are circulating in Lagos that the NCNC is "negotiating" with the Western Region's Action Group, which finished third in the voting and is regarded by the NPC as its principal enemy. While such rumors are probably deliberately inspired as part of the bargaining now going on, an NCNC-AG coalition might materialize if the northern leaders set too high a price on sharing power. Such a development might provoke disturbances in the Northern Region.

17 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
