[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
5 February 1953

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Philippine President Quirino reportedly may not seek reelection (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Israeli border attacks seen result of policy decision (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Backlog of refugees in Berlin causes concern (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA
8. Peron states desire for end of US-Argentine tension (page 7).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Philippine President Quirino reportedly may not seek reelection:
the recent Philippine Supreme Court decision voiding the president's wartime emergency powers is a severe blow to Quirino and may cause him to decide not to run for reelection. The court's ruling deprives Quirino of control of public disbursements, his strongest weapon in compelling support of Liberal Party organization leaders.

Comment: This is the first hint that Quirino might alter his determination to seek reelection. remarks may reflect his known active dislike of Quirino and his own ambition to obtain the Liberal Party nomination for president.

Quirino's withdrawal would greatly improve the chances for a free election, and as long as Defense Minister Magsaysay remains associated with the Liberal Party, he will be a leading contender to head its ticket.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Israeli border attacks seen result of policy decision:
According to the American Ambassador in Tel Aviv, the recent Israeli incursions into Jordan and the Egyptian-held Gaza strip
[PAGE 05]
result from a major Israeli policy decision to pursue Arab marauders across the border if necessary. This is based on the conviction that the Arab authorities are unwilling or unable to control the increasingly serious border situation.

The Israeli delegate to the Mixed Armistice Commission has stated that the chief reason for the Israeli policy of "active defense" was the failure of Arab officials to prevent infiltration into Israel and sale of stolen Israeli property.

Comment: The decision to bypass the UN Mixed Armistice Commission marks the first time that Israel has used such drastic measures to stop Arab infiltration, and it presents the most serious threat yet to the area's uncertain peace.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE
7. Backlog of refugees in Berlin causes concern:
Western authorities in Germany believe that if the backlog of East German refugees in Berlin continues to build up at the current rate pending a decision as to their disposition in the Federal Republic, additional nonscheduled flights may be needed to evacuate them. At present, not all the available space on scheduled American and British planes from Berlin is being used.

Comment: Less than half of last month's record number of 25,340 refugees were flown to West Germany, largely because the individual laender, especially industrial North Rhine-Westphalia, would not accept their refugee quotas. Those remaining in Berlin are unable to find work because of the already severe unemployment situation.

Chancellor Adenauer believes the Communists are encouraging the exodus to create difficulties for the West and has publicly urged East Germans not to emigrate unless their lives are in danger. East German officials, while apparently glad to get rid of "irreconcilable" elements, are reportedly trying to curb the mass defections.
[PAGE 07]
LATIN AMERICA
8. Peron states desire for end of US-Argentine tension:
Ambassador Nufer, in reporting a long conversation on 3 February with President Peron and Foreign Minister Remorino, stated that Peron's obvious purpose in the meeting was to state a desire "that tension between our two countries....come to an end."

The Ambassador points out that this development seems to confirm recent indications that the Peron government is seeking a rapprochement with the United States.

Comment: In 1950 and 1951 the Peron government made diplomatic approaches aimed at settling pending problems with the United States. Both approaches preceded requests for special favors.
