II. ASIA

Cairo to Postpone Action Against Jordan

Cairo has decided that it will not attempt action against the Jordanian Government "at present," because a "rebellion" would not be certain of success.

Jordan's former Army Chief of Staff Major General Sadiq Shara, whose recent implication in conspiracy against the monarchy led to the fall of the Rifai government, could quietly be given refuge in Syria.

The successful maneuvering by the Jordanian Army's Bedouin officers against the remnants of the pro-UAR "Irbid group," of which Shara was the leader, was probably taken as a setback by Cairo. Officers from Irbid, a large town in northwest Jordan near the Syrian border, have long tended to conspire against the Jordanian monarchy with the help of Egypt and Syria. Shara was implicated in the UAR-supported conspiracy in Jordan early last summer but, because of insufficient evidence, was not among those arrested at that time. Since about 3 May, Shara has been on leave and under virtual house arrest, pending investigation of new charges of plotting against the regime.

Indication that the UAR was considering some form of retaliatory action against Jordan following a border incident appeared

The purge of the Irbid officer group, and the installation of Hazza Majalli as premier of Jordan appear to have provoked the UAR authorities still further. Syrian Interior Minister Sarraj, who has been in Cairo since 28 April, has often urged more active intervention in neighboring Arab countries than has been condoned by Egypt.

While Cairo's decision against attempting a coup in Jordan may have been influenced by reluctance to risk difficulties with the West while Nasir is attacking Communism in the Middle East, the effective purge of pro-UAR leadership in the Jordanian Army precluded UAR success in a coup attempt employing the army. The UAR may in time, however, attempt to increase agitation among Jordan's West Bank citizens and the refugees from Israeli-held areas of Palestine, who together comprise more than half of Jordan's population.
