[PAGE 01]
27 January 1958
Copy No. 137
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 January 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev has sought to parry President Eisenhower's proposal to establish international control of outer space for peaceful purposes. He said the USSR would be willing to discuss this question only as part of a general disarmament agreement which would ban nuclear weapons, suspend nuclear tests, and liquidate foreign military bases.

Khrushchev has made another important proposal for reorganizing the Soviet economy. By eliminating Machine Tractor Stations, a key element in the organization of Soviet agriculture, he hopes to cut costs and spur production.

The USSR has stepped up its diplomatic and propaganda offensive against the Baghdad Pact council meeting in Ankara. On 23 January the Soviet ambassador in Karachi made the first official protest to Pakistan on the alleged establishment of American missile bases there, and the Soviet ambassador in Tehran outlined to top Iranian officials the details of a "new" economic aid policy which offered "anything you want" without any strings.

i

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

The National Bank of Egypt has apparently been offered a Soviet loan at current banking interest rates to provide foreign exchange up to the equivalent of about $15,000,000. Despite its foreign exchange shortages, no decision has been taken by Cairo, probably because it is still hopeful that a financial settlement can be reached with the British in the talks scheduled to begin on 30 January.

27 Jan 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Okinawan leftists are likely to make new gains in elections to be held in Naha on 2 February. Fifteen seats in the city assembly are at stake, and supporters of Mayor Saichi Kaneshi could gain control of the assembly. (Page 7)

III. THE WEST

Serious friction could develop between civilian elements and the Venezuelan governing junta, which is predominantly military, over the future status of Communism. Venezuelan Communist party members are known to have been an important element in the Patriotic Front, a civilian organization composed of the four principal opposition factions which promoted the ouster of President Perez.

27 Jan 58    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

* "Strong resistance" by peasants in the eastern portion of Rumania to further agricultural collectivization is reported to have required armed intervention by the regime. Any such expressions of discontent on the part of the peasants are probably in reaction to the regime's long-expected and recently publicized intention to complete collectivization in these regions but will probably remain limited to localized actions. While the areas in question have been closed off to Western observers since 20 January, earlier reports attributed these security measures to possible Soviet troop rotation moves in Rumania.

RUMANIA -- SITES OF REPORTED PEASANT RESISTANCE
22 JANUARY 1958

27 Jan 58    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Seeks to Retain Initiative on East-
West Talks

Khrushchev's remarks on foreign policy in his speech of 22 January at Minsk were intended to maintain the USSR's diplomatic and propaganda initiative in the East-West exchange on summit talks. He sought to parry President Eisenhower's proposal to establish international control of outer space for peaceful purposes by stating that the USSR would be willing to discuss this question only as part of a general disarmament agreement which would ban nuclear weapons, suspend nuclear tests, and liquidate foreign military bases.

The confident and unyielding tone of his speech, together with his extreme terms for discussing international control of missiles, further suggest that the Soviet campaign for heads-of-government talks is presently aimed not at serious substantive negotiations but at discrediting Western policy and disrupting Western unity. The Kremlin apparently believes that mounting popular pressure in the non-Communist world for summit talks will progressively weaken the Western powers' negotiating position and eventually force them to agree to negotiations on terms more favorable to the USSR.

Khrushchev contrasted the "urgent" Soviet calls for a heads-of-government conference with alleged Western efforts to evade talks by putting forward "impossible" conditions--a reference to the status of Eastern Europe and the problem of German reunification. He charged that the "imperialists" are trying to intimidate the Soviet bloc by promising to build missile bases and station nuclear weapons on the territories of the members of NATO and other "aggressive blocs."

Khrushchev added no new items to the agenda for a summit conference suggested in Bulganin's recent letters--banning nuclear tests, ending "war propaganda," reducing foreign forces in Germany and other European countries, establishing a nuclear-free zone in central Europe, and discussing the Middle East situation and international economic relations.

27 Jan 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Khrushchev's Proposal for Agricultural Reorganization

Khrushchev has proposed the virtual abolition of a historic agricultural institution, the Machine Tractor Station (MTS), in another of his bold proposals for economic reorganization. This will transfer a large quantity of production machinery from state to collective ownership--a step which Stalin as late as 1952 said "could only retard our advance toward Communism." The MTS has been historically one of the three basic Soviet agricultural institutions, along with the state farm and collective farm. The MTS has also been a major instrument for centralized party control in the countryside. It is a state-owned centralized pool of agricultural machinery with operating personnel which serves a number of collective farms on a contract basis.

The stations are now to be gradually relegated to the status of repair depots and their machines sold to the collective farms. The move appears logical and should result in more efficient farming since the relationship between the MTS and the collective farms has had various drawbacks.

The Soviet leadership apparently will embark on this reorganization as a means of cutting agricultural costs and spurring production toward the goal of catching up with the West. Khrushchev indicated he now intends to rely on party organizations in the collective farms as instruments for stimulating production and maintaining political leadership. He thus appears confident that the peasants have come to accept the collective farm system and that the MTS is no longer needed as a political control organ in the countryside.

27 Jan 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
Stepped Up Soviet Offensive Against Baghdad Pact
Council Meeting

The USSR has followed up its propaganda charges against the Baghdad Pact council meeting in Ankara with a private warning to Pakistan not to accept American missile bases on its territory. Moscow has also made a sweeping offer of economic aid to Iran designed to provide Tehran with an alternative to its membership in the Baghdad Pact.

Moscow broadcasts allege that the United States will attempt to force American rocket and nuclear bases on pact members and that they will have to pay for "unsel fish" American aid with the loss of their sovereignty.

Soviet Ambassador to Pakistan, I. F. Spedko, on 23 January protested to Pakistani Foreign Minister Noon on the alleged establishment of American missile bases in Pakistan. Noon denied that any such base either had been established or was planned and offered personally to take the Soviet ambassador to any suspected location in order to disprove the charge. This is the first Soviet protest to Pakistan on the subject, although Moscow radio infrequently has voiced such charges.

On the eve of his departure for a Moscow visit, Soviet Ambassador Pegov gave the Iranian foreign minister and the director of plan organization details of a "new" economic aid policy toward Iran which he would present formally on his return from Moscow. Pegov stated that the USSR would furnish Iran "anything you want" without strings. The USSR has made its economic overtures to Iran increasingly public in the hope of building popular pressure for accepting at least some of the offers. Pegov's "new" economic aid policy toward Iran may be a summary of 1957 "offers" which covered a broad field for cooperation in technical and investment fields of interest to Iran.

27 Jan 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
Leftists May Gain in Okinawa Assembly Election

A by-election in Naha, Okinawa, on 2 February to add 15 seats to the city assembly offers leftist elements an opportunity to gain control of Naha's legislative body. Leftists hold 12 of the 30 seats in the present assembly and must win 11 in the by-election to gain control of the expanded body. While hard pressed to stage such a large gain, several factors may assist them.

The election will be held in the recently merged district of Mawashi which gave leftist Saichi Kaneshi his largest majority in his election as mayor earlier this month. The leftist Minren organization probably has gained an advantage on the strength of Kaneshi's victory and, as was the case in that election, has started campaigning earlier and more aggressively than its conservative-Socialist opposition.

Mayor Kaneshi, who took office on 20 January, has the authority to dissolve the entire assembly at his convenience and to call new elections. In the event leftists fail to win control of the assembly in the by-election, Kaneshi may resort to new elections in order to capitalize on city-wide sentiment against American occupation policies.

27 Jan 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 12]
[PAGE 13]
Communists May Exploit Venezuelan Political Instability

The status of the outlawed Venezuelan Communist party (PCV) could be a source of serious friction among the several contending military and civilian groups as the governing junta attempts to restore order and formulate a transitional program of government. Communists are an important faction in the Patriotic Front, an organization prominent in the ouster of President Perez which is composed of the PCV, two leftist but non-Communist parties, and a Catholic-oriented party.

The front has not fully endorsed the new regime, which is predominantly military. Front leaders in Venezuela, including the top Communist spokesman, have called for legalization of all parties, early elections, and the return of all exiles. The exiled heads of the three non-Communist parties, however, have avoided reference to the Communists in their general statements on unified action. Civilian unity appears uncertain in the face of the Communist issue and the probable conflicts between front leaders and exiled leaders in determining a common political program.

The military, who are believed to be suspicious of the front, may attempt to close ranks to preserve their traditional dominant position in the government, and will possibly insist on the continued suppression of Communist activity.

27 Jan 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 9

[PAGE 14]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 January 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev has sought to parry President Eisenhower's proposal to establish international control of outer space for peaceful purposes. He said the USSR would be willing to discuss this question only as part of a general disarmament agreement which would ban nuclear weapons, suspend nuclear tests, and liquidate foreign military bases.

Khrushchev has made another important proposal for reorganizing the Soviet economy. By eliminating Machine Tractor Stations, a key element in the organization of Soviet agriculture, he hopes to cut costs and spur production.

The USSR has stepped up its diplomatic and propaganda offensive against the Baghdad Pact council meeting in Ankara. On 23 January the Soviet ambassador in Karachi made the first official protest to Pakistan on the alleged establishment of American missile bases there, and the Soviet ambassador in Tehran outlined to top Iranian officials the details of a "new" economic aid policy which offered "anything you want" without any strings.

The National Bank of Egypt has apparently been offered a Soviet loan at current banking interest rates to provide foreign exchange up to the equivalent of about $15,000,000. Despite its foreign exchange shortages, no decision has been taken by Cairo, probably because it is still hopeful that a financial settlement can be reached with the British in the talks scheduled to begin on 30 January.

[PAGE 17]
Serious friction could develop between civilian elements and the Venezuelan governing junta, which is predominantly military, over the future status of Communism. Venezuelan Communist party members are known to have been an important element in the Patriotic Front, a civilian organization composed of the four principal opposition factions which promoted the ouster of President Perez.

RUMANIA -- SITES OF REPORTED PEASANT RESISTANCE
22 JANUARY 1958

27 Jan 58    DAILY BRIEF    iv
