[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

7 May 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA, DOS and
NAVY
review(s)
completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. JORDAN MAY SEEK ENTRY OF IRAQI TROOPS

2. COLOMBIAN POLITICAL CRISIS

3. SERIOUS FIGHTING STILL POSSIBLE DESPITE HONDURAN-
NICARAGUAN CEASE-FIRE

5. SOVIET OFFICER STATES USSR HAS EXPERIMENTAL
ATOMIC SUBMARINE

6. SOVIET MERCHANT SHIP MONITORING US NAVY ELEC-
TRONIC SIGNALS

8. LAOTIAN POLITICAL
SITUATION DETERIORATING

9. CHINESE RIOTING IN SAIGON INTENSIFIES

10. RIOT INVOLVING POLISH TROOPS REPORTED
[PAGE 04]
1. JORDAN MAY SEEK ENTRY OF IRAQI TROOPS

Reference:

Jordan's Deputy Prime Minister Rifai
desires to put pressure on Syria to
withdraw its troops from Jordan by re-
questing entry of Iraqi troops in ac-
cordance with the Iraqi-Jordanian treaty
of 1947. Rifai told Ambassador Mallory
that removal of the Syrian force would be
one of the first steps to break up Syrian
intrigue in Jordan. The Iraqis would be
stationed at Mafraq near the Syrian brigade.
Rifai wishes to
bring the Iraqis in prior to the British evacuation of Mafraq
air base scheduled for the end of May. As a further step,
Rifai plans to install an Iraqi representative on the joint com-
mand in Jordan.

Rifai asserted that his government is un-
able to maintain its present position, much less take an active
role in the Arab world, without outside help. He said Jordan
needed assistance most urgently in obtaining funds to meet the
$1,800,000 installment now due to Britain on 1 June for mili-
tary equipment and transferred fixed installations.

In addition, Rifai stressed the importance
of aiding the army, rewarding its loyalty, and restoring its
position to that which prevailed before pay and allowance cuts
by former chief of staff Nuwar. Rifai, according to the Amer-
ican army attaché in Amman, has submitted a request for
equipment for an infantry division, an armored division to-
gether with corps artillery, 84 aircraft including 40 jets, and
12 motor torpedo boats. Rifai informed Ambassador Mallory
that, having decided on an anti-Communist line, Jordan was
prepared to take necessary steps, including acceptance of train-
ing missions, to qualify for American aid.
[PAGE 05]
2. COLOMBIAN POLITICAL CRISIS

Comment on:

Widespread student protests against
President Rojas' regime and a police
attack which damaged a Bogota church
on 5 May have maintained the political
tension in Colombia. Although opposition
presidential candidate Guillermo Valencia
was released on 3 May from house arrest--
the occasion for the student demonstra-
tions--students and other opposition ele-
ments may attempt to call a general strike
on or before 8 May, the latest scheduled
date for Rojas' "re-election" by his rump
National Constituent Assembly. The Amer-
ican embassy believes the odds favor Rojas' replacement shortly,
probably by a military junta.

Rojas' re-election plans for the 1958-1962
term have provoked increasing opposition from the two major
political parties, the Catholic Church, and business elements.
The serious discontent reportedly has spread to the military,
Rojas' principal remaining support. This probably caused post-
ponement of his legislative re-election originally set for 1 May.

Rojas has indicated he may resign after his
"re-election" in favor of a substitute acceptable to the armed
forces, according to the Colombian government press. Such a
declaration may be mere temporizing by Rojas to gain time to
rebuild support, but in any case would probably not satisfy the
opposition at this point in its campaign to oust him.
[PAGE 06]
3. SERIOUS FIGHTING STILL POSSIBLE DESPITE
HONDURAN-NICARAGUAN CEASE-FIRE

Reference:

Public opinion is highly inflamed in
both Honduras and Nicaragua, and some
hotheaded action by one of the disputants
might result in serious fighting at any
moment. This opinion was expressed
by Ambassador Dreier, American member of the five-nation
special committee of the Organization of American States set
up to investigate and help settle the border dispute, shortly
after a temporary cease-fire had been negotiated by the com-
mittee. The cease-fire agreement, which became effective
late on 5 May, gives the committee the difficult task of work-
ing out within four days a mutually acceptable plan for the
withdrawal of troops of both sides from a zone in the disputed
border area.

The committee was favorably impressed
with the attitude of Nicaraguan officials who, it feels, recog-
nize the futility of the drift toward war and appear to be exer-
cising a restraining influence on the public. The Honduran
government also seems to Ambassador Dreier to be desirous
of avoiding war. The ambassador feels, however, that the
Honduran government has created a situation over which it
could lose control.
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
5. SOVIET OFFICER STATES USSR HAS EXPERIMENTAL
ATOMIC SUBMARINE

The Soviet assistant army attaché in
Stockholm recently informed the Amer-
ican naval attaché there that the USSR
has one experimental atomic-powered
submarine, built between one and two
years ago, which is operating with the Northern Fleet.

Comment

The existence of a Soviet nuclear-
powered submarine has not been veri-
fied. Intelligence concerning the development of the USSR's
nuclear energy program has indicated that such a submarine
would not be in operation until late 1958 or 1959.

The Soviet Union's first identified nuclear-
powered ship is the widely publicized icebreaker Lenin, sched-
uled to be launched in Leningrad by 7 November.

Because Northern and Pacific Fleet bases
afford unrestricted access to the open seas, it is likely that
the USSR would test its first nuclear submarine in one of these
areas.
[PAGE 09]
6. SOVIET MERCHANT SHIP MONITORING US NAVY
ELECTRONIC SIGNALS

American naval sources reported on
3 May that the Soviet merchant ship
Kolkhoznik, equipped with an unusual
number and variety of radio antennae
for a merchant vessel, had obviously delayed departure
from the vicinity of the major US naval base at Guantanamo,
in southeast Cuba, for the purpose of monitoring electronic
emissions. The Kolkhoznik entered the port of Boqueron on
19 April to load sugar and had been scheduled to depart on
30 April.

The ship's antenna array includes one
ultra-high or very-high-frequency antenna, two very-high-
frequency dipoles, five medium-high and high-frequency
antennae, one high-frequency sleeve antenna, three horizon-
tal wire antennae, and a radio direction-finder loop.

Comment

The USSR has never before attempted
in such an open manner to collect com-
munications and electronic intelligence on US naval opera-
tions and equipment.
naval officers are placed on merchant vessels solely
for the purpose of collecting intelligence.
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
8. LAOTIAN POLITICAL
SITUATION DETERIORATING

the political situation
in Laos has deteriorated to such an ex-
tent that remedial action must be taken immediately.
dissension and lack of authority impede the func-
tioning of the government and that the country is further weak-
ened by the unhindered subversive maneuvering of the Pathet
Lao.
an extensive social welfare and
economic development program be launched to improve condi-
tions at the village level. Without such action,
Laos will be "eaten away" and sooner or later "absorbed by
Communist brigands"

Comment

concern with Pathet Lao subver-
sion may also indicate a shift in the prevailing sentiment
among Laotian politicians, who generally held six months ago
that the Pathets were simply "misguided" nationalists.
[PAGE 12]
9. CHINESE RIOTING IN SAIGON INTENSIFIES

Comment on:

Rioting by Chinese in Saigon has in-
tensified in protest against Taipei's
inability to protect them from the man-
datory naturalization decree by the
Vietnamese government. On 6 May,
following two violent demonstrations
at the Chinese Nationalist legation dur-
ing the preceding week, some 300 Chi-
nese broke through police lines to seize
the building, and are now threatening a sitdown hunger strike.

President Ngo Dinh Diem has attributed
the demonstrations to a small minority of Communists among
the nearly 1,000,000 Overseas Chinese in South Vietnam. The
American embassy in Saigon, which has warned of the danger
of Communist exploitation of the citizenship issue, also re-
ports certain aspects that suggest Communist involvement.
In particular, the embassy notes that the crowd-handling tech-
niques of leaders of these purportedly spontaneous demon-
strations appear to be of the "Communist-cadre variety."

In Taipei, Chiang Kai-shek has called a
meeting of top government leaders at which a decision may
be made to break off relations with Saigon. The Nationalists
have offered to aid those Overseas Chinese subject to Viet-
namese naturalization who desire to come to Taiwan, and, on
1 May, Chiang informed Ambassador Rankin that the next
step "might well be" to withdraw representation from Saigon.
[PAGE 13]
10. RIOT INVOLVING POLISH TROOPS REPORTED

A Warsaw newspaper report suggests
that the recent riot at Jaroslaw, an
agricultural communist community in southeast-
ern Poland, when the populace and
some troops intervened to halt the arrest by police of a
young soldier, is one of the most serious of recent out-
bursts against Communist state authority. The rioters
were dispersed only after more than 1,000 police and troops
intervened and drove off the demonstrators with tear gas.
A military investigation has reportedly been launched to de-
termine responsibility for the incident.

Comment

Although no other riots have been re-
ported involving Polish troops, a num-
ber of minor strikes and demonstrations have recently oc-
curred throughout the country. Most of these disturbances
have taken place in industrial towns where some worker-
management friction has existed.

Official concern over such incidents,
reflected in government and party statements, doubtless
stems in part from the realization that failure to maintain
public order might furnish Moscow with a pretext to inter-
vene more directly in Polish affairs.
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
