serious interest in achieving progress in the forthcoming negotiations. Gromyko indicated interest in "first-step" measures outlined by McCloy, but contended that partial steps taken independently without a program for complete disarmament would create "disequilibrium." Gromyko took a less positive line in discussing the nuclear test talks, indicating that the Soviet proposal for a tripartite administrator for the control system would be a "sticking point" and admitting this was related to the Soviet demand for revising the UN structure. The Polish delegate subsequently told an American official that he had received the impression from Gromyko that the test ban talks would be "locked," with no real progress until general disarmament negotiations had shown signs of advance.
(Backup, Page 7)

UAR—Africa: Cairo is continuing its clandestine financial support of African nationalists. more than $140,000 has been turned over to Ugandan, Kenyan, and Northern and Southern Rhodesian nationalist leaders during the past three months.

the UAR also informed its diplomatic missions that while it would support a proposed Ghanaian UN resolution recommending that member nations sever relations with South Africa, it would try to keep open its legation in Johannesburg as "the only official means of contact" between South African nationalists and the outside world.

sought Brazilian support for an Indonesian draft resolution to be submitted in the UN General Assembly on the Cuban complaint against the United States. This draft resolution has not yet been formally presented. Mexico is willing to support the draft and that Brazilian backing would influence other Latin American governments to do likewise. Brazil's customary position has been not to refer hemispheric problems to the UN until appeals to the OAS had been exhausted. In reply Castro claimed that the OAS is incapable of defending small countries when their rights "are disregarded by the largest power on the continent".
