II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru's Position in Forthcoming Talks With Chou En-lai

Indian Prime Minister Nehru, in his discussions with Chinese Premier Chou En-lai in New Delhi from 19 to 25 April, reportedly will continue to insist on Chinese acceptance of the principle that the Indo-Tibetan border is already delimited. While also insisting initially that Peiping evacuate military forces from all the territory it holds in the Ladakh area of Kashmir, Nehru apparently is ready to concede Chinese troops the right to stay in the immediate vicinity of the road they built through the area.

Nehru reportedly has reassured President Prasad that no Indian territory will be surrendered. Legal problems arising from provisions of the Indian constitution and from Pakistan's claims to Kashmir would, in fact, make any formal cession of territory difficult. Nehru may feel that some form of joint Sino-Indian administration of Ladakh, not affecting Indian sovereignty, could provide an eventual solution.

New Delhi is puzzled over reports that the Chinese expect the meeting to produce positive results, and there is concern that Peiping may be overestimating India's readiness to negotiate. Nehru expects that the border problem will be discussed by the two prime ministers only "in principle," and that a joint commission will be established to consider detailed proposals. Although Indian officials feel the Chinese are ready to make some concessions, they still anticipate "several years" of negotiations.

Chou, who has maneuverability denied Nehru by the latter's need to consider domestic public opinion, may make some dramatic offer such as the outright exchange of disputed areas in Assam and Ladakh. Peiping's bargaining position is based on the contention that actual jurisdiction establishes ownership and on its claim that the border has never been legally defined. Hence Chou is unlikely to agree to Nehru's contention that the border is delimited or to any significant reduction in Chinese control of the disputed Ladakh area.
