II. ASIA-AFRICA

Seoul Raises New Obstacle to Agreement with Tokyo

South Korea has raised a last-minute obstacle to agree-
ment with Japan on settlement of two major issues--the ex-
change of Japanese fishermen held by South Korea for illegal
Korean entrants detained by Japan and the repatriation of
Koreans in Japan to South Korea. South Korean Ambassa-
dor Yu Tai-ha in Tokyo implied on 28 December that a final
settlement could not be reached unless the United States
would provide advance financial assistance for the resettle-
ment of the prospective Korean repatriates.

To secure the return of its fishermen, Tokyo has agreed
to seek Diet approval to provide Korean repatriates to South
Korea the amount of $1,500 per five- to six-person family,
following an over-all settlement of Japanese-South Korean
differences. Tokyo has implied that further procrastination
in returning the fishermen may force it to take sterner meas-
ures, such as referring outstanding issues between the two
governments to the United Nations, arming its patrol craft
along the "Rhee fishing line," evicting the South Korean mis-
sion in Japan, or establishing "official" trade relations with
North Korea.

Seoul is holding about 200 Japanese fishermen seized for
violation of the unilaterally imposed Rhee line, most of whom
have completed sentences imposed by South Korean courts.
Japan is believed to be holding some 300 illegal Korean en-
trants.

According to the South Korean foreign minister, Yu had
led President Rhee to believe that the United States would pro-
vide financial aid for the repatriates. Without such an arrange-
ment, the foreign minister told Ambassador McConaughy, the
Tokyo negotiations are again up in the air.

Meanwhile, the repatriation of about 5,000 Koreans in Japan
who have so far requested to go to North Korea is continuing.
On 28 December the third group of about 1,000 left Japan with-
out incident. South Korea has moderated its agitation against
the repatriation, but it requested on 27 December that the
United States take "necessary action" to halt the program.
