Control Commission for Laos, in line with the British proposal of 21 January that the ICC take preliminary soundings, through its chairman, on whether it could perform a useful role in Laos. The USSR, however, continues to show little disposition toward supporting the return of the ICC, at least until some sort of international conference is held on Laos.

Replying to the British ambassador’s comment that Prince Sihanouk had withdrawn his proposal for a 14-nation conference on Laos, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Sobolev remarked that this was not his government’s understanding and that the USSR still favored the Cambodian proposal. Without US and Thai participation his proposal might have to be withdrawn. Soviet leaders probably feel that Sihanouk’s plan has provided valuable non-Communist support for the bloc’s diplomatic position and has given the Communists an opportunity to delay any international action or negotiations on Laos by prolonging East-West exchanges over the timing, composition, and agenda of a conference.

The two Soviet AN-12 heavy transports which left Moscow on 24 January reached Peiping on 27 January, and today flew on to Canton. They may continue to North Vietnam.

Soviet AN-12s—which are heavy four-engine turboprop transports capable of carrying between 15 and 20 tons of supplies—have been involved in Laos-associated airlift operations on two previous occasions. The first group consisting of three AN-12s arrived in Canton from the USSR on 18 December. Their cargo was off-loaded and ferried to Hanoi aboard the Soviet IL-14s which had been engaged in airlift operations since early December. A second group of seven AN-12s, two of which were part of the 18 December group—arrived in Canton on 24 December. Three days later six flew on to North Vietnam—five to Haiphong and one to Hanoi. One remained at Canton, apparently because of mechanical difficulty. By 29 December, all six of the AN-12s which arrived in North Vietnam were returning to the USSR; the one delayed at Canton returned on 13 January.

28 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
