Salazar to "Remodel" Portuguese Cabinet

told embassy officials that General Botelho Moniz, minister of defense, "comes out of the reshuffle stronger than ever." Moniz, who claims to have the backing of 90 percent of the military, has been pressing Salazar since the Santa Maria episode in January and the February disturbances in Angola to make changes in Portuguese policies in Africa or risk the loss of military support of the regime. Moniz has reportedly felt for some time that the military might be forced "to take matters into their own hands."

The events in January and February have also emboldened the civilian opposition in Portugal. In early February, in an unprecedented action, Salazar permitted the President to receive three members of the opposition who presented a formal request for political concessions. Salazar has also felt it was necessary for the opposition to "let off some steam" in the controlled press. Mounting international criticism of Portugal, particularly as regards its African policies, and the realization that Portuguese Africa has been selected as a target for special attack by anti-colonialist countries in the UN may also have led Salazar to believe he must at least make gestures in the direction of change.

The most significant change slated appears to be a shift in the Ministry of the Presidency. The holder of this position is generally regarded as the most likely successor to Salazar, and the present incumbent, Theotonio Pereira, is an ultraconservative dedicated to continuing Portugal on the path chosen by Salazar. The reported new appointee to this key post, Dr. Marcello Caetano, is probably the most respected and popular figure in Portuguese politics. As a former minister for the overseas areas, he is familiar with the basic problems at issue and is reported to have become more liberal in his views in recent years. He and Moniz have political foes in common and could be expected to work well together. Moniz

17 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
