Venezuelan-Cuban Relations Approach Critical Stage

Venezuelan President Betancourt told Foreign Minister Arcaya, then in Argentina on a South American tour, to advise Cuban President Dorticos not to come to Caracas at this time as his visit would "create serious internal problems." The visit, scheduled for 6 June, could cause unrest in Venezuela, where outspoken anti-Castro groups are said to be planning a violent protest demonstration against the Cuban delegation. On the other hand, Arcaya, a stanch supporter of the Castro regime, has reportedly insisted that withdrawal of the invitation would also cause "grave internal problems"; he has threatened to resign if his government takes such action.

The issue of the visit is likely to intensify the divisions in Betancourt's three-party coalition, in political pressure groups, and in the press over Venezuelan policy toward Castro. At the time of Cuban Foreign Minister Roa's visit to Venezuela in March, this cleavage was clearly defined over the issue of whether Venezuela would attend Cuba's underdeveloped nations conference proposed for Havana this fall. The Venezuelan ambassador to Washington subsequently stated that "the Cuban problem" was an extremely serious threat to internal stability in his country. The controlled Cuban press and radio have attacked Betancourt on various occasions in recent weeks.

A new irritant in Cuban-Venezuelan relations is Cuba's program to import 900,000 tons of Soviet crude oil in 1960, which will replace about 43 percent of Venezuela's crude oil exports to Cuba. Venezuela supplied almost all of Cuba's crude oil requirements in 1959, when the Cuban market took more than 3 percent of total Venezuelan petroleum exports. A large segment of the Venezuelan press has denounced the Cuban-Soviet deal, and the acting foreign minister has called it a "rude blow to Venezuelan petroleum," which is already facing keen competition in its world markets.

4 June 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 9
