[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

14 June 1960

Copy No. C 68

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

14 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bloc-Burma: Burma has reportedly decided to accept a Czechoslovak offer of a $10,500,000 line of credit to finance the purchase of Czech industrial equipment. Other bloc countries have shown renewed interest in Burma since the return to power of U Nu, who is considered more receptive to bloc overtures than his predecessor, Ne Win. There have been general bloc offers for expanded trade, and Peiping and Moscow have offered new economic assistance.
[PAGE 05]
Belgian Congo: A worsening financial situation may prompt the Congolese government, when it is formed, to take drastic action following the colony's independence on 30 June. The American Consulate General speculates that, confronted with Belgian-incurred deficits totaling over $80,000,000, the Congo may repudiate its debts and resort to large-scale dismissals of Belgian civil servants. The consulate general emphasizes that the failure of Western nations to come forward with firm offers of economic aid would increase the Congo's susceptibility to overtures from the bloc.

14 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
New Bloc Economic Approaches to Burma

[A $10,500,000 credit recently offered by Czechoslovakia and reportedly accepted by Burma is the first indication that the bloc's bid for new economic ties with Rangoon may meet a favorable response.] The Sino-Soviet bloc has shown renewed interest in Burma since the return to power of U Nu, who is considered more receptive to bloc overtures than his predecessors. Representatives from the USSR, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Communist China have held out prospects for an expansion of trade, and both Moscow and Peiping have expressed a willingness to provide new economic assistance. Soviet aid has been proposed for construction of a road network linking Burma with other Southeast Asian countries, and China has offered to provide machinery and technical assistance for light industrial projects.

As one of the first Asian countries to embark on extensive economic relations with the bloc, Burma has learned of the disadvantages as well as advantages of bloc trade and aid programs, and the experience of both sides since 1955 probably will dictate caution in negotiating new agreements. It is unlikely, for example, that the bloc will attempt--or Burma will accept--renewal of the bilateral barter agreements, all of which have been terminated. Burma's difficulties in using the credits it generated through rice exports to the bloc probably will preclude large-scale barter commitments, and if possible Rangoon will insist on cash transactions similar to those which have fostered the continuation of Sino-Burmese trade--at lower levels--since the barter agreement was canceled in 1957.

Proposed bloc economic aid projects in Burma will probably also be carefully planned to avoid raising such grandiose hopes which had been expressed for earlier Soviet projects and which resulted in severe domestic criticism when the plans proved overly optimistic. Of the nine original Soviet "gift" projects--all of which were to be repaid with Burmese "gift" rice--only three are actually being carried out.

14 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
