apprehensive that developments in Iraq might lead to some Israeli action, on 21 October alerted units and outposts of the 2nd Motorized Battalion in northeastern Sinai. There is no indication, however, of unusual Israeli military preparations. (Page 3)

India - Communist China: New Delhi issued a statement on 23 October "strongly" protesting a border clash on 21 October, in which 17 Indians were reported killed, as an incursion well inside Indian territory. The incident occurred in an area of Ladakh in eastern Kashmir claimed by both governments. The Indian spokesman said New Delhi had rejected a Chinese protest claiming the Indians had entered Chinese territory and opened fire on a Chinese patrol. This incident--the first on the border since 26 August--probably was not intended as a provocation, in view of the fact that both governments have been trying to prepare the way for negotiations on the border dispute. The clash is likely to have the effect of deferring any immediate moves in this direction.

*Peiping on 23 October published its version of the incident, claiming in a relatively mild statement that Chinese frontier guards had been "compelled" to fire in self-defense. In its protest to New Delhi on 22 October, Peiping asked that measures be taken at once to prevent the recurrence of any "violation of Chinese frontiers." (Page 4) (Map)

III. THE WEST
Italy-USSR: President Gronchi will probably accept a Soviet invitation to make an official trip to Moscow in the near future. In sounding out the Italians, the USSR has tried to ensure that Khrushchev will be invited to visit Italy. Premier Segni and other cabinet members want to leave the question open. They fear that such a visit would have a bad effect on local elections scheduled for next spring. (Page 6)

Cuba: Reacting with characteristic demagoguery and violence to new evidence of opposition to his regime, Fidel Castro has again sought to enhance his mass support by strong attacks on the United States. In a TV speech on 22-23 October, he accused the US Government of permitting anti-Castro activities and referred scathingly to the presence of the US naval base at Guantanamo Bay. Castro's treatment of Major Huber Matos is causing "deep shock" in the revolutionary stronghold of Santiago de Cuba, according to the American Consulate there. (Page 7)
