Indian and Chinese Communist Border Forces Clash in Ladakh

Ill feeling between India and Communist China over their border dispute is likely to hit a new peak as a result of another serious clash in the Ladakh area of Kashmir. The latest incident occurred on 21 October about 45 miles inside the generally recognized border between western Tibet and Ladakh, about at the point where the boundary claimed by Peiping slices off the northeastern corner of Ladakh.

New Delhi on 23 October issued an official statement "strongly" protesting the incident as an intrusion into Indian territory. The communique stated that 17 Indian border guards were killed and three seriously injured when their unit suddenly came under heavy fire--including mortars and grenades--from Chinese troops in a mountain position. The Indian spokesman said New Delhi had rejected a Chinese protest claiming the Indians had entered Chinese territory. Peiping also published its version of the incident on 23 October, claiming in a relatively mild statement that Chinese frontier guards had been "compelled" to fire in self-defense. In its official protest on 22 October, Peiping asked that measures be taken at once to prevent the recurrence of any "violation of Chinese frontiers."

This incident is the first serious border clash since 26 August. While the most publicized Himalayan frontier clashes have occurred about a thousand miles east along the McMahon line in Assam, Ladakh was the scene of several incidents during the summers of 1958 and 1959 which were protested by New Delhi. Prime Minister Nehru, though demanding Chinese withdrawal from outposts on the Indian side of the "traditional" frontier as a condition for negotiations on the border dispute, has left the Indian position on northeastern Ladakh purposefully vague.

While Peiping's definition of the "traditional boundary" is equally vague, the Chinese deny Indian claims as the legacy of "British aggression" and insist New Delhi should respect the "status quo," which would leave the Chinese occupying the disputed corner of Ladakh.

The latest incident probably was not intended by either side as a provocation, in view of the fact both governments have been
