[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

9 June 1960

Copy No. C 58

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

9 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Pakistan: President Ayub has authorized his subordinates to explore the sincerity of recent Soviet indications of willingness to extend economic aid, particularly in oil and other mineral exploration. A major motive in this--he informed Ambassador Rountree of his move on 4 June--appears to be to take advantage of recent Soviet saberrattling over the U-2 incident to press for increased US military assistance.
[PAGE 05]
III. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the United States Intelligence Board concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the orbit in the immediate future.
Note: There are no indications of Chinese Communist intentions to launch a major attack in the Taiwan Strait area in the near future. The Chinese Communists may, however, use the occasion of the President's visit to Taiwan for military demonstrations in the Taiwan Strait area to emphasize their hostility toward the US.

C. The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which would jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future: None.

9 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Pakistani Inquiry About Possible Soviet Aid

Pakistani President Ayub, in an apparent effort to stimulate US interest in giving additional aid, has informed the US Embassy that he has authorized the Foreign Ministry to explore the sincerity of recent Soviet indications of willingness to give economic aid, particularly in oil and minerals exploration. Although the Pakistanis have often cited the success of India and other neutrals in securing aid from both the Communist bloc and the West, they would probably be unwilling to jeopardize good relations with the US by accepting extensive Soviet aid.

Ayub, however, may also believe that suggesting willingness to improve relations with Moscow, will help reduce Soviet pressure on Pakistan over the U-2 incident. Soviet leaders probably consider that Pakistan's strong ties with the West preclude the prospect of substantial Soviet gains, but may respond with a specific offer in the hope of prejudicing Pakistan ties with the US.

Ayub's statement to Ambassador Rountree that as an economy measure he is considering a reduction of Pakistani military units to 80 percent of full strength may have been designed to underscore the need for additional US assistance. It seems unlikely that Ayub would take this step, since it would probably weaken the army's support for his military regime. Moreover, he appears especially concerned over long-term Soviet pressures on Pakistan, particularly through Afghanistan.

9 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 10]
