[PAGE 01]
18 May 1961
Copy No. C 84

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

JCS, DIA and State Dept
review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 May 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Iran: Shah to be out of the country for about a week. (Page iv)

4. Iraq: Negotiations of Iraq Petroleum Company with Qasim regime. (Page iv)

5. Jordan: Vocal opposition to King's impending marriage subsides. (Page v)

7. USSR: Venus probe launched 12 February to reach vicinity of planet about 19 May. (Page v)

8. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page vi)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Iran: The Shah and a party of 19 left for an official visit to Norway on 17 May, and he is expected to be out of the country for about a week. Before leaving, the Shah appointed a regency council to rule in his absence consisting of Prime Minister Amini and Minister of Court Ala, and two members of the royal family, Prince Gholam Reza and Prince Abdol Reza.

Princess Ashraf, the Shah's twin sister, is reported to have left Iran on 14 May. Some of the royal family, particularly the two princes on the regency council, will presumably remain in Tehran at least until the Shah returns from Norway. Some of the Shah's unpopularity results from the intrigues and financial manipulations of the royal family, and their elimination from the scene would help further the image of a reformed government which Amini is attempting to create.

The Watch Committee at its meeting on 17 May reached the following conclusion concerning Iran:
The implementation of reforms by the Amini government will at least temporarily result in a period of increased political instability. The opportunity for reaction to these reforms may be enhanced during the absence of the Shah.
Note: While the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, agree that there is a continuing danger of a military coup in Iran, they do not believe that this danger is as great as it was several weeks ago or that it is materially accentuated by the absence of the Shah on a brief trip to Europe.

Iraq-Oil: Prime Minister Qasim apparently views recent conciliatory moves by the Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) to resume negotiations as indicating company weakness. He may now attempt to enforce his government's demands for more revenue and part ownership of the company. Qasim responded to IPC Board Chairman Lord Monckton's personal letter of 30 April by publicly castigating "the avaricious, monopolist-imperialist companies which suck the blood and wealth of the

18 May 61     DAILY BRIEF     iv
[PAGE 09]
peoples" and which fear losing "the wealth upon which they have preyed for a number of years." The IPC appealed to the British Foreign Office for assistance on 9 May.

Jordan: There is continuing ferment in Jordan as a result of King Husayn's engagement to an Englishwoman, but talk of wholesale cabinet resignations and of widespread disaffection within the army has abated. The King's supporters have discontinued their efforts to get him to change his mind in view of his determination to carry out his plans. A newly organized Royal Armored Force commanded by the King's uncle, Sharif Nasir, probably will be able to control any disturbances that might develop at the time of the wedding, on or about 25 May. Anti-regime political elements like the Baath party now apparently favor the marriage because of the ultimate advantage it could afford them.

USSR: The Soviet interplanetary probe launched on 12 February is expected to reach the vicinity of Venus on or about

18 May 61     DAILY BRIEF     v
[PAGE 10]
19 May. If this space ship passes within about 60,000 miles of Venus, as Moscow claims it will, it will be a major technical achievement. The USSR admitted several months ago, however, that no communications had been received from the probe during the regular transmission period on 27 February, and Moscow's silence on the subject thereafter suggests that no further communications have been received. The USSR may therefore have no way to confirm the probe's trajectory. The contribution of this space operation to scientific knowledge of Venus and its environment will be nil unless communications can be re-established. Soviet descriptions and photographs indicate that the probe is equipped with directional long-range communications equipment. Despite the failure to communicate at relatively close range, the USSR may be able to reactivate this equipment as the vehicle reaches the vicinity of Venus.

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No change from last week.

B. No change from last week.

E. IRAN: Carried on Page iv of the Daily Brief.

18 May 61     DAILY BRIEF     vi
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
TOP SECRET
