3. Establishment of interim government in Greece now appears unlikely:
Opposition leader Papagos has prevented formation of the proposed interim government by his refusal to participate in a vote of confidence. The King's political adviser, Vendiris, had insisted that without the support of all the parties an interim government could not carry out economic and other reforms.

Comment: Papagos fears that a vote of confidence in an interim government would enable it to remain in power indefinitely. Consequently he has refused to take part in such a vote.

Indications are that the present government will continue to function for the time being with decreasing effectiveness in the face of a deteriorating economic situation and increasingly bitter opposition from Papagos' Greek Rally Party.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Reactions to the US proposal for rapid completion of Western defense treaties:
The British, Dutch and French Governments are reacting negatively to a United States suggestion that both the Allied-German contractual agreement and the European Defense Community treaty be signed on 9 May. They agree that the earliest possible date is 20 May.

The British Foreign Office thinks that no deadline should be set until negotiations are nearer completion. Furthermore, Britain will not sign the contractual agreement until the terms of the German financial contribution for defense purposes are settled.

Paris observes that the EDC treaty drafts may be completed by 30 April, but that the participating governments should have several weeks to review its provisions. The French Foreign Minister may stipulate that the British security guarantees extend to EDC nations only as long as they are EDC members.

Comment: Reaching accord on the terms of the German financial contribution to Western defense is the main barrier to early agreement on both the treaties. The Allied High Commissioners in Bonn believe that all other points in the contractual agreement will be settled by 30 April. The Netherlands has created an impasse in the EDC negotiations by insisting that the Federal Republic pay for all its defense costs.
