[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

10 August 1960
Copy No. C 73

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran: The obvious rigging of the current parliamentary elections and reports of disorders in several provincial constituencies suggest that extensive security precautions will be necessary to assure order when elections are held in Tehran. In spite of warnings that he should disassociate himself from the election irregularities, the Shah appears determined to continue the arranged election of government-approved candidates. It seems certain that the Shah and the government will be further weakened in consequence.

Turkey: The compulsory retirement of nearly 90 percent of the general and flag officers in the Turkish armed forces has caused some initial disorganization and confusion within the military headquarters. The impact of the program on the armed services and their relations with American military representatives will probably not be fully apparent for some time. The forced retirement program may soon be extended to the civil ministries.

Israel-UAR: A new incident in the dispute over Israeli shipping via the Suez Canal could develop when the West German merchant ship Klostertor, now believed under Israeli charter, leaves Haifa on 10 August and attempts to pass through the canal en route to Japan. UAR sensitivity on this issue was recently reaffirmed by Nasir, who asserted hotly that the UAR alone would determine policy on the canal.
[PAGE 05]
LATE ITEMS

*The Situation in the Congo: Premier Tshombé's decision not to oppose the entry of UN troops into Katanga probably stemmed from his belief that a Belgian troop withdrawal was inevitable and from indications that sentiment for a Congo confederation such as he had espoused was increasing elsewhere in the Congo. Tshombé has charged the Belgians with "having brought us into all our difficulties," suggesting that he feels abandoned by Brussels and forced to negotiate with the UN and Leopoldville as best he can.

The Belgian cabinet met on 9 August, reportedly to establish a timetable for a Belgian withdrawal from Katanga. It remains unclear whether Brussels will also evacuate its base at Kamina; Brussels may avoid any explicit statement concerning the status of this base in the hope that the Lumumba government may fall and be succeeded by a more moderate regime.

A UN occupation of Katanga would serve to mute somewhat the strident criticism of both the Belgians and the UN by Congo Premier Lumumba. On his return to Leopoldville on 8 August, Lumumba declared a state of emergency throughout the Congo, threatened to lead the Congo "army" personally in an invasion of Katanga, and delivered to the Belgian ambassador an ultimatum to leave the Congo. The Belgian emissary had stayed in Leopoldville in a private capacity after Lumumba broke off diplomatic relations with Brussels.

According to the American Embassy in Leopoldville, the endorsement by the Abako of a confederation government on 8 August could presage a coup against the Lumumba regime around 10 to 15 August. The embassy reports that several tribal groups, political parties, and labor groups are united in favoring a Congo confederation, and will attempt to displace Lumumba in favor of a more moderate figure.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Widespread Election Rigging in Iran Weakens Shah and Government

The Shah's much-publicized plans for "free" election of government-approved candidates during the current parliamentary elections in Iran seem to have broken down. The Melliyun party headed by Prime Minister Eqbal is running well ahead of the nominal opposition Mardom party, as planned, but the obviousness of the rigging and reports of disorders in several provincial constituencies suggest that extensive security precautions will be necessary when elections are held in Tehran.

The clumsiness of the government's efforts to ensure the proper results--about 2 to 1 in favor of the progovernment party--will alienate many who would have been willing to accept limited-choice elections. Increased intriguing against the government and Shah can be expected and will probably find a broader basis of support in the future.

10 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
Turkish Military Retirements

The Turkish revolutionary regime has extended its major military shake-up by announcing the imminent retirement of 70 percent of the colonels and 15-20 percent of the majors and their equivalents in the armed forces. Almost 90 percent of Turkey's general and flag officers were retired with practically no warning on 3 August by decree of the ruling National Unity Committee (NUC). Diplomatic circles in Ankara now are speculating that the "purge" will soon be extended to the civil government, where there have been charges that some ministries lack "dynamic leadership."

The early reaction in Turkey to the forced retirement program has been mostly one of apprehension. Those pensioned have been described by American military representatives as "still in a state of shock."

Field-grade officers--who themselves face an uncertain military future, as approximately 2,000 are soon to be retired--appear jubilant over their chances for promotion. Individually they seem to believe that others will go but not themselves. Civilians for the most part appear doubtful over the true meaning and possible extent of the "purge."

The broad shake-up, which entails major shifts and removal of key personnel, has allowed no period for adjustment and will require wholesale reorganization of some military activities. In the Turkish Map Service, for example, no officer is left who has had previous contact with the US Army Map Service. Future activities involving foreign liaison will be at a standstill in many areas of activity until the air clears.

The general attitude of Turkish leaders in developing and implementing this program demonstrates the determination of the revolutionary regime to act with greater independence than its predecessor.

10 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Israeli Chartered Ship to Attempt Transit of Suez Canal

A new incident in the dispute over Israeli shipping via the Suez Canal could develop when the West German merchant ship Klostertor, now believed under Israeli charter, leaves Haifa on 10 August and attempts to pass through the canal en route to Japan. The ship may carry some cargo from Haifa which would be subject to confiscation by the UAR.

The Klostertor has been on the Arab blacklist of ships which trade with Israel since 9 March, but such blacklisting, which deprives affected ships of services and facilities at Arab ports, would not necessarily bar it from the canal. If, however, the UAR believes the ship is chartered by an Israeli firm or by any firm in which Israelis own an interest, the ship almost certainly will be prohibited from the canal, in accordance with previous UAR policy. The ship most recently involved in this dispute, the Greek-owned Astypalea, was released on 10 April after nearly five months of detention at Port Said for attempting to carry cement through the canal under Israeli charter.

UAR sensitivity on the issue has recently increased as a result of platform statements by American political parties urging free navigation of the canal. Nasir responded in a speech on 26 July by asserting that the UAR's canal policy will be determined by the UAR alone.

Cairo's press and radio also charged last week that a "new plot" was revealed at the International Transport Workers' Federation conference in Bern, where a resolution was adopted calling for joint measures against the UAR if it does not refrain from interfering with freedom of navigation in the Suez Canal. A Cairo newspaper attributes the resolution to American sponsorship, although Swiss sources in Bern say the initiative for it came from the Danish delegation. The Danes apparently are still upset over UAR treatment of the Inge Toft, a Danish ship which was held at Port Said from May 1959 until 9 February 1960, when its Israeli cargo was unloaded and the ship released.

10 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
