Cuban Government Changes Increase Leftist Power

The shake-up in high government posts on 26 November is a further important step in the leftist trend that has been accelerating in Cuba for the past three months. Ambassador Bonsal sees it as stressing Fidel Castro's commitment to extreme leftist policies and his growing receptivity to guidance by Communist-oriented elements.

Ernesto "Che" Guevara, new head of the National Bank, now will be in a position to determine the allocation of foreign exchange and thus implement his precept that to achieve true independence Cuba must shift the pattern of its trade away from dependence on the United States. He laid the basis for expanded trade contacts during a three-month trip last summer to nine Afro-Asian countries and Yugoslavia. Guevara is likely also to be instrumental in implementing Castro's long-planned nationalization of private banking in Cuba. The 31-year-old Guevara, an Argentine by birth, is one of the 12 survivors of Castro's original landing force that launched the two-year guerrilla war. Castro relies heavily on him for advice. Guevara's economic knowledge is basically weak and colored by his concept of the Cuban revolution as a class struggle in which the government, in alliance with the peasant and worker classes, must "change the economic panorama" of the country and its social system.

The new minister of public works, Capt. Osmani Cienfuegos, is probably a Communist. He has served since last March as director of the Cuban Army's indoctrination program. The new minister for the recovery of misappropriated assets, Lt. Commander Rolando Diaz, is a naval officer of unknown political orientation.

The three officials replaced are relative moderates. The remaining moderate officials, including the ministers of finance and communications, have lost virtually all influence and are almost certain soon to be replaced. They are convinced that Cuba is rapidly headed for economic collapse and a Communist take-over.

28 Nov 59 Page 5
