Ethiopia Considering Soviet Aid for Agricultural Program

Ethiopia's Emperor Haile Selassie is reported considering a Soviet offer to assist his ambitious agricultural development program. The Emperor discussed land reform with officials in Moscow last summer and at that time accepted a $100,000,000 Soviet line of credit, part of which presumably will be utilized to develop Ethiopia's primitive but potentially rich agricultural resources.

The Emperor, who has long sought to modernize agriculture in Ethiopia and thereby increase the living standard of his 16,000,000 subjects, first announced the development program on 28 August following his return from visits to Moscow and Prague. A major item in the program, which is still in the formulation stage, would make available 50,000,000 acres of government-owned land on both a cooperative and an individual settlement basis. The program apparently also envisages providing the services of agricultural technicians and government-sponsored experimental farm projects, in addition to liberal credit terms both for purchasing land and for securing technical advice.

While Moscow is anxious to begin implementation of its economic aid agreement with Ethiopia, it is unlikely that the Soviet Union has offered to finance and assume responsibility for the whole land reform program. The USSR probably has offered, however, to furnish agricultural equipment and technical assistance. Haile Selassie, aware of Western concern over Soviet aid to Ethiopia, may hope the offer will attract increased Western--particularly US--interest.

The composition of the Soviet delegation now in Addis Ababa indicates that Moscow probably will also offer to aid Ethiopia in exploiting its gold mines and in constructing an oil refinery. The Soviet credit will probably also be used to develop light industry, including such projects as a pharmaceutical plant.

A Czech mission which arrived in Addis Ababa on 5 November is discussing with Ethiopian officials implementation of an economic aid credit reportedly amounting to $20,000,000.

28 Nov 59 Page 4
