Bulk of Vietnamese in Thailand Ask Repatriation

Hanoi can be expected to take maximum propaganda advantage of the decision of about 90 percent--over 45,000--of the Vietnamese refugees living in Thailand to request repatriation to North Vietnam. Recent broadcasts from Hanoi have announced the formation of welcoming committees to receive refugees from abroad, and intercepted messages indicate that detailed plans are being prepared for their settlement. The messages suggest that North Vietnamese authorities intend, where possible, to integrate returnees by requiring them to join relatives who are members of the armed forces or civil functionaries--especially those associated with state farms.

Hanoi has carried on a lengthy propaganda campaign among the refugees to encourage repatriation and recently began beaming special broadcasts to northern Thailand. Hanoi's broadcasts have reportedly been the only information medium available in many refugee areas. The repatriation program is scheduled to be completed in mid-1962, but the American Embassy in Bangkok doubts that Hanoi will carry out the agreement in good faith.

the first group of 1,000 repatriates is scheduled to leave for Haiphong on 5 January 1960. Members of this group have already disposed of their property, according to Thai press reports, and Thai Red Cross officials are making arrangements for their transportation to the port of Bangkok. Travel facilities from Bangkok have not yet been arranged, but the North Vietnamese Red Cross "advisers" in Bangkok are reported to be satisfied with the repatriation proceedings to date.

These developments will further disturb relations between Thailand and South Vietnam, which have been strained since the Thai - North Vietnamese Red Cross agreement on repatriation was concluded last August. South Vietnam, which claims legal jurisdiction over the Vietnamese refugees in Thailand, holds that Bangkok's actions are affording Hanoi a gratuitous psychological victory.

28 Nov 59 Page 1
