[PAGE 01]
22 April 1959
Copy No. C 03

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Tibet: Rebels in southeastern Tibet are being hard pressed by Communist forces using aircraft and artillery.

rebel forces consider most of the southeast area lost. A large group of armed Khamba tribesmen and other Tibetans are reported to be camped near the Indian border. They are short of food and ammunition and are said to be under constant Chinese Communist attack. They hope to obtain permission to proceed into India near the point where the Dalai Lama entered.

[PAGE 04]
III. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions were to be used in context with SNIE 100-2-59 (24 February 1959) and with the review of that estimate in SNIE 100-2/1-59 (17 March 1959):

1. There are as yet no clear indications of specific Soviet tactics at Geneva, but there have been several recent indications that the USSR will be prepared to discuss some issues other than a German peace treaty and Berlin, particularly security and disengagement proposals.

22 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
3. The USSR will not turn over access controls to the GDR in the near future. However, the physical transfer of access controls could be accomplished with little or no advance warning.

4. Indications of Soviet responses to possible Western actions in the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade remain consistent with the judgments stated in SNIE 100-2-59.

6. There are no significant changes in the West Berlin situation.

22 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: Moscow's note of 21 April to Bonn, charging that measures to equip West German forces with nuclear weapons are designed to confront forthcoming East-West negotiations with a fait accompli, is a further Soviet move to discredit the Adenauer government and set the stage for Soviet proposals for a nuclear-free zone in Europe in the talks. The warning that negotiations will be doomed to failure if Bonn persists in its rearmament program is another step in Moscow's effort to establish in advance the rationale and justification for unilateral actions regarding Berlin and a separate peace treaty with East Germany in the event the talks fail. By focusing attention on the controversial issue of arming West Germany with modern weapons, the Soviet leaders are seeking to sharpen differences among the Western allies on the eve of the foreign ministers' conference.

22 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 09]
