[PAGE 01]
17 November 1953

Copy No. 84

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 36
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
[] DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 20/12/79 REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Yugoslavia states terms for conference on Trieste (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
2. Comment on Nehru's opposition to rumored US-Pakistani military pact (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Little prospect for early resumption of Suez base talks (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
4. New MIG-15's observed near Czech aircraft factory (page 4).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Yugoslavia states terms for conference on Trieste:
The Yugoslav note of 15 November accepted a five-power conference on Trieste in principle but rejected any handing over of the civil administration to Italy as a prejudgment in Italy's favor. Belgrade proposed a pre-conference meeting of experts to discuss conditions and preparations for a conference.

The sense of Yugoslavia's reply, according to Ambassador Riddleberger, is that it will attend a pre-conference meeting only if there is no prior introduction of further Italian officials into Zone A. Belgrade is prepared, however, to discuss the appointment of such administrators prior to a full-dress conference or even during the pre-conference meeting itself, "once the purely symbolic character of such officials has been demonstrated."

SOUTH ASIA

2. Comment on Nehru's opposition to rumored US-Pakistani military pact:
Indian prime minister Nehru's outburst on 15 November against a rumored military pact between Pakistan and the United States reflects his concern over the possible appearance in South Asia of a military power rivaling India. It also illustrates his fear that any display of Western military interest in Pakistan would lead the Orbit to put additional pressure on the area and increase the possibility of World War III.

Nehru's admission that negotiations between Pakistan and the United States are "none of our concern" and that India would not interfere if Pakistan wished to "give up its independence" indicates that he is nonetheless aware of his inability to prevent or counteract such a pact.
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Little prospect for early resumption of Suez base talks:
The announcement of changes in the British delegation is additional evidence that there is little prospect of an early resumption of the Anglo-Egyptian talks on the Suez base which have been suspended since 21 October. General Robertson, special military delegate, will return to London this week; and Ambassador Stevenson, who has been on sick leave since May, will replace Charge Hankey in the negotiations in mid-December.

While Britain was not willing to accept the Egyptian proposal for formal termination of the talks four weeks ago, the withdrawal of the two top negotiators makes it unlikely that the British delegation will be prepared to resume discussion soon.

The Nagib regime, stung by Eden's charges of meddling in the Sudanese elections, apparently also wishes postponement until election returns are completed sometime in December.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. New MIG-15's observed near Czech aircraft factory:
The American air attache in Prague observed 50 new MIG-15's on an airfield near the Rudy Letov jet aircraft factory on 12 November. All had Czech air force markings and appeared ready for early delivery.

The jet fighter strength of the Czech air force increased from 80 MIG-15's on 1 November 1952 to an estimated
[PAGE 05]
215 MIG-15's on 1 November 1953. This is the largest number of jet fighters in any Satellite air force. The report suggests that the Czech air force has been further strengthened and that the production of MIG-15's in Czechoslovakia is being maintained at least at the previously estimated rate of 23 per month.
