Iranian Ambassador Sees No Hope for Improved Iranian-Soviet Relations

Iranian Ambassador Masud-Ansari in Moscow reviewed his unsuccessful efforts to improve Iranian-Soviet relations and concluded that there was no use in discussing the subject further with Soviet officials. He said the Soviet Union maintains that "normal friendly" relations could be re-established only if Tehran would give a written assurance that no military bases or missile sites will be established in Iran. Masud Ansari concluded by saying that perhaps he should be replaced by someone more acceptable to the Soviet Union.

The USSR's propaganda assaults on the Shah and Iran's policies are continuing, despite Deputy Foreign Minister Pavlov's statement to Ansari on 9 February that Khrushchev had ordered Radio Moscow to stop its "offensive statements." Soviet officials suggested in late February through a neutral diplomat that if the Iranian Government would take the initiative in proposing an exchange of high-level visits, the "improved atmosphere" could enable Moscow to stop its radio propaganda. Khrushchev had accused Iran of interpreting earlier Soviet concessions as a sign of weakness.

The Shah, for his part, has expressed a willingness to give Moscow written assurances not to permit foreign long-range or intermediate-range missile bases. However, he does hope to get defensive ground-to-air missiles and would not agree to a blanket ban on all missiles. Tehran is apparently convinced that an immediate improvement in relations is unlikely. It has resumed its Russian-language broadcasts from Tehran for the first time in 18 months and has reactivated the National Defense Organization to organize anti-Soviet demonstrations throughout the country.

Masud-Ansari was sent to Moscow in late 1958, apparently in the hope that he would be able to improve Iranian-Soviet relations because of his well-known pro-Russian sympathies--he spent his childhood in Russia and his first wife was Russian. He has been described as a cautious, uncourageous man who is incapable of objective judgment when the USSR is concerned.
