GENERAL

1. US Embassy in Moscow claims Soviet intentions unaffected by year's setbacks:

In its preliminary annual report on Soviet intentions, Embassy Moscow notes that the USSR is employing separately and in combination political, psychological, economic and military weapons in the prosecution of a total war against the free world. The Embassy anticipates that the Soviet Government, in carrying out its present policy, is prepared to incur major risks of precipitating global hostilities. However, probably because the Soviet leaders are presently uncertain of victory in war, they wish to avoid committing their own armed forces. Instead, they prefer to apply continued pressures of the types mentioned, believing this will eventually create a situation more favorable to "engaging their ultimate weapon." Nevertheless the Embassy, and particularly the service attaches, feel that the USSR's present relative military strength, which will be diminished in the future as a result of Western defense efforts, could lead the Soviet Government to "cast the die without delay." The Embassy feels that Korea and the implementation of the North Atlantic Treaty have been setbacks to the USSR during the past year, but concludes that maintenance of the present uneasy balance and eventual improvement of the situation depend on Western determination and unity in rapidly increasing resistance forces to the extent necessary to convince the Politburo of the inevitable disaster of a military adventure. The Embassy is convinced that Western Europe is still the center of danger for the US, but that threats to Asia and the Middle East are of "serious import."

2. UK Foreign Office fears impact of possible Soviet break at Paris talks:

A high UK Foreign Office official has expressed to the US Embassy in London his fears that the Gromyko propaganda blast in the 25 April meeting of the Deputy Foreign Ministers in Paris may be the prelude to the Soviets' breaking off the agenda talks to the tune of violent accusations against the intransigence of the West. The official
