Congo: The 2,300-man addition to India's UN contingent has disembarked at Dar es Salaam, Tanganyika, and the first planeloads of troops are expected shortly in Katanga. In view of Tshombé's warnings against the reinforcement of UN forces in Katanga, Hammarskjold is considering sending UN military commander McKeown or his deputy to assume personal command of UN forces there.

Gizenga's representative in Cairo, Pierre Mulele, has advised Stanleyville that, while arms and ammunition are available in Cairo, "We do not know how to send them to you." With respect to aircraft, Mulele reported that "the friends" had agreed to provide two to four IL-18s, but only if scheduled flights to Stanleyville could be arranged. He added that "if you can obtain for us an authorization to fly over the Sudan, the planes will reach you in 24 hours."

Meanwhile, Gizenga has continued to leave the door open for a meeting with representatives of the Leopoldville government. Gizenga reportedly has suggested Addis Ababa, Berlin, or Athens as acceptable sites for a meeting.

Angola-Portugal: Terrorist activity in the area north of Luanda is continuing in the face of a steady Portuguese military build-up. According to the Portuguese news agency, "thousands" of Africans attacked a village about 100 miles northeast of Luanda but were driven off with heavy casualties by the small garrison there. Disorders have also been reported in Cabinda. The outgoing overseas minister in Lisbon told Ambassador Elbrick that the situation is very grave and is not improving. He said that the residents of Angola were very nervous and that additional troops were being dispatched. Provincial authorities are calling for volunteers and are beginning to mobilize reservists.

Lisbon instructed the Portuguese Embassy in Cape Town to purchase 500 twenty-pound bombs from the South African Government.

In Portugal, Salazar has been reshuffling the military supporters of ex-Defense Minister Moniz, following the cabinet changes of 13 April. (Backup, Page 3)

15 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF  ii
