[PAGE 01]
13 December 1960
DOCUMENT NO. 37

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
13 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Moslem demonstrations in Algeria bring strong repressive measures from French Army. (1)

Congo—Nehru resists pressure for withdrawal of Indian units from UN Congo operation; Mobutu's delay in initiating military action against pro-Lumumbists in Orientale Province brings criticism from Leopoldville commissioners. (2)

Laotian King Savang ousts Souvanna Phouma government and turns powers over to General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee; USSR steps up delivery of military supplies to Vientiane. (3)

III. THE WEST

Castro regime, faced with growing resistance inside Cuba, taking stronger measures to suppress it. (4)

Ecuador to exchange diplomatic missions with Czechoslovakia. (5)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algeria-France: Violent Moslem demonstrations, which entered their third day on 12 December, have brought strong repressive measures from the French Army. De Gaulle's decision to return to Paris a day earlier than planned may have been based on his view that his continued presence in Algeria would only encourage further Moslem-European clashes. Reports of an imminent emergency cabinet meeting, however, suggest new moves from Paris. (Page 1)

Congo: Despite the position taken by Yugoslavia, Indonesia, Morocco, Guinea, and the UAR to withdraw their troops from the Congo, Prime Minister Nehru is firmly resisting pressure from most of his cabinet and other influential Indians for a withdrawal of Indian officials and military units from the UN Congo operation. He remains convinced that the UN offers the only hope for preventing "another Korea," and feels its present untenable position must be strengthened immediately. New Delhi has instructed its embassy in Cairo to protest against UAR press criticism of the alleged partisan attitude of Indian representatives in the Congo.

The situation in the Stanleyville area remains tense, and Mobutu's delay in initiating military operations against pro-Lumumba forces there has aroused criticism from the commissioners general in Leopoldville who have been handling government affairs as technicians on an interim basis. The commissioners are reported also concerned over the condition of some government troops who lack sufficient ammunition, food, and transportation.

(Page 2)
[PAGE 05]
The Situation in Laos: King Savang in Luang Prabang signed on 12 December a royal ordinance ousting the Souvanna Phouma government and temporarily transferring all powers to General Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. This action followed a National Assembly vote of no confidence against Souvanna, taken at a meeting in Savannakhet; it appears that the deputies will soon go to Luang Prabang, where the King has convoked a special session of the assembly to deal with the formation of a new government. The most likely choice to be the new premier is Prince Boun Oum, co-leader with Phoumi of the Revolutionary Committee. Phoumi himself will probably be assigned major portfolios, including in all likelihood that of defense.

Meanwhile, reports of increased Pathet Lao military pressure in the Luang Prabang area may indicate an intent to harass or capture the royal capital. On 12 December, the "Supreme Command of the Pathet Lao armed forces" broadcast an order which, in addition to calling for expanded guerrilla warfare throughout Laos and for cooperation in the defense of Vientiane, directed Pathet Lao units to join in a move to "rescue the King and liberate Luang Prabang." Three columns of Pathet Lao are reported to be advancing northward toward Luang Prabang and may now be only 20 miles or so away. Other Pathet Lao elements are believed to be located to the north and northeast of Luang Prabang. The pro-Phoumi garrison at Luang Prabang has been weakened by the withdrawal of three companies of paratroopers for use in the Vientiane area.

The buildup of both Kong Le's and Phoumi's forces in and around Vientiane is continuing. Soviet IL-14s reportedly delivered from four to six 120-mm. mortars for Kong Le on 12 December; in addition to the howitzers brought in the day before, four 90-mm. antiaircraft guns have also been brought in; a minimum of two howitzers and all of the antiaircraft guns are said to be in place along the Pak Sane road and at the Vientiane airfield. The Soviet airlift capacity from Hanoi may be augmented.

Quinim Pholsena, self-styled head of the Vientiane government, is seeking through various avenues a truce between the Kong Le and

13 Dec 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Phoumi forces. He claimed, however, that the USSR was prepared to send in additional forces if needed, and warned that he would give orders to bomb [redacted], Thailand, if Phoumi's troops fired on Vientiane.

Hanoi, seizing on [redacted] arms request as a pretext, may become much more open in supporting the Pathet Lao and in attempting to strengthen the Communist position in the two northern provinces of Phong Saly and Sam Neua. While a 12 December North Vietnamese "appeal to Geneva Convention participants for measures to stop foreign intervention and support Souvanna Phouma may be used to justify such assistance, it may also be part of a bloc effort to bring the Laotian situation before an international forum. [redacted] on 10 December [redacted] that the primary purpose of his trip to [redacted] was to gather material for presenting charges in the Security Council of US interference in Laos[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

III. THE WEST

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Cuba: The Castro regime, faced with growing but still uncoordinated resistance inside Cuba, is taking ever stronger measures to suppress it. Guevara, speaking in Moscow on 10 December, declared that "counterrevolutionary terror will be met with equal terror" and implied that "the great majority of Cuba's [redacted] organized into a single political party[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]. (Page 4)

Ecuador-Czechoslovakia: Foreign Minister Chiriboga has announced that a Czech legation will be opened in Quito shortly and that Ecuador will establish a diplomatic mission of the same rank in Prague next February. The former Ponce regime ordered the closure in September 1957 of the Czech legation—the only bloc mission in Quito—without severing relations, but generated accreditation to a Czech minister in Brazil a few weeks before its new administration was inaugurated on 1 September. The leftist Ecuadoran minister of education recently returned from Prague where he entered into a preliminary agreement to purchase about $600,000 in technical equipment for schools
[PAGE 07]
and received a Czech offer to provide a $10,000,000 loan. Although the reopening of the Czech mission in Quito may be a normal outgrowth of these recent economic and diplomatic moves, it appears timed to reinforce the threats of President Velasco, Chiriboga, and other top officials to turn to the bloc and Cuba to win support for Ecuador's concerted campaign to nullify the Rio Protocol. The protocol provides for the definitive settlement of the long-standing boundary dispute with Peru and grants a favorable territorial award to the latter.

13 Dec 60    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]
The Algerian Situation

Moslem demonstrations in Algiers entered their third day on 12 December as French troops fired on a mob attempting to leave the Moslem quarter, killing at least six. Moslem civilians in the city are becoming more open in their support of the rebel National Revolutionary Front (FLN). The vehemence of the Moslem demonstrations undercuts the settler claim that the Moslems want to remain French, and the efforts of the colons to retain a privileged position are likely to become more desperate.

De Gaulle's decision to return to Paris on 13 December—a day early—may have been based on a view that his continued presence in Algeria would only encourage further clashes between Moslems and Europeans and lead to further setbacks to his program for an amicable settlement on the basis of an "Algerian Algeria." Reports of an emergency cabinet meeting on his return suggest possible new moves from Paris. The Moslem-European clashes, absent in both the 1958 and January 1960 Algerian upheavals, will sharply increase left and center pressure in France for an accommodation with Moslem Algerians. However, the clashes may already have rendered a solution based on cooperative communities of Europeans and Moslems almost impossible.

The disturbances in Algeria are taking place at a moment when leaders of the FLN's military forces reportedly are planning a period of reduced activity in Algeria in order to familiarize their troops in Tunisia and Morocco with arms received from the Sino-Soviet bloc. In an effort to acquire greater respectability on the "day of victory," the rebels reportedly are also planning the creation of a tightly disciplined 2,000-man contingent which would be withheld from the present loosely organized guerrilla bands and would serve as a nucleus for an army of an independent Algeria.
[PAGE 09]
Nehru Resists Pressure for Indian Withdrawal
from Congo

Prime Minister Nehru is being subjected to growing pressure from most of his cabinet colleagues to withdraw Indian officials and military units from the UN Congo operation. He remains convinced, however, that the UN offers the only hope for preventing "another Korea" and that India must continue its supporting role in the Congo. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]The four senior cabinet ministers[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]] reportedly have argued that the Indian military and medical missions, as well as UN Representative Dayal, should be withdrawn because their presence implies support for Lumumba's authority and consequently may antagonize the incoming US administration. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]Other influential Indians[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]] reason that Lumumba is on the way out and continued UN and Indian presence in the Congo can only perpetuate a regime identified strongly with the Western powers.

Nehru reportedly has refused to change his stand, perhaps in part as a result of UN delegation leader Krishna Menon's urgent recommendation against withdrawal. Referring to the decisions of other nations to withdraw their forces—now including Yugoslavia, Indonesia, Morocco, Guinea, and the UAR—the prime minister stated on 12 December that a UN withdrawal from the Congo would lead to "complete chaos and perhaps a major war in Africa, and accordingly India will not pull out." Nehru warned Ambassador Bunker on 8 December, however, that the UN would have to get out of the Congo if its present weak position were not strengthened immediately. Further incidents involving Indian nationals would make it far more difficult for Nehru to resist pressure for withdrawal.

New Delhi recently instructed its embassy in Cairo to protest against UAR press criticism of the allegedly partisan attitude of Indian representatives in the Congo. The Ceylonese Government has announced that it will reconsider its decision to withdraw the small Ceylonese administrative contingent so long as the UN continues to uphold the legal authority of the
[PAGE 10]
Lumumba government. The Indonesian Government declared on 10 December that it would recall its 1,150-man force because Djakarta feels the UN is unable to carry out its assigned task, although the Indonesian foreign minister has privately indicated that this decision is subject to change.

The long-awaited visit of the UN's Conciliation Commission to the Congo is about to occur, although present plans call for an advance party of only three officers, led by Nigeria's representative Wachuku, to depart for Leopoldville on 13 December. The remaining members of the commission are to proceed only when so advised by Wachuku.

In Leopoldville Colonel Mobutu reportedly was criticized at a recent meeting of the commissioners, who are concerned over the low morale and generally bad situation of the Congolese National Army. The commissioners are worried over the condition of the troops in Luluabourg and Stanleyville, where there reportedly is not enough ammunition, food, or transport. Morale in the regular army is bad because of Mobutu's special attention to organizing a paratroop force. The Leopoldville commissioners are also dissatisfied with the delay in military operations against Stanleyville. An uneasy peace prevails in Stanleyville, but at any time the pro-Lumumba leaders and troops may engage in further harassment of Europeans. Within the past few days Ethiopian troops of the UN command have helped evacuate some 35 Europeans from the hinterland of Orientale Province.
[PAGE 11]
Castro Regime Reacts to Growing Resistance

The Castro regime, faced with growing but still uncoordinated resistance inside Cuba, is increasing its measures to combat it. Six Cubans were executed on 10 December on counterrevolutionary charges and more executions are expected. The civilian militia, though not invariably reliable, now rivals the regular armed forces as an instrument in suppressing dissident activity. It is composed largely of the lowest income groups, where loyalty to Castro is strongest.

Daily acts of sabotage and terrorism by opposition groups throughout the island. Militiamen in particular are frequently victims of the dissidents' terror tactics. Anti-Castro guerrilla operations have recently been subject to security action in at least three separate locations in Las Villas and Pinar del Rio provinces. Fidel Castro was personally directing operations against a guerrilla band on the north coast of Las Villas. Many of the guerrillas are deserters from Castro's army, some of whom have defected with arms.

The purging of the leaders of the electrical workers' union on 12 December will at least temporarily suppress the revolt of that union against domination by the Communist-controlled Confederation of Cuban Workers. The electrical workers' protest march on the Presidential Palace on 9 December was a rare show of defiance against Communist control, and resentment will continue to smolder among organized workers. Members of the electrical workers' union were evidently responsible for the bombings in Havana electrical installations late last month.

Che Guevara, speaking in Moscow on 10 December, declared that "counterrevolutionary terror will be met with equal terror." In saying "we are not yet united and organized into a single party," he implied that the regime will shortly seek to
[PAGE 12]
fulfill this project. It would serve further to strengthen police state controls and increase the scope of Communist entrenchment. At present, the Communists have the only organized party in the country.

Meanwhile, conclusion of a contract for ten Soviet AN-2 aircraft for delivery to Cuba in the first quarter of next year. These small planes, used in the Soviet Union for such jobs as rescue work and seeding, would be useful in Castro's antiguerrilla effort.
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 December 1960
