NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Comment on stalemate in Soviet-Iranian border and financial talks:

Soviet-Iranian talks on border and financial problems have been temporarily suspended to allow the Soviet delegation to obtain instructions from Moscow, according to the chief of the Iranian delegation. The Soviet ambassador left for Moscow on 21 January, apparently for consultation.

Although it was originally agreed that the talks would deal alternately with border and financial issues, the Soviet delegation apparently has declined to discuss the latter. Iranian states that the Iranian delegation asserted that it will not resume the talks until the USSR is ready to discuss them.

Iran reportedly was prepared to make claims for $38,000,000 and to ask for a revision of the border which would return to Iran some areas now claimed by the Soviet Union. It is unlikely that the USSR will make any significant border or financial concessions to the present Iranian government.

5. Henderson says supplementary financial aid to Iran will promote oil settlement:

Ambassador Henderson believes, and British charge Wright concurs, that extension of supplementary emergency financial aid to Iran would produce an atmosphere more favorable to the success of oil negotiations and the durability of any resulting agreement.

Henderson points out that if a settlement were reached with Britain while the United States was refusing assistance to Iran, it would be an invitation to Iranian demagogues to contend that an agreement had been signed only under economic duress.

Comment: Since the beginning of the oil dispute with Britain, many Iranians have maintained that the United States was withholding aid in order to force an agreement.

6. Iranian government reportedly suspends balloting in five districts:

The suspensions are explained on the grounds of "procedural irregularities." The real reasons appear to be resistance to government attempts to rig the elections, indecision concerning candidates to be supported, and conflicting political deals made by government-sponsored candidates without Tehran's knowledge.

Comment: The necessity of suspending balloting so early in the election period suggests that the government will not get a friendly Majlis as soon as it had expected. On the basis of this initial reaction, the elections will probably be drawn out, and the government may have to resort to even more obvious intervention in order to ensure the election of its candidates.
