[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
14 February 1961
Copy No. C 79
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 February 1961
CONTENTS
2. Berlin: East Germany bars West German church-
men from East Berlin. (Page 1)
3. Burma: Army leadership may shift toward a more
neutral position following recent purge of senior
officers. (Page 1)
4. Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: Federation
may break up on issue of African representation in
government of Northern Rhodesia. (Page 1)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 February 1961
Berlin: The East German action on 12 February bar-
ring seven West German bishops and other leading church-
men from attending religious services in East Berlin is
further evidence that the regime is not living up to its agree-
ment with the West Germans to relax controls on the Berlin
sector border. It was this agreement which was instrumen-
tal in inducing Bonn to reactivate the interzonal trade agree-
ment on 29 December. East Germany's action is the latest
in a series of steps toward the long-held goal of severing
remaining links between the Evangelical Church in East Ger-
many and its leaders in West Berlin and West Germany. While
[PAGE 05]
this move was probably taken with Soviet knowledge, it
does not appear to represent a shift from the Soviet
policy of avoiding a Berlin crisis at this time.
Burma: The recent purge of senior Burmese Army
officers favorably disposed toward the West has removed
the principal proponents of army resistance to Prime Min-
ister U Nu's policy of closer relations with Communist
China. One effect of this may be decreased receptivity
to United States materiel and training assistance. With
the removal of some of the army's most able commanders,
the government's anti-insurgent campaign may be adverse-
ly affected.
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: The outcome
of the current talks between Rhodesian and British officials
concerning constitutional changes which would increase
African influence in the British protectorate of Northern
Rhodesia may determine whether the Federation breaks up.
The Federation's prime minister reportedly has stated that
white-controlled Southern Rhodesia will leave the Federa-
tion if London insists, as now seems likely, on an African
majority in the legislature of Northern Rhodesia. The
American consul general in Salisbury views the next weeks
and months as critical.
*On 12 February the federal government called up North-
ern Rhodesian territorial reserves to be ready for possible
disorders, which may arise when London announces the new
constitution for Northern Rhodesia. Africans have held
large rallies and are reportedly ready to engage in violence
if their demands for franchise and representation are not
met.
14 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
East Germany Bars Churchmen From East Berlin
The religious services were held in connection with
the all-German Evangelical Church synod now meeting in
West Berlin. Past synod sessions in both East and West
Berlin have been attended by large numbers of ecclesias-
tics and laymen from both parts of the country. Prior to
scheduling this year's synod, East German churchmen
sounded out the regime on its attitude toward permitting
synod sessions in East Berlin. The chairman of the State
Office for Church Affairs indicated that the regime might
tolerate a "purely religious service" but under no circum-
stances would it permit a business meeting.
In a speech on 9 February East German party boss
Ulbricht made clear that his regime intended to use the
church meeting to drive a wedge between church members
in East and West Germany. He said that Bishop Dibelius
of Berlin-Brandenburg and other prominent churchmen
"have no business in the GDR or its capital." Nevertheless,
on 12 February Dibelius was permitted to attend the reli-
gious service in East Berlin, perhaps because he is a West
Berliner, rather than a West German, and the regime does
not see its way clear to bar West Berliners from the Soviet
sector at this time.
This is the second recent step to undercut the ties be-
tween the church in East and West Germany. On 12 January,
the Ulbricht regime announced that the Evangelical Church
would not be permitted to hold its congress (Kirchentag) in
East Berlin in July, on grounds that the selection of Berlin
for the meeting was intended as "provocation" and an occa-
sion for "revanchist outbursts." The regime offered to per-
mit the meeting in some East German city, such as Leipzig,
but flatly refused to guarantee that anyone desiring to attend
would be allowed to do so.
Earlier, East German officials sharply reduced the
financial aid which the church in West Germany is allowed
to transmit to East German congregations. The East Ger-
man people give lip service to the regime's objectives
but continue to adhere to the church as one of the few
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 11]
remaining ties with the West and the focal point for op-
position to Communism.
In view of the continuing East German harassing of
the movement of West Germans in Berlin, Bonn will
probably urge that NATO maintain its retaliatory re-
strictions on the travel of East Germans to NATO coun-
tries. Bonn, however, has thus far given no indication
that it intends to halt vital steel or machinery shipments
to East Germany in an effort to force the East Germans to
implement their 29 December pledge to stop requiring
passes for West Germans entering East Berlin.
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 12]
Adverse Effects of Burmese Army Shake-up
Two brigadiers and nine field-grade officers who were
ousted from their commands on 3 February included Burma's
most forceful advocates of an active army role in Burmese
politics. With Brigadier Maung Maung as their spokesman,
they comprised the pro-Western core of army leadership
and had pressed General Ne Win for an extension of the Ameri-
can military aid program under way since 1958. Many officers
remaining in the army share the views of those relieved, and
some, in protest against Ne Win's actions, reportedly plan
to avoid combat with Burma's various insurgent forces for
three to four months, which would allow internal security
to deteriorate seriously.
The American military aid program is in particular
jeopardy at this time, both because it was the special proj-
ect of Brigadier Maung Maung and because General Ne Win
sees it as a potential source of embarrassment with the
Chinese Communists. Ne Win is said to have argued that
while he is neither pro- nor anti-American, "the govern-
ment of Burma and the army cannot afford to be aligned
too closely with any non-socialist ideal whether it be
American or Communist."
A further factor affecting the stability of both the gov-
ernment and army in Burma is the marked disaffection of
the ethnic minority elements who feel they are discrimi-
nated against by the Burman majority. Added to the long-
standing Karen insurgency and the Shan dissidents, Chin
army officers have been reported prepared to mutiny a-
gainst their Burman superiors, and one Kachin unit has
deserted. Karens, Chins, and Kachins are upset by Bur-
mese plans to establish Buddhism as the state religion;
Kachin civilians recently rioted and stoned a train in pro-
test. Many Kachins in North Burma feel their elected lead-
ers are incapable of supporting their interests against the
Burmans. So strong is this feeling that one hereditary
chieftain was disowned by his following and recently com-
mitted suicide.
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 13]
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
The Federation, formed by Britain in 1953 of three de-
pendent areas in differing stages of political evolution, is ac-
corded the status of a self-governing territory handled by the
Commonwealth Relations Office as is the keystone territory,
Southern Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, on the
other hand, are under the control of the Colonial Office. Nego-
tiations concerning Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia
have been in progress recently.
A meeting at Salisbury between Southern Rhodesian offi-
cials including African representatives and Commonwealth Re-
lations Secretary Sandys has resulted in an agreement--subject
to British parliamentary approval and a Southern Rhodesian ref-
erendum in June. The agreement calls for a bill of rights in the
Southern Rhodesian constitution, a dual electoral roll system by
which in essence 70,000 white voters will elect 50 representa-
tives and some 50,000 Africans will elect 15 representatives,
and a constitutional council to safeguard civil rights with the
power to delay discriminatory legislation. In return for Rhode-
sian acceptance of these pro-African provisions, Britain is to
surrender its reserve powers to veto legislation affecting native
affairs--one of London's major powers over Southern Rhodesia.
The white segregationist Dominion party has refused to
agree to the proposals and will probably wage a bitter campaign
against such a settlement. To a lesser extent, there is some
dissatisfaction in African circles over the limited gains, and
the position of Joshua Nkomo, leader of the National Democrat-
ic party, may be weakened by the extremist faction.
The negotiations in London concerning Northern Rhodesia's
constitutional reform are proceeding less satisfactorily because
of differences over the extent of African participation in the
legislature. The Africans demand a clear majority in both the
Legislative and the Executive Council. In the Legislative Coun-
cil they now have nine members out of 30; in the Executive
Council, 2 out of 10. African delegates have warned that a
failure to reach a satisfactory solution "must lead to unrest"
in Northern Rhodesia. In preparation for the possibility of polit-
ical and/or racial disorders when Britain's Colonial Secretary
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 14]
Macleod announces a new constitution, reserve troops--pre-
dominantly white--were called up on 12 February in Northern
Rhodesia by the Federation's Ministry of Defense. This is the
first time the federal government has called up territorial
units without a specific request from a territorial government.
14 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Director, The Joint Staff
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 19]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
