[PAGE 01]
9 June 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SHEPILOV'S IMPENDING VISIT TO EGYPT

2. BOHLEN COMMENTS ON TITO VISIT TO MOSCOW
(page 4).

3. SUSLOV'S TRIP TO HUNGARY MAY DETERMINE RAKOSI'S
FUTURE

4. JAPANESE EXTEND LIMITED RECOGNITION TO SOVIET
MISSION

6. ASSASSINATION THREAT REPORTEDLY CAUSED RHEE TO
CANCEL ADDRESS

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. SHEPILOV'S IMPENDING VISIT TO EGYPT

Soviet foreign minister Shepilov's visit to Cairo on 18 June probably is intended by Moscow as a reaffirmation of Soviet support for the Arabs. Shepilov will also visit Syria.

Shepilov may press for Egyptian acceptance of the Soviet offer to finance the Aswan High Dam.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. BOHLEN COMMENTS ON TITO VISIT TO MOSCOW

Ambassador Bohlen reports that Tito during his visit has maintained the posture of a chief of state of an independent country and has refrained in his public statements from references to party matters. The Soviet leaders have treated this as a state-to-state visit in their public statements. At the negotiating table, however, Khrushchev, as party first secretary, has been seated as head of the delegation rather than Bulganin as chief of government.

A member of the Yugoslav delegation told Bohlen the Yugoslavs, although finding the Soviet leaders "dogmatic," had been impressed by their frankness, particularly in discussing their past mistakes. He told Bohlen that the two countries were very close on the German question, both favoring a rapprochement between the two German states, which he believed would be facilitated by some changes in the East German structure. He implied that in the Moscow talks so far there had been somewhat greater divergencies on certain other questions, possibly, according to Bohlen, the question of Satellite relations.

Bohlen notes that Shepilov has not figured prominently in the visit and is obviously outside the inner group. In view of Molotov's participation in the talks, Bohlen is becoming convinced that Molotov was replaced as foreign minister by common agreement or at his own request. He may have wished to avoid playing before Tito the role of mere technician which he as foreign minister has played in high-level negotiations during the past year.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. SUSLOV'S TRIP TO HUNGARY MAY DETERMINE
RAKOSI'S FUTURE

The arrival of Soviet presidium member Suslov in Budapest on 7 June coincides with a Hungarian central committee meeting reportedly convoked to discuss the problem of party factionalism. Suslov may be on a mission to settle Hungarian party first secretary Rakosi's future position. Suslov is believed to be responsible for relations with foreign Communist parties and reportedly was present at the Bulgarian central committee plenum which ousted Chervenkov. Rakosi, like Chervenkov, has been a target of Tito's criticism.

Rakosi has apparently retained power in the face of strong internal opposition only through open Soviet endorsement. His continued inability to cope with factionalism, and possibly demands by Tito in Moscow, may have forced a change in Soviet plans.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. JAPANESE EXTEND LIMITED RECOGNITION TO
SOVIET MISSION

The Japanese government has granted Soviet mission chief Sergei Tikhvinsky "limited recognition" as Moscow's official representative in fishery matters only. Tikhvinsky's reported acceptance of this status will open the way for the Japanese fishing fleet to obtain Soviet licenses for operation in Soviet restricted waters beginning 15 June, but it merely defers settlement of the larger question of relations with the USSR.

Japan, under the terms of the fishery pacts recently concluded in Moscow, is committed to restore diplomatic relations with the USSR. The principal political conflict which has developed in Tokyo centers on timing and method for resuming relations--whether to adopt the Adenauer formula of an immediate exchange of diplomats without a peace treaty or to attempt to negotiate a treaty.

Unexpected opposition within the government party, arising primarily from the former Yoshida faction, appears to have convinced the Hatoyama government that a drive for immediate relations might split the party. The cabinet decision to continue to seek a treaty and not abandon Japan's claims to the Southern Kurils apparently was made in recognition of popular coolness toward "selling territory for fish."

Prime Minister Hatoyama's faction has deferred the Japanese-Soviet issue until after the upper house elections in early July. Most Japanese, however, regard the resumption of diplomatic relations as inevitable.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. ASSASSINATION THREAT REPORTEDLY CAUSED RHEE
TO CANCEL ADDRESS

President Rhee failed to make his scheduled Memorial Day address on 6 June, reportedly because he had received information that he and Assembly Speaker Yi Ki-pung were in danger of assassination.

Comment

President Rhee's action reflects the atmosphere of tension which has prevailed in South Korea since the election. Vice-President-elect Chang Myon is also reported being heavily guarded.

Opposition assemblymen have demanded an investigation into the alleged use of bribes to secure the reelection on 8 June of Yi Ki-pung, Rhee's defeated vice-presidential running mate, as speaker of the assembly.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 8 June)

Israel has made an official protest to the UN Security Council over Egypt's continued blockade of the Suez Canal. The Israeli delegate to the UN stated that Egyptian authorities were detaining a Greek ship, the Pannagia, which was bound from Haifa to the Gulf of Aqaba port of Elat. The delegate said that this was of "special gravity at a time when the Security Council has just reaffirmed once again the need to re-establish full compliance with the general armistice agreements." Last February Israel imposed censorship on reports of Egyptian detention of another Greek ship on a similar trip, apparently to avoid an international political debate on the blockade at that time. This protest suggests that Israel, which indicated dissatisfaction with the recent Security Council resolution, intends to try to keep the Arabs on the defensive diplomatically and to continue to press for a settlement of the basic problems left unsettled by the Hammarskjold mission.

9 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11

[PAGE 12]
