[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
SUMMARY

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Yugoslavia presents bleak picture of food needs (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. France opposes Austrian Foreign Minister's visit to Bonn (page 5).
7. De Gasperi expected to make strong pronouncement on Trieste issue (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Yugoslavia presents bleak picture of food needs:

According to an official report presented to the American Embassy, the Yugoslav Government needs to import 1,180,000 tons of grain and is unable to pay for 680,000 tons of this total. The report shows corn production as only 71 percent of that in the drought year of 1950, and only 37 percent of that in the normal year of 1951.

Comment: The need, as presented, is approximately 2.5 times the amount received under the 1950 food aid program. From available information, both the crop loss and the import needs are much exaggerated in the Yugoslav figures, with even the government's own previous figures showing a far less pessimistic picture.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. France opposes Austrian Foreign Minister's visit to Bonn:

The French Foreign Ministry has urged the American and British Governments to discourage Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber from making his proposed visit to Bonn. The British Foreign Office is inclined to agree that the visit at this time would be "highly undesirable."

American officials in Vienna believe that in going to Bonn Gruber expects to "steal the thunder" of extreme rightists whose pan-German line is endangering the position of the conservative People's Party in western Austria.

Comment: This French move presumably reflects the chronic concern in Paris over closer Austro-German relations. Gruber's tendency toward independence in conducting Austria's foreign relations may be contributing to this concern.

7. De Gasperi expected to make strong pronouncement on Trieste issue:

The American Embassy in Rome reports that Premier de Gasperi is "taking a serious risk" in continuing to absorb public criticism on the Trieste issue. He will probably feel impelled to make a strong statement along nationalistic lines at the conclusion of the current parliamentary debate on the Foreign Ministry's appropriation bill.

[PAGE 06]
