[PAGE 01]
1 June 1952
Copy No. 53
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SOVIET UNION
1. Moscow Embassy comments on Soviet treatment of Koje incidents (page 3).
FAR EAST
2. South Korean Army move against Rhee suggested (page 4).
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Wafdists may try to force reopening of Egyptian Parliament on 3 June (page 5).
6. French reform program for Tunisia ready for initiation (page 5).
WESTERN EUROPE
7. Trieste Stalinists reportedly to adopt vigorous anti-fascist policy (page 6).
8. West German Government believes Allied-Russian talks unlikely (page 6).
9. French press for assurances on military production finances (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION
1. Moscow Embassy comments on Soviet treatment of Koje incidents:
Ambassador Kennan expects Soviet propaganda regarding alleged US atrocities on Koje to parallel the BW propaganda campaign. He points out that a mass meeting held in Moscow on 29 May to protest the "bloody outrages" of Americans in Korea is obviously only the first of country-wide meetings which will be designed to inculcate hatred toward Americans on the Soviet populace.

The vituperation showered upon the United States at the Moscow meeting, according to the Ambassador, surpassed that used against the Germans during the height of the last war, and, by its constant repetition, cannot fail to have an effect on the Soviet people.

FAR EAST
[PAGE 04]
4. South Korean Army move against Rhee suggested:
Former South Korean Prime Minister Chang Myun told American Charge Lightner on 29 May that Chief of Staff Lee and many other ROK Army officers have concluded that President Rhee is "a menace." Chang added that if General Van Fleet would unofficially permit the movement of one Korean division to Pusan, the military would "put things to right."

Lightner comments that Chang has been isolated in a US army hospital for several months but adds that former Defense Minister Yi Kipong is reportedly considering a similar plan, and his connections with General Lee and other military leaders are far closer than Chang's.

Comment: President Rhee told General Van Fleet on 27 May that Lee was "implicated" in a plot against the government and would have to be removed, but as yet no action has been taken. Lee's close relationship with the former Defense Minister is the probable motive for Rhee's action.

The ROK national police attempted on 31 May to arrest Chang Myun as the "number one Communist" but were thwarted by US military police guarding the hospital.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Wafdists may try to force reopening of Egyptian Parliament on 3 June:
The influential Wafd has been spreading rumors that it has decided to revive its antigovernment activities. It says that it will have deputies march to Parliament on 3 June, which it claims is the last day under the Constitution by which the now-dissolved Parliament must be called into session by the King.

The American Embassy in Cairo comments that the Egyptian police and army seem capable of handling any Wafdist challenge to the government's ability to maintain law and order.

Comment: A new wave of unrest provoked by the Wafd would adversely affect the Egyptian-Sudanese talks scheduled to begin 31 May. Sudanese delegates, already hostile to Egypt and suspicious of Egyptian intentions and political ability, might become more intransigent in their opposition to Farouk as King of the Sudan if they became first-hand witnesses of Egyptian political disturbances.

6. French reform program for Tunisia ready for initiation:
According to the French Resident General, France's reform program for Tunisia has been drafted and can be put into operation within ten days, if both the French and Tunisian Governments act promptly. American officials comment that the reform program is apparently the same as last March. The Resident General hopes actually to launch the reform program before the end of Ramadan on 23 June.

Comment: The reform program of last March, if not drastically amended by the French Cabinet, probably would be acceptable to most Tunisians. It provides for some increase in Tunisian autonomy, with France reserving absolute control over finances, defense and foreign affairs.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE
7. Trieste Stalinists reportedly to adopt vigorous anti-fascist policy:
Moscow has reportedly ordered the pro-Cominform Communist party in Trieste to abandon its defensive policy and adopt an offensive one. In preparation for this more positive campaign against the neo-fascists, a strong nucleus within the party is to be organized into action squads along military lines.

Comment: The recent strong electoral showing of the neo-fascists in both Italy and Trieste may have produced this Moscow reaction. From a tactical standpoint, however, the Communist position in Italy and Trieste would be strengthened by Christian Democratic defections to the right-wing parties.

8. West German Government believes Allied-Russian talks unlikely:
Leaders of all factions in the West German coalition now say that there is little possibility for any four-power talks at this time. According to one leader, the note is receiving scant attention because Moscow has killed the subject by repetition.

No informed German official believes that either the note or recent Soviet moves indicate that a war is imminent.

Comment: Recent statements by coalition leaders, together with the continued embarrassed silence of the opposition Social Democrats, are evidence that the Western powers have gained the initiative in the battle of notes.
[PAGE 07]
9. French press for assurances on military production finances:
French Defense Minister Pleven has told Secretary Acheson that the National Assembly would open its military debate on 10 June under "very unfavorable conditions" unless the government can present some idea of the level of American credits for military production in France in 1952-53.

Pleven fears that the Assembly might transfer funds to armament production to the detriment of other parts of the defense effort such as NATO installations because it is politically "inconceivable" that France should close armament plants just as German plants reopen.

Comment: The total appropriation for the French military budget has been voted, but the Assembly has yet to decide on its allocation.

American officials in Paris think that defense production in France is not only vital to the total NATO potential, but is also important if France is not to be dependent indefinitely on the United States.
