LATE ITEMS

*Republic of the Congo: Congolese police loyal to Premier Lumumba continue to patrol the African quarter of Leopoldville following anti-Lumumba demonstrations on 9 and 10 August. Lumumba, whose political position appears to have been weakened by the recent no-confidence vote against his administration by the Abako party, reportedly is planning a cabinet shake-up in order to displace his moderate ministers with leftists. The Abako--the best-organized party in the Leopoldville area, where Lumumba has little popular support--is opposed to the premier's concept of a highly centralized government.

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold, meanwhile, has told Katanga Premier Tshombé he will arrive in Elisabethville today, accompanied by military and civilian advisers and two Swedish companies of about 125 armed men each. He will not take a representative of the Lumumba government with him. In an apparent effort to curb inflammatory statements by Prime Minister Nkrumah of Ghana, Hammarskjold discussed the situation with him during a "refueling stop" in Accra en route to Leopoldville.

Hammarskjold hopes to call in the first large contingent of troops--Irish, Moroccan, and more Swedish--for Katanga on 14 August. He plans to return to Leopoldville on 15 August to begin negotiations with the Congolese and the Belgians on the disposition of Belgian bases.

The Belgians, in their pique at the UN, have characterized the maintenance of troops in their trust territory of Ruanda-Urundi as logistically dependent on retaining their Kamina base in Katanga; they have hinted that they might be obliged to abandon the Ruanda-Urundi trusteeship. Premier Eyskens announced on 11 August that he would request a vote of confidence on Belgium's Congo policies next week.

Soviet officials are continuing their attempts to stimulate among African countries dissatisfaction with UN efforts in the Congo. During his 10 August talks with Hammarskjold, however, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov agreed that the USSR would make all of its technicians for the Congo available through the UN.

12 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iv
