[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

1 July 1956
Copy No. 105

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. TITO COMMENTS ON HIS MOSCOW VISIT
(page 4).

3. ARGENTINA ORDERS MILITARY ALERT AGAINST POSSIBLE
DISTURBANCES

4. EGYPTIAN CABINET CHANGES

5. BELGIAN SENATE APPROVES PROPOSED VISIT OF PAR-
LIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PEIPING
(page 7).

6. USSR OFFERS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TO LAOS
(page 8).

[PAGE 04]
2. TITO COMMENTS ON HIS MOSCOW VISIT

President Tito told Ambassador Riddleberger on 29 June that Soviet leaders had not exerted any pressure on him during his Moscow visit and that the joint communiqué was largely the result of Yugoslav suggestions. He said that there was no discussion whatsoever of military relations, which would have been completely contrary to Yugoslav policy.

Tito is convinced that all Communist parties will eventually be free from Stalinist concepts and will reassert their right to dissent from Moscow, and that his policy of establishing bilateral contacts with all "Socialist" parties will help in accomplishing this end. He pointed to Togliatti's attitude as a clear indication of ferment in Western Communist parties and predicted more of these "positive developments." Tito cited Togliatti's visit to Belgrade and the result of his own trip to Moscow as contributing to these developments.

He said that for internal reasons Khrushchev must move slowly in revising Stalin's policies. He feels that Khrushchev has undoubtedly strengthened his position, but that Stalinist elements remain. Tito counseled patience and more contact on the part of the West with Soviet leaders, remarking that the "devil is sometimes not as black as painted."

[PAGE 05]
3. ARGENTINA ORDERS MILITARY ALERT AGAINST
POSSIBLE DISTURBANCES

The extensive security measures ordered by the Argentine government on 29 June reflect its concern over action by Peronista and nationalist elements, but the regime is believed capable of quelling any disturbances. Military units and the some 4,000 civilian commandos have been alerted and more than 150 persons arrested. This action follows recent terroristic attacks on the homes of high naval officers since the abortive revolt on 9-10 June.

While the regime's position was apparently strengthened for the immediate future by its quick action at that time, the attempted revolt and continued plotting re-emphasize the considerable political discontent, especially over the slow progress in the return to constitutional government. This discontent and widespread shock over the government's summary execution of rebels earlier this month apparently have given new impetus to the regime's consultations with political leaders regarding constitutional reform and scheduling elections.

[PAGE 06]
4. EGYPTIAN CABINET CHANGES

The changes in the Egyptian cabinet announced on 29 June have the primary effect of removing from top posts the members of the former Revolutionary Command Council (RCC). While the changes may give the regime a more moderate tone, they do not indicate any significant shift in the direction of Egyptian policy.

Gamal Salim, former deputy prime minister whose brother Salah Salim was forced to resign last year, and ex-minister of state Anwar Sadat have been noted for their extremely nationalistic and anti-Western manifestos. Hassan Ibrahim, the third RCC member dropped, reportedly was among those who strongly opposed Salah Salim's resignation. Little is known of the two new civilian appointees.

The officers who have been dropped presumably will be treated similarly to Salah Salim, who is now publishing a "controlled opposition" newspaper with funds supplied by the government. Nasr's careful treatment of such individuals indicates he is fully aware that they could form a nucleus for future army opposition to the regime.

[PAGE 07]
5. BELGIAN SENATE APPROVES PROPOSED VISIT OF
PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO PEIPING

Press reports that the Belgian Senate has approved the proposed visit of a Belgian parliamentary delegation to Communist China as well as to Taiwan indicate that the controversial trip to the Far East will almost certainly take place. It had been tentatively scheduled for September.

Foreign Minister Spaak had previously told Ambassador Alger that he could not intervene in an essentially parliamentary matter. Belgian motives in undertaking the trip are probably a mixture of curiosity, Liberal interest in trade possibilities, and Socialist views on the desirability of contacts with the Orbit.

The delegation will be headed by the president of the lower chamber, Camille Huysmans, whose rather neutralist ideas are not shared by most of his Socialist colleagues.

[PAGE 08]
6. USSR OFFERS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS TO LAOS

The USSR has offered to recognize the Kingdom of Laos and establish diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, according to a Laotian government communiqué. Laos will probably agree to reciprocal recognition rather than affront the USSR, but will politely evade diplomatic and other exchanges, according to the American embassy in Vientiane.

Moscow probably feels that the time is right to extend neutralism in Southeast Asia by seeking in Laos relations similar to those the bloc is now developing with the adjoining country of Cambodia, where neutralism is already firmly established. The USSR has undoubtedly noted with approval the increasing Laotian interest in neutralism as well as the cautiously favorable Laotian response to overtures from Peiping.

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
