1. AMBASSADOR THOMPSON COMMENTS ON SOVIET DISARMAMENT OBJECTIVES

The USSR probably considers that the Western disarmament proposals fail to meet even minimum Soviet objectives, according to Ambassador Thompson in Moscow. He believes the Soviet Union will not feel compelled now or in the foreseeable future to accept terms which it considers unfavorable.

Thompson thinks the USSR is less concerned than the United States about the spread of atomic capability to other states, except for West Germany. Non-orbit states are more likely than the satellites to produce or insist on receiving atomic weapons, and their possible use of such weapons against each other could be exploited by the USSR. Thompson believes, furthermore, that Moscow sees no value in the Western proposal for a cutoff of world-wide production of fissionable material as long as the United States reserves the right to station units with atomic weapons abroad and supply atomic weapons to other countries. He believes the USSR's emphasis on ending tests springs less from a desire to prevent other nations from acquiring atomic weapons than from the propaganda advantages to be gained from Western rejection of such a ban or the lessening of international tension if the West accepts.

The ambassador feels that the Western aerial inspection proposals, even if confined to the Arctic, would not only be considered costly by the USSR but would force the USSR to give up a large measure of its advantage of greater secrecy than the West can maintain. He quotes a Soviet Foreign Ministry official as saying recently that the USSR could never agree to aerial inspection as long as Western bases exist on the periphery of the Soviet bloc.

Thompson points out that the proposed armed forces levels would mean a greater reduction for the USSR than the West. The Western proposals do not satisfy important Soviet objectives of maintaining the status quo in Eastern Europe, reducing the danger of an explosion there, and diminishing the risks of local conflicts developing into major wars with atomic weapons. The USSR does not attach much importance to the prime Western objective of reducing the danger of surprise attack.
