[PAGE 01]
15 November 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Arab League delivers moderate note on German-Israeli restitution agreement (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communist bomber strength may be greatly increased (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Thailand claims to have uncovered extensive Communist plot (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

5. India and Pakistan may negotiate privately on Kashmir (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Britain plans approach to Pakistan on MEDO participation (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Favorable West German court decision seen for EDC treaty (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Arab League delivers moderate note on German-Israeli restitution agreement:

The formal note presented by the Arab League to the Bonn government on 13 November limits itself to expressing fear that ratification of the German-Israeli reparations agreement will strengthen Israel and suggesting that German ratification will be followed by a breakoff of economic relations. The League hopes that an economic rupture with Germany can be avoided and "expects" the Bonn government to initiate diplomatic conversations on this subject with League members.

Comment: The note indicates that the Arabs are not eager to cut economic relations with Germany. Since the Bonn government probably intends to implement the agreement negotiated with Israel, however, West Germany still faces the problem of finding a formula for satisfying the Arabs.

FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communist bomber strength may be greatly increased:

Between 22 October and 14 November, 55 Soviet TU-2 conventional light bombers flew from Vozdvizhenka and Khabarovsk in the Soviet Union to Changchun in Manchuria. At least eight of these aircraft have been assigned to the Chinese Communist 10th Air Division at Nanking.

Comment: the remainder of these aircraft will also be transferred to Chinese Communist units. This would greatly increase the offensive capability of the Chinese Communist Air Force, which had an estimated 300 TU-2 bombers.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Thailand claims to have uncovered extensive Communist plot:

Documents seized during the recent arrests in Bangkok allegedly reveal that Communists were planning an armed uprising against the government in late December. The American Embassy comments that existence of the plot has not been substantiated.

The Embassy reports that the arrests were touched off by the detention of a Thai air force officer returning from Britain who was a member of a ring selling secret documents to the Soviet Union.

Comment: the Thai Government's action was directed primarily against disgruntled junior military officers. It is now clear, however, that regardless of whether or not a genuine plot existed, the great majority of the 125 arrested were civilians known to be Communists or Communist sympathizers.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

5. India and Pakistan may negotiate privately on Kashmir:

India and Pakistan are preparing to hold confidential negotiations in "a day or two" aimed at settling the Kashmir question, according to Sir Benegal Rau.

Sir Benegal indicated that a solution might take the form of partition along the cease-fire line with a plebiscite limited to the Vale of Kashmir, where the capital city of Srinagar is located. He felt that although such a settlement would create many problems for India and Pakistan, it was the only practical solution.

Comment: This proposal for a limited plebiscite is a radical departure from the official position of the Indian and Pakistani governments and from UN resolutions on the subject. Individual Indian officials had previously indicated that a similar plan would be the most realistic basis for settling the dispute.

Any India-Pakistan conference on Kashmir faces the problem of achieving agreement on the disposition of troops during a plebiscite, up to now the major stumbling block.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Britain plans approach to Pakistan on MEDO participation:

The British Government suggests inviting Pakistan to become a participating member of the planning group working out details of the projected Middle East Defense Organization. The approach, which would be timed to coincide with a similar approach to Iraq, would emphasize that Pakistani participation would be welcomed by the sponsoring powers. India would be informed of the MEDO proposals and of the conversations with Pakistan.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
The Department of State has informed London that it will support these moves.

Comment: Britain apparently considers that circumstances are now more favorable for securing a Pakistani commitment to join in Western defense arrangements.

Pakistan has long desired to play a leading role in the Middle East. It may not be willing to accept a position in MEDO less than that accorded to Turkey, which is one of the sponsoring powers.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Favorable West German court decision seen for EDC treaty:

the West German Constitutional Court will rule in favor of the European Defense Community when hearings on the treaty's constitutionality are completed next month. They discount the reports emanating from some West German politicians that the court is "determined" to declare the treaty unconstitutional, but note that Bonn is "jittery" over this possibility.

[PAGE 08]
