Nehru Foresees Imposition of Direct Rule in India's Kerala State

Agitation against the Communist government in India's Kerala State has been stepped up following recent high-level Congress party meetings in New Delhi. Prime Minister Nehru reportedly told the party's top executive board on 29 June that he anticipated the central government would be forced to impose President's Rule in Kerala in about six weeks.

The main result of the high command's lengthy discussion of the Kerala situation was a directive to state party leaders to intensify their agitation, but without using violent tactics. The major objectives of the anti-Communist coalition's campaign now are immediate state elections, an inquiry into recent police shootings, and suspension of the controversial Communist education act. Nehru reportedly opposed an inquiry into the opposition's list of political charges against the Communist government and any mass resignations by non-Communist officials. After much argument over the question of Congress cooperation with the Praja Socialist party and Moslem League during elections in Kerala, the high command overrode Defense Minister Krishna Menon's objections and advised the state branch to proceed with efforts to work out an electoral alliance.

Communist leaders rejected the Congress executive's call for elections in Kerala, condemning the party resolution issued on 29 June as "dishonest" and a "complete endorsement" of the agitators' "undemocratic" demand. The Communist government maintains there is no proof that it does not represent majority sentiment in the state and insists it will not resign under pressure.

Clashes between demonstrators and Communist-directed police continue. Some 25,000 have been arrested thus far in the three-week-old campaign, and about 6,000 are still in jail. The hardening attitudes of both sides in the conflict increase the likelihood of further serious violence. Extremists may try to touch off widespread disturbances to provide New Delhi with sufficient grounds for intervention, which could cause the national government to act prior to mid-August.

4 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
