South Korean Official Sees Need For Positive Program In Repatriation Controversy

Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Kim Dong-yo believes that South Korea must present a specific program for settling the status of the Korean residents in Japan in order to demonstrate the validity of its opposition to the present repatriation agreement between Japan and North Korea. He hopes to persuade President Rhee to offer the returnees free and immediate return to their homeland and guarantee them homes and job opportunities. Kim's proposal reflects the growing concern of South Korean leaders over the detrimental effects of Seoul's negative policy toward Japan, but, as Ambassador Dowling notes, the prospects for gaining Rhee's approval are dim.

Recent Japanese actions emphasize Tokyo's determination to maintain a firm policy toward South Korea, first indicated by the decision in February to repatriate Koreans in Japan to North Korea. Patrols along the Rhee line have been increased, and the government is prepared to double the present number of unarmed patrol craft. Japanese press reports stating that the government might permit direct trade between Japan and North Korea also could be a pressure tactic stemming from the belief that there is no reasonable prospect for a settlement with South Korea.

The Japanese Government has begun preparatory steps for implementing the Japanese - North Korean repatriation agreement, which is awaiting approval of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Tokyo has avoided predictions about the attitude of the ICRC but has consistently stressed its unwillingness to modify its position unless forced to do so by the ICRC.

Tokyo believes that the repatriation agreement embodies the substantive recommendations of the ICRC, and that the Korean residents' "freedom of choice" is adequately safeguarded.

They assert that the United States has an important responsibility in preventing the South Korean forces from committing "rash acts."

4 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
