[PAGE 01]
24 May 1960

Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
24 MAY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Demonstrations by Japanese extremists against Kishi and treaty with US continue, but no large-scale public reaction yet apparent.

Cambodian Prince Sihanouk voices strong criticism of US, praise of Communist China.

Saudi Prince Faysal reportedly delays trip abroad because of Saud move to re-assert domination of government.

King to rule Morocco personally following his dismissal of Ibrahim government.

Statements by leftist Congolese leaders raise some possibility of an African attempt to seize political power in northern Congo; Belgian security forces appear sufficient to suppress such action.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 May 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: The continuing demonstrations by a small minority of extremists against Prime Minister Kishi and the US-Japan security treaty apparently have not, thus far at least stimulated large-scale public reaction. Kishi's power play in forcing lower-house approval of the treaty has momentarily weakened his position. He still remains the only conservative leader who has the support of a majority of the ruling Liberal-Democratic party, however, and no logical successor is in sight; With upper-house approval of the treaty assured, intensified demands by Kishi's rivals that he step down could prompt the holding of an election for party president soon after the Diet adjourns in mid-July.
(Page 1)

Cambodia: Prince Sihanouk, in his strongest anti-US statements in many months, has accused the United States of following a "blind policy" of tolerating South Vietnamese and Thai hostility toward Cambodia. At the same time, Sihanouk has praised Communist China and stated that Communist countries, in contrast to the "free world's hostile attitude, have done nothing against Cambodia." Further, and possibly stronger, emphasis on this pro-bloc, anti-US theme seems certain in the period prior to the 5 June referendum Sihanouk has called to allow the electorate to choose between him and his detractors.
(Page 2)

Saudi Arabia: King Saud's initial move last week in an effort to reassert his domination over the Saudi Government has caused Crown Prince Faysal to delay his scheduled departure for medical treatment in Europe,

[PAGE 05]
Pro-Faysal members of the Council of Ministers reportedly have submitted resignations in a gesture of protest against Saud's pressure and are trying to consolidate a bloc of key government officials and influential senior princes in opposition to the King.

Morocco: Following his dismissal of the Ibrahim government on 20 May, the King announced on 23 May that he personally would rule for a two-year period and would seek to prepare the country for a constitutional monarchy. He apparently will appoint Crown Prince Moulay Hassan as his deputy premier. This appointment will almost certainly provoke increasing opposition among left-wing political and labor groups, which regard the Prince with growing disfavor. Ibrahim's ouster followed his recently frequent challenging of royal authority in regard to the control of the police, his dismissal of all French technicians in the national security establishment, and his rejection of a proposed increase in the number of American service attaches in Morocco.

Belgian Congo: Attacks by leftist Congolese leaders Patrice Lumumba and Anicet Kashamura on Brussels' program leading to Congolese independence, and their demands for the withdrawal of Belgium Army reinforcements ordered to the Congo, raise some possibility of an African attempt to seize political power in the northern Congo. Should such action be started, Belgian security forces appear sufficient to suppress it.
(Page 3)

24 May 60 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
III. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese Political Crisis

A small leftist minority, consisting primarily of labor unionists and radical students, has continued to demonstrate against Prime Minister Kishi and the US-Japanese security treaty, but except for strong press condemnation of the government, there has thus far been no large-scale public reaction. The press, while generally critical of Kishi for forcing ratification of the treaty in the lower house of the Diet, assesses the Socialist resort to violence in the Diet and student attacks on Kishi's official residence as added blows to parliamentarianism in Japan. One of the nation's three largest newspapers is demanding Kishi's resignation.

Kishi, for the moment at least, has been substantially weakened, but says that he will surrender his aspirations for a third term as Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) president--tantamount to the prime ministership----only if the entire party is agreed that he do so. The LDP policy board chairman has commented that Kishi is the only conservative leader who has majority support in the party and that no logical successor is in sight.

Nevertheless, several party factions are calling for Kishi's resignation, and there are indications that, once final treaty ratification is secured, such pressure may be intensified with the participation of some party members now supporting Kishi. The extent of public criticism of Kishi probably will determine the ultimate success of a move to oust him, and could advance the party presidential elections from January 1961 to a date soon after the Diet adjourns in mid-July.

Legislative deliberations now focus on the upper house, which has 30 days in which to act; after this time the treaty is automatically ratified. The Socialist party seems intent on a complete boycott of the deliberations, but the moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP), which already has been damaged in the early phase of its political life by vacillation on the treaty issue, remains undecided as to its next step. The Socialists have announced their strenuous opposition to a visit by President Eisenhower, and the DSP also is advising against it.

24 May 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Cambodian Leader Criticizes United States

Prince Sihanouk, in recent public statements including editorials and broadcasts, has accused the United States of following a "blind policy" of tolerating South Vietnamese and Thai hostility toward Cambodia. Laos now has been added to his list of "imperialist" neighbors encircling Cambodia.

At the same time, Sihanouk has praised Communist China for its understanding attitude toward his neutrality policy, and has stated that in contrast to the "free world's hostile attitude," Communist countries "have done nothing against Cambodia."

In his personal newspaper, The Nationalist, Sihanouk wrote on 21 May that the West's "defeats" in the cold war are attributable to the "bad faith of imperialist circles, who claim to be working for the free world."

Sihanouk's statements against the United States are the strongest in some time and go against his usual practice of carefully counterbalancing any significant Communist bloc propaganda gain in Cambodia, such as that achieved by Chou En-lai's visit earlier this month. Further, and perhaps stronger, emphasis on this pro-bloc, anti-US theme seems likely in the period prior to the 5 June referendum which Sihanouk has called to permit the Cambodian people to choose between him and his detractors. Sihanouk is in a depressed and troubled mood, probably stemming basically from continued friction between him and the palace over the succession issue, with the barbs of the dissident Cambodian radio a contributing factor. The American Embassy in Phnom Penh notes that Sihanouk is especially unpredictable when in such a mood.

24 May 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Congo Nationalists Split by Extremist Attacks on Belgians

Moves by Belgium to deter further election violence in the Congo and to reassure European residents there have been vigorously attacked by extremist Congolese leaders, who may hope to create an atmosphere which would permit them to seize power in the northern provinces. Other African leaders, however, have remained aloof from the extremist attacks.

Criticism of Brussels' program for Congolese independence by leftist leaders Patrice Lumumba and Anicet Kashamura became virulent on 18 May. In a press conference they charged the Belgians with "rigging" the balloting for a Congo legislature, demanded that provision be made for new elections within six months of the Congo's 30 June independence date, and rejected the colony's projected constitution as having been "prepared by Belgium." Both attacked the dispatch of Belgian Army reinforcements to the Congo, where inflammatory oratory by Lumumba and others had stimulated anti-European demonstrations and had increased apprehension among Europeans.

The sweeping character of the charges by Lumumba and Kashamura probably contributed to their repudiation by the four other African members of the General Executive College--the interim organization governing the Congo in the period prior to independence. It is possible that Lumumba and Kashamura are concerned about their showing in the legislative elections, which were completed on 22 May, and are attempting to discredit the results in advance. While they might attempt to set up a rump government in one or more of the northern provinces, they would be unlikely to succeed so long as Congolese security forces remain loyal to Belgian authority.

24 May 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
