[PAGE 01]
State Department review completed

7 March 1952

Copy No. 43

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

1.

2.
3.
4. Political showdown in Thailand reportedly imminent (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5.

6. British and Turks fear new Egyptian disturbances (page 6).
7.

8.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. Italy to make counter-proposal on Trieste issue (page 7).
10. US observers analyze forthcoming Italian elections (page 8).

11.

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3.

4. Political showdown in Thailand reportedly imminent:

Promulgation of the new Thai constitution
and the simultaneous resignation of the cabinet,
scheduled for 8 March, will precipitate a
showdown between Police Director General
Phao and Assistant Army Commander Sarit,

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
Premier Phibun, according to this report,
will not be reappointed, because Phao is allegedly backing his father-
in-law, Army Commander Phin, for the Premiership. Sarit favors
Seni Pramote, a prominent royalist.

Comment:

Friction between the Phao and Sarit factions,
which together control Premier Phibun's government, has been frequently
reported for months. To date, an overt clash has probably been prevented
by a systematic and apparently satisfactory allotment of the various eco-
nomic and financial opportunities for unrestricted exploitation by the two
groups.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
6. British and Turks fear new Egyptian disturbances:

British troops in the Suez Canal area, who
would be called upon to occupy the delta region
in case of a breakdown of public order in Egypt,
have again been put on a 24-hour alert owing
to British fears that disturbances may reoccur.

The Turkish Ambassador in Cairo believes
that the British are "overplaying their animosity
to the Wafd Party which may backfire in the end
and even produce chaos in the country." He added, however, that Turkey
still supports the British position in Egypt.

Comment: Underneath the outward calm which
Prime Minister Hilali is maintaining under martial law is the continuing
possibility of violence induced by the Wafd Party. In spite of the strong
Palace support for the Premier, it is an open question how far Hilali can
go against the well-organized and well-entrenched Wafd.

7.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
8.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. Italy to make counter-proposal on Trieste issue:

Italy, having rejected Yugoslavia's proposal
for a joint administration of the entire Free
Territory of Trieste, now plans to suggest
that a general plebiscite be held in both zones
to determine the territory's ultimate nationality.
The Italian Foreign Office believes this proposal will be un-
acceptable to Yugoslavia and will therefore provide an easy escape from
further negotiations at this time.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
Comment: The plebiscite proposal is an
attempt by the Italian Government to give the impression both to the West
and to the Italian people that it is actively working for a solution of the
Trieste issue. The Foreign Office's estimate of its chances of being
accepted by Yugoslavia confirms previous indications that Italy does not
desire a settlement now.

10. US observers analyze forthcoming Italian elections:

The American Embassy in Rome reports that
the prospect for "democratic" success in the
Italian local elections scheduled for 25 May in
southern Italy is "fairly good" in most large
cities, including Naples. In Rome, however, the strength of those pro-
government parties which are willing to be linked in a common electoral
list is insufficient to give a "safe" margin, because the Democratic
Socialists and the Republicans are still reluctant to be associated even
indirectly with the Monarchists.

Comment: The local elections are particularly
useful as harbingers of results in the national elections, planned for late
this year or early 1953. Observers believe that even if the Democratic
Socialist leadership decided to enter an electoral alliance with the govern-
ment parties and Monarchists, their party following would in many cases
refuse.

11.

- 8 -

[PAGE 09]
