[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

11 April 1958

Copy No. 140

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 APRIL 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet reply--later withdrawn--to 31 March Western proposals suggested ambassadors in Moscow limit discussion of pre-summit foreign ministers' meeting to time, place, and composition.

Khrushchev apparently disturbed by indifference of public during his Hungarian visit.

Soviet Union increases air defense capabilities in Central Arctic.

Soviet Air Force begins practice for Moscow May Day flyby.

Peiping apparently agrees to negotiate with New Delhi on one of disputed territories near Tibetan border, but will probably avoid quick settlement.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia - Bloc countries and Yugoslavia offer Djakarta further economic and military assistance.

Taipei accepts Japanese assurances regarding Communist Chinese trade mission; plans to resume normal trade relations with Tokyo.

Japanese officials anticipate talks with South Korea for an over-all settlement to begin on 15 April. Negotiations likely to be difficult.

United Arab Republic - Some elements in Syrian Army reported dissatisfied over Nasir's reorganization moves.

III. THE WEST

Gaillard calls US-UK good offices proposals for reopening French-Tunisian negotiations unacceptable.

Cuba - Failure of Castro's general strike removes threat to Batista's control at this time.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

11 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - Summit tactics: On 9 April Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov gave Ambassador Thompson an official reply to the 31 March Western proposals, but almost immediately withdrew it following a sudden telephone call. The note appeared to propose that the ambassadors in Moscow discuss only such arrangements for a foreign ministers' meeting as time, place, and composition. The confusion may have been caused by the fact that Premier Khrushchev was to return to Moscow the next day. Kuznetsov reiterated orally that the USSR thought the West wanted preliminary negotiations in order to reach an impasse and prevent a summit conference, while Moscow thought a summit meeting would be useful whether or not it could reach decisions.

Hungary - USSR: The cold reception accorded Khrushchev on his Hungarian visit must have shattered his belief that the scars of the 1956 Soviet intervention could be removed by his personal magnetism. He had earlier told UN Secretary General Hammarskjold that he felt confident his trip would show he was not unpopular in Hungary. The alternately threatening and defensive tone of his 8 and 9 April speeches contrasts with his initial approach, which was more temperate and controlled, and suggests that the indifference of the Hungarians was an important factor in his loss of temper.

USSR - Arctic activity: The development of Tiksi as a principal installation in the air defense system

[PAGE 05]
of the Soviet Central Arctic--a trend in evidence since early 1957--was advanced when the FLASHLIGHT (YAK-25) aircraft, which flew to Tiksi a few days earlier, made their first local area flights. These all-weather fighters, the latest operational Soviet aircraft of this type, at Tiksi, significantly increasing the air defense capabilities in this potential bomber staging area.
(Page 1) (Map)

Soviet flyby practice: The Soviet Air Force has started practice flights over Moscow in preparation for the flyby which is a feature of the Soviet May Day parade in Red Square. So far only known types of Soviet fighter and bomber aircraft have been observed. At least seven canvas-covered missiles have been noted on trailers in Moscow, suggesting that a missile display--such as occurred in Moscow last November--probably will be repeated.

Communist China - India: Peiping, yielding to persistent prodding from New Delhi, has apparently agreed to negotiate on one of the territories near the Tibetan border claimed by both countries. There have been seasonal incursions of Chinese Communist troops into this and other ill-defined border areas in the past several years. The Chinese are expected to pursue the bargaining tactics they have adopted in the Sino-Burmese border dispute, making professions of friendship while resisting pressures for a quick settlement.
(Page 2) (Map)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Indonesia--Soviet Aid: The central government continues to receive offers of economic and military assistance from bloc countries and Yugoslavia. The offers are reliably said to include help in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the training of naval and merchant marine personnel. Foreign

11 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
Minister Suhandrio has admitted to Ambassador Jones that Indonesia has contracted for a "few" bloc fighter aircraft and one submarine. A Soviet vessel carrying 2,700 tons of military cargo loaded at Nikolaev is expected in Indonesia on 20 April.
(Page 3)

Japan - Taiwan: Taipei has accepted Japanese assurances that any Chinese Communist trade delegation in Tokyo will not receive official status or privileges or be formally granted the right to fly Peiping's flag. The Japanese Government, however, cannot legally prevent the flying of the flag when the Peiping mission opens. The Nationalists, meanwhile, have announced that trade relations between Japan and Taiwan will soon return to normal.
(Page 4)

Japan - South Korea: The Japanese Foreign Ministry has stated that formal talks for an over-all settlement with South Korea are "practically certain" to open on 15 April. Agreement to convene the conference still depends on South Korea's promise to repatriate Japanese fishermen, an action which Seoul has indicated it will undertake. Seoul, however, will undoubtedly continue to hold some Japanese as hostages, until the issue of the return of Korean detainees in Japan to North Korea is settled. This will complicate negotiations, which are likely to be difficult in any case.
(Page 5)

United Arab Republic: Nasir's moves to purge potential opposition in Syria apparently have led to dissident activity by some army and police elements in Damascus, including, the distribution of antiregime leaflets. The formation of a "free officer" group is reported, but it appears unlikely that it will develop into a significant dissident force.
(Page 6)

11 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

France-Tunisia: Gaillard appears determined to reject the US-UK good offices proposals for reopening French-Tunisian negotiations because of Bourguiba's refusal to accept neutral supervision of both sides of the Algerian-Tunisian border. Gaillard regards this proposal as politically unacceptable in France, and his view will probably be confirmed by the emergency session of the Council of Ministers on 11 April. France may then initiate a new appeal to the UN Security Council to outmaneuver Bourguiba, who intends to raise the whole North African problem--including Algeria--for UN review.
(Page 7)

Cuba: Despite its failure in Havana, the Castro strike attempt seems to be partially effective in Santiago and to have spread to other towns in Oriente Province as well as to Camaguey Province. Thus limited, however, it poses no threat to Batista's control at this time.

11 Apr 58 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 08]
FLASHLIGHT (YAK-25) AIRCRAFT MOVEMENT INTO TIKSI

11 APRIL 1958

ROUTE OF YAK-25 AIRCRAFT

[PAGE 09]
I. COMMUNIST BLOC

Tiksi Increasingly Important to Air Defense of Soviet Arctic

Flight activity by FLASHLIGHT (YAK-25) all-weather jet fighters is the latest in a series of developments establishing Tiksi as a key installation in the air defense of the Soviet Central Arctic. Six aircraft, probably subordinate to the air defense command, of a flight of 14 originally scheduled to Tiksi from Amderma on 25-27 March engaged in round-robin flights from Tiksi to several points including Tajmylyr, a Tiksi-controlled radar site 125 miles to the west.

These twin-jet aircraft, latest Soviet operational all-weather interceptors--a type that has been associated with the semiautomatic air defense system--complement the early warning facilities that became operational at Tiksi in February 1958. Except for 13 FRESCOS (MIG-17's) which flew to Tiksi in April 1957--and which have not been recorded since--the FLASHLIGHTS are the first fighters to operate in the area between Amderma and Provideniya in the Soviet Arctic, a distance of 2,500 miles. YAK-25's have been based at Amderma since late 1956.

Tiksi is considered a forward staging base for Soviet bomber aircraft. Elements of bomber units from the Soviet Long Range Air Force commands located in the western USSR and the Soviet Far East have deployed there for short periods during the past two years. The most recent deployment occurred during February and March of this year.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 10]
SINO-INDIAN BORDER

11 APRIL 1958

DISPUTED AREAS

BHOTI AREA TO BE DISCUSSED IN FORTHCOMING NEGOTIATIONS

[PAGE 11]
Communist China Agrees to Negotiate With India Regarding Tibetan Border

Negotiations will begin "soon" between Communist China and India concerning one of the territories near the Tibetan border claimed by both countries.

The Chinese have apparently at last agreed, with some reluctance, to send a delegation to New Delhi. Prime Minister Nehru told the Indian Parliament last September that although the Chinese had agreed to negotiate the matter, New Delhi had to "remind them again."

Discussions will apparently be focused on the undemarcated and ill-defined Bhoti region of Uttar Pradesh State near the Tibetan border, although other territories in dispute may also be discussed. Both Chinese Communist and Indian troops have entered the Bhoti area in past years, and it was in reaction to a Chinese incursion in the fall of 1955 that India proposed forming a joint commission to settle the matter. Peiping and New Delhi have since agreed to keep their troops out of the area pending a final settlement.

Peiping is aware of New Delhi's sensitivities on Chinese Communist activities along the border and will seek to reassure the Indians that it has no desire to occupy any of the disputed areas before a settlement is reached. The Chinese are expected to pursue the bargaining tactics they have adopted in the Sino-Burmese border dispute, making professions of friendship but resisting pressures for a quick settlement. Prime Minister Nehru's scheduled September visit to Tibet to meet the Dalai Lama and, reportedly, Premier Chou En-lai would give him a further opportunity to spur the Chinese toward an agreement.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 12]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Soviet Bloc Aid Offers to Indonesia

The Indonesian Government continues to receive offers of economic and military assistance from bloc countries and Yugoslavia. The Soviet Embassy in Djakarta has offered assistance in atomic development in the agricultural and medical fields while Czechoslovakia wants to provide general assistance in the development of atomic techniques and to send technicians for survey and exploration of Indonesian uranium deposits. East Germany has also offered economic and technical aid.

The Soviet Union apparently has reiterated its willingness to train officers and pilots for the Indonesian merchant marine. Poland is also willing to train shipping pilots, East Germany to educate 150 Indonesians in technical subjects, and Yugoslavia to train naval officers and paratroopers. Bloc assistance presumably would be arranged under the $100,000,000 Soviet loan which has already been used to finance Indonesia's purchase of ten Soviet merchant ships.

The Soviet vessel Izmail, carrying 2,700 tons of military cargo loaded at the Black Sea port of Nikolaev, is expected to arrive in Indonesia on 20 April. The cargo includes military communications vehicles, 25 "workshops," and large crates, possibly containing aircraft.

The Indonesian dissidents in Celebes have been working to win support in the southern area of that island. Dissident leaders have held discussions with the notorious guerrilla, Kahar Muzakkar, who has been fighting the central government intermittently for seven years, and with Djakarta-appointed officials in South Celebes. the South Celebes army commander was willing to support the dissidents as of 31 March but the civilian governor who outranks him was "still doubtful."

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 13]
Rift Between Taipei and Tokyo Temporarily Eased

The rift between Japan and Nationalist China over the right of the proposed Peiping trade delegation to fly the Chinese Communist flag in Tokyo has been settled for the moment. A Chinese Nationalist communique cites Japanese assurances that any Chinese Communist trade agency established in Tokyo will be denied official status and privileges, and that Japan "will not recognize the right of the Chinese Communists to fly their flag." The communique expresses Taipei's belief that Tokyo will "in time give practical expression" to these assurances.

The Nationalists have also announced that trade relations between the two countries--restricted by the Nationalists on 18 March when trade contracts with Japanese suppliers were suspended--will return to normal on 10 April when the Bank of Taiwan resumes the issuance of letters of credit to local merchants for the purchase of Japanese goods. Negotiations for a trade agreement probably will also be resumed.

While Tokyo maintains that it has no legal basis to prevent the flying of foreign flags, it seems quite unlikely that Taipei has surrendered on this point. Taipei's acquiescence could be the result of some confidential understanding that Japan will find a means to take the necessary action.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 14]
Japan and South Korea Prepared to Resume Formal Negotiations

The South Korean vice foreign minister told an official of the American Embassy on 9 April that his government can give Japanese Prime Minister Kishi private assurances on the repatriation of Japanese fishermen detained at Pusan which will open the way for talks to normalize relations. The Japanese Foreign Ministry has indicated that details for the mutual release of detainees are still under discussion, but that negotiations are "practically certain" to open on 15 April.

Japanese Foreign Minister Fujiyama believes that Seoul might return about 300 of 422 detained fishermen, holding the remainder as hostages to assure the return to South Korea of some 90 Koreans in Japan who have requested repatriation to Pyongyang. The Japanese Government apparently is willing to accept such an arrangement in order to show some progress in negotiations prior to the national election campaign expected in May.

Plans to open the negotiations on 1 March broke down when Seoul refused to continue the repatriation of fishermen unless Japan guaranteed to repatriate all Korean illegal residents to South Korea including the 90 desiring to go to North Korea. Lack of agreement on the disposition of the 90 probably will be a serious obstacle in the forthcoming discussions.

Should this hurdle be overcome, the negotiations may lead to an early agreement on such outstanding issues as property claims, but a compromise on the controversial Rhee line which bans Japanese fishing in waters as much as 60 miles from the Korean coast will probably prove more difficult.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 15]
Syrian Army Officers Disgruntled With New Regime

Antiregime pamphlets were distributed in Damascus between 3 and 5 April, apparently by police personnel at the instigation of "certain army elements".

Syrian Army involvement in such action could stem from dissatisfaction of former army officers with their current restricted roles as civilian officials and of present officers over the manner in which the UAR military command is effecting personnel transfers. Nasir appears to be using individual transfers either within the military or into civilian positions to eliminate from the army any potential centers of future conspiracies.

The reported arrest at Nasir's order of Syrian Minister of Municipal and Village Affairs Abd al-Karim, ex-chief of operations of the Syrian Army, is probably due to his association with ex-Chief of Staff Bizri in efforts to modify new military assignments. The story being spread publicly, however, is that Abd al-Karim was arrested for abusing his new civilian position. Bizri himself is being detained in Cairo. Other leftist supporters of Bizri, as well as rightist associates of former dictator Shishakli, either have been transferred out of Syria or are scheduled to leave. Former Assistant Chief of Staff Nafuri, now Syrian minister of communications, may be "the next prominent ex-officer marked to go", since he also is believed to have been implicated in the Bizri affair. Former G-2 Sarraj seems as strong as ever, with most of the army's former internal security and intelligence functions being shifted to his Ministry of Interior for the Syrian region.

The formation of a "free officer" group has been reported and Lebanese Prime Minister Sulh stated on 7 April that he is receiving reports of dissidence within Syria from a broad range of sources, but gave no details. It seems doubtful that present or former army officers, despite their disgruntlement, are making any real effort to throw off Nasir's control, or that a "free officer group" could develop into a significant dissident force.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 16]
III. THE WEST

France Uncompromising on Tunisian Border Supervision

French Premier Gaillard and Foreign Minister Pineau told the US-UK good offices mission on 9 April that they doubt their government could accept the mission's proposals of 15 March on reopening French-Tunisian negotiations, because of Tunisian President Bourguiba's unwillingness to agree to any provision for neutral supervision of both sides of the Algerian border. Gaillard, who regards the proposals as politically unacceptable in France, probably can expect the 11 April emergency session of the French Council of Ministers to back his adamant position. Pineau, meanwhile, has already told the National Assembly Foreign Affairs Committee that the good offices mission has failed.

Both Gaillard and Pineau showed interest in a suggestion by British Ambassador Jebb that France couple assent to the Tunisian minimum conditions with a proposal to the UN Security Council to set up a border commission on both sides of the frontier. Since such a move would probably encounter rightist opposition, however, France may prefer to renew its February appeal to the UN Security Council in an effort to outmaneuver Bourguiba. The Tunisian President intends not only to press his own February complaint against France in the Security Council but also to open up the question of Algeria and the entire North African problem for UN review.

France will not hesitate to use its veto power if the Security Council moves to include Algeria in its discussion following the report of the good offices mission. Such a step would almost certainly lead to a strong drive by the Arab-Asian bloc for a special session of the General Assembly.

11 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 17]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

11 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

USSR - Arctic military activity: The development of Tiksi as a principal installation in the air defense system of the Soviet Central Arctic--a trend in evidence since early 1957--was advanced when the FLASHLIGHT (YAK-25) aircraft, which flew to Tiksi a few days earlier, made their first local area flights. These all-weather fighters, the latest operational Soviet aircraft of this type, at Tiksi, significantly increasing the air defense capabilities in this potential bomber staging area.
(Page 1) (Map)

Soviet flyby practice: The Soviet Air Force has started practice flights over Moscow in preparation for the flyby which is a feature of the Soviet May Day parade in Red Square. So far only known types of Soviet fighter and bomber aircraft have been observed. At least seven canvas-covered missiles have been noted on trailers in Moscow, suggesting that a missile display--such as occurred in Moscow last November--probably will be repeated.

Communist China - India: Peiping, yielding to persistent prodding from New Delhi, has apparently agreed to negotiate on one of the territories near the Tibetan border claimed by both countries. There have been seasonal incursions of Chinese Communist troops into this and other ill-defined border areas in the past several years. The Chinese are expected to pursue the bargaining tactics they have adopted in the Sino-Burmese border dispute, making professions of friendship while resisting pressures for a quick settlement.
(Page 2) (Map)

Cuba: Despite its failure in Havana, the Castro strike attempt seems to be partially effective in Santiago and to have spread to other towns in Oriente Province as well as to Camaguey Province. Thus limited, however, it poses no threat to Batista's control at this time.
