Situation in the Congo

Nkrumah's 7 March General Assembly speech, in which he called for a strengthening of the UN under a "primarily" African command, further modifies his earlier proposals which would have excluded European units in the UN force and would have put Asians in a subordinate role. He told American officials earlier in the day that his desires would be met with the designation of an African or Asian as UN military commander and some increase in Afro-Asian membership in the UN staffs. He presented these proposals—which may have originated with General Alexander, the British commander of the Ghanaian army—as a means for stimulating a willingness among uncommitted nations to contribute troops.

Mobutu reportedly is unhappy over the failure of civilian officials in Leopoldville to consult him before setting up the Ileo government. He apparently is traveling around Equateur, his home province, paying little attention to political developments. He has reorganized the upper echelons of his command in an attempt to strengthen his control and may ask Belgium to provide him with military advisers who could serve with his forces as "civilian" technicians. Plans for his military operation into Orientale envisage the capture of the gasoline supplies at Aketi, with Stanleyville a possible second objective. Mobutu reportedly is approaching the operation "like a sheep going to slaughter"; he seems to believe he will be killed during the campaign. Furthermore, no attempt has been made to keep up training or increase discipline.

The Ileo government, meanwhile, has sent the UN a proposal for reorganizing the Congolese army, according to the American embassy in Leopoldville. Although the Congolese suggestions are carefully hedged to retain final Congolese control over the program, their substance is fairly moderate. The proposals envisage establishment of a joint UN–Congolese defense council, headed by a "neutral" officer responsible to Kasavubu. The message also expresses the Leopoldville government's willingness to permit the UN to begin with the reorganization of Mobutu's troops, provided firm agreements are made for similar steps to be taken with other Congolese forces. There is no indication that these proposals would be accepted by the troops concerned, who are

9 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
