Jordan: King Husayn has acted to thwart what he believed was a plot to seize control of the Jordanian Army and perhaps ultimately the government. On 27 March he forced the resignation of the minister of defense and discharged the commander of the armored forces and three other senior officers. At least one of the officers had been in touch with Jordanian exiles in Syria who have been plotting a coup against Husayn's regime. The minister and the armored commander are leaders of the Bani Sakhir Bedouin tribe, which heretofore has been the dominant influence in the Jordanian Army and a main support of the King. Their dismissal has aggravated an already unsettled situation and invites further army dissidence. (Backup, Page 8)

Yemen: The Imam was wounded by gunshots on the night of 26 March. He is reported to be in a state of shock, although the wounds are said to be superficial. No information is yet available on the identity of those involved in the assassination attempt, although some arrests have been made, reportedly including young army officers. If the Imam should be incapacitated for a lengthy period, his opponents might seek to supplant him and prevent the succession of his unpopular son, Crown Prince Badr, now in Rome for medical treatment. Such an effort could lead to a prolonged struggle in Yemen.

Badr was informed by members of the court that the situation in Yemen was under control. expressed the hope that Badr would soon return home. (Backup, Page 9)

Tanganyika-UK: Julius Nyerere, chief minister of Tanganyika, is expected to urge British Colonial Secretary Macleod, who is chairing the constitutional conference now under way in Tanganyika's capital, Dar es Salaam, to announce an early date--possibly 1 October--for the independence of this East African trust territory. While Macleod is expected to agree to eliminate the few remaining British controls over Tanganyika's internal affairs, he will probably attempt to maintain Britain's present schedule, which calls for independence in 1962, unless he is convinced that Nyerere's prestige would otherwise seriously decline. (Backup, Page 10) (Map)

29 Mar 61
DAILY BRIEF iii
