[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

17 May 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Three more Russian fighter units located on Korea-Manchuria border (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

2. Yugoslavia proposes military talks to Greece (page 3).
3. French report Bulgarian overtures to Yugoslavia (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans praise latest Allied note on German unification (page 4).
5. France sees closer British association with Defense Community (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Three more Russian fighter units located on Korea-Manchuria border:

Three additional Russian fighter units, probably regiments, became active on the ground.

Comment: The Chinese moved one or two jet divisions to Antung in the past month. With these new Soviet units the number of jets in the Yalu River area is estimated at 500. Since 13 April UN pilots have on several occasions observed 450-500 jets on fields in this area.

EASTERN EUROPE

2. Yugoslavia proposes military talks to Greece:

The Yugoslav Deputy Foreign Minister has informed the Greek Minister in Belgrade of his government's willingness to begin military talks with Greece. He stated that the Yugoslav General Staff soon would present an agenda and proposed arrangements for the talks to the Greek Military Attache in Belgrade, and that Yugoslavia wished to conduct the discussions with the Greeks alone.

The Under Secretary of the Greek Foreign Office has stated that his government will authorize its military attache in Belgrade to proceed with the talks, and will not inform the Turks "until the situation crystallizes."
[PAGE 04]
Comment: This is the first definite Yugoslav approach to Greece on military talks, and apparently is in reply to a recent request by the Greek Chief of Staff for immediate staff talks. The Yugoslavs wish to avoid any kind of formal military agreement that would tie them to NATO, and probably will limit the talks to coordination of Greek-Yugoslav plans for defense of adjacent areas of the two countries.

3. French report Bulgarian overtures to Yugoslavia:

The French Ambassador in Sofia has reported that Bulgarians have been in clandestine contact with the Yugoslav mission in Sofia in regard to the formation of a "neutral south Slav bloc." The French Ambassador to Belgrade has been unable to shed additional light on the report.

Although considering it possible that the USSR is trying to draw Tito into some sort of trap, the French Foreign Office leans toward the view that the Bulgarian Government, or some element in it, is trying to "do a Tito."

Comment: The report is not confirmed by other sources. Although there have been rumors of a schism within the Bulgarian Communist Party, there has been no firm evidence of serious unrest within the higher echelons since June 1951.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans praise latest Allied note on German unification:

High Commissioner McCloy reports that the West German public is reacting very favorably to the Allied note of 13 May. Coalition and opposition leaders alike are hailing the note as "very satisfactory" and "constructive."
[PAGE 05]
The opposition Social Democratic Party was especially pleased that an Allied-sponsored UN investigation was not an unalterable prerequisite to all-German elections.

Comment: The West German press has been almost unanimous in stating that the Allies made precise proposals which Moscow will find difficult to dodge.

5. France sees closer British association with Defense Community:

The chief French delegate at the Paris conference states that the recent discussions between British Defense Minister Alexander and French Defense Minister Pleven provided real evidence of Britain's desire for specific arrangements to associate British forces with the European Defense Force.

It was agreed that there should be common instruction and training, and exchange of units and personnel, beginning with the air forces; and that a method must be found for the temporary incorporation of British divisions into European army corps and European divisions into British corps.

Comment: Although such arrangements would not entail closer political ties between Britain and the Defense Community they might make French ratification of the EDC treaty more likely by satisfying the French Socialists. The Socialists, whose support is essential for ratification, have insisted that they would reject the treaty unless the French Government made more forceful efforts to secure British participation.
