5. Fear of war reported in Manchuria:
A Russian-born naturalized American who left Harbin on 10 April and arrived in Hong Kong on 1 May, told the US Consul General in Hong Kong that the fear of war was growing in Harbin. The atmosphere was particularly tense in Manchouli (on the Sino-Soviet border in northwest Manchuria), where Chinese residents were being evacuated from the Sino-Soviet border and where the USSR was erecting fortifications on its side of the border. In Harbin, air raid precautions were inaugurated at the time of Chinese intervention in Korea and were being further implemented at the time of the source's departure. Several hundred Soviet airmen were stationed at the Harbin airfield, but few were seen in the city. Flights over Harbin were infrequent and never consisted of more than five planes in a group. Source reported a very heavy southward rail movement, largely after dark, through Harbin. He observed four or five train-loads of Russian tanks and one load of Mongol horses. Source stated that there was no doubt in the minds of the inhabitants that the real power in the area, though exercised through the Chinese, was held by the USSR. Many Russians have been discharged in preparation for the turn-over of enterprises including the railway to the Chinese in 1952.

Comment: Few reports are received from the northeastern areas. This one appears credible.

6. British concerned over Chinese Nationalist troops in Burma:
US Embassy London reports that the British Government is becoming increasingly concerned over the refugee Chinese Nationalist troops in the Burmese state of Kengtung. The British, apparently feeling that these forces are being supported by the US, may be expected shortly to make high level approaches on the subject in Washington. They consider that the Nationalists do not merely provide the Chinese Communists with an excuse to invade Burma but constitute a pressure on the Communists to act which would inevitably result in the establishment of a Communist government in Burma.
