II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudan: Leaders of a dissident junior officers' group are making final plans for a coup attempt, The plotters admit contact with the UAR Embassy. They claim to be pro-Western Sudanese nationalists and say they have the support of strong army elements, one of the northern tribes, and some religious leaders. In spite of the government's strong security measures, the conspirators believe their plans are not known to the government. If Sudan offers to compromise with the UAR in negotiations beginning in Cairo on 10 October on distribution of the Nile waters, the plotters may accuse the government of a sellout of Sudanese interests as a pretext for launching their coup effort. (Page 2)

Pakistan: The view is prevalent among army officers and police officials in the Karachi area that other changes may follow the apparently enforced retirement on 30 September of Lt. General Habibullah, Pakistani Army Chief of Staff. They feel that President Ayub probably supported General Musa, the commander in chief, against Habibullah for procedural reasons, but that he is still friendly with Habibullah and may give him a cabinet post. They also suggest that Musa may be removed in the near future and that Interior Minister Lt. General Sheikh may be given the governorship of West Pakistan or a foreign assignment. (Page 2)

South Korea: Factional strife between South Korean opposition Democratic party leaders Cho Pyong-ok and Vice President Chang Myon has brought the party to the verge of a split on the eve of its national presidential convention, scheduled for 15 October. Chang fears that Cho will not only make a strong bid for the presidential nomination but will attempt to exclude Chang's supporters from all key party posts. A split, which appears to have been encouraged by the administration, would destroy South Korea's embryonic two-party system and would enable President Rhee to win re-election next year without resorting to extreme extralegal measures. (Page 3.)

9 Oct 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
