LATE ITEM

6. Possible new type Soviet medium jet bombers sighted near Moscow:

On 19 April during a practice fly-by for the May Day Air Show, six unidentified swept-wing medium jet bombers of the B-47 class were observed in formation near Moscow. Also sighted in the formation were approximately 70 MIG-17 (Type-38) jet fighters, 80 IL-28's and a single Type-37 heavy bomber. The medium bombers were sighted at a distance of approximately 2 1/4 miles while the Type-37 was sighted at a distance of approximately one mile.

Weather at the time of the fly-by was overcast at 4,000 feet with 3 to 4 miles visibility in haze. Due to the distance and visibility, none of the observers could give specific details on the medium jet bombers. General observations, however, revealed that they were more than twice the size of an IL-28 but not as large as the Type-37. Other characteristics noted consisted of a single fin and rudder and wings sharply swept back and tapered with no visible protrusions such as pod engines. One observer, who had the best view, stated that the mediums resembled a B-47 and were about the same size.

According to observers, the Type-37 was definitely powered by turbo-jet engines which were buried near the fuselage with two oval air intakes on the leading edge of each wing. Two exhausts were noted protruding aft of each wing--wings which appeared to be mounted slightly above the mid-fuselage. Objects similar to fuel tanks appeared on each wing tip. The leading edge of the wing appeared mounted into the fuselage about one-quarter of the way back from nose--the trailing edge half of the way back. The wing was described as having a slight negative dihedral while the horizontal stabilizer has considerable positive dihedral. A slight protrusion under the forward part of fuselage appeared to be a radome. The nose section appeared to resemble that of a DC-6.

US Air Attaché Comment: The six unidentified medium bombers are probably the same aircraft seen in three ship vees on 18 April. The Type-37 is probably the aircraft seen flying the regular parade route with 24 IL-28's.

- 6 -
