ASIA-AFRICA
Seoul Raises New Obstacle to Agreement with Tokyo

South Korea has raised a last-minute obstacle to agreement with Japan on settlement of two major issues--the exchange of Japanese fishermen held by South Korea for illegal Korean entrants detained by Japan and the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to South Korea. South Korean Ambassador Yu Tai-ha in Tokyo implied on 28 December that final settlement could not be reached unless the United States would provide advance financial assistance for the resettlement of the prospective Korean repatriates.

To secure the return of its fishermen, Tokyo has agreed to seek Diet approval to provide Korean repatriates to South Korea the amount of $1,500 per five- to six-person family, following an over-all settlement of Japanese-South Korean differences. Tokyo has implied that further procrastination in returning the fishermen may force it to take sterner measures, such as referring outstanding issues between the two governments to the United Nations, arming its patrol craft along the "Rhee fishing line," evicting the South Korean mission in Japan, or establishing "official" trade relations with North Korea.

Seoul is holding about 200 Japanese fishermen seized for violation of the unilaterally imposed Rhee line, most of whom have completed sentences imposed by South Korean courts. Japan is believed to be holding some 300 illegal Korean entrants.

According to the South Korean foreign minister, Yu had led President Rhee to believe that the United States would provide financial aid for the repatriates. Without such an arrangement, the foreign minister told Ambassador McConaughy, the Tokyo negotiations are again up in the air.

Meanwhile, the repatriation of about 5,000 Koreans in Japan who have so far requested to go to North Korea is continuing. On 28 December the third group of about 1,000 left Japan without incident. South Korea has moderated its agitation against the repatriation, but it requested on 27 December that the United States take "necessary action" to halt the program.

30 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
