[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

26 April 1960

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

26 April 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: In his 25 April speech in Baku, Premier Khru-
shchev combined a prediction that the "favorable" interna-
tional trend would continue after the summit with an effort
to increase pressure for Western concessions on the major
summit topics. As in previous statements, he sought to
create the impression that Soviet unilateral action on a sep-
arate German peace treaty could be dependent on the outcome
of the summit, while carefully avoiding committing the USSR
to such a position. Foreign Minister Gromyko also restated
the standard Soviet position on Berlin and Germany to Am-
bassadors Thompson and Bohlen, while hinting that an in-
terim Berlin solution was still negotiable. Both Khrushchev
and Gromyko took an optimistic line on the chances for resolv-
ing the main issues of a nuclear test agreement, and Gromyko
stated that Khrushchev would be seeking a "concrete" decision
on disarmament which could be translated into action.

USSR-China: The Soviet Union has used the major speech
given in Moscow for the Lenin anniversary celebration to re-
fute the views on the inevitability of war developed by the Chi-
nese Communists in their two Red Flag editorials on the occa-
sion of Lenin's birthday. Attributing the views not to the Chinese
but to "bold publicists in the West," the speaker, Presidium mem-
ber Otto Kuusinen, asserted that such ideas are one-sided, obso-
lete dogmatism and that today the policy of peaceful coexistence,
as developed by Lenin and followed by the USSR, is the "only
correct and vital policy."
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

India - Communist China: The failure of Nehru and Chou
En-lai to reach any substantive agreement as a result of their
six days of talks in New Delhi makes it almost certain that re-
lations between New Delhi and Peiping will remain strained for
some time. While neither side was willing to budge from its
basic position, both apparently hoped to reduce tension along
the frontier and agreed, in a communiqué on 25 April, to es-
tablish a joint panel of officials to study evidence supporting
respective border claims. These lower level meetings from
June to September are likely to accomplish little beyond keep-
ing the border problem on the diplomatic level.
(Page 5)

Tunisia: Stepped-up activities by the French and Algerian
rebel elements along the Algerian-Tunisian frontier, together
with rebel efforts to "internationalize" the war by recruiting a
"foreign legion," have aggravated President Bourguiba's fear that
Tunisia will be caught in the middle. The President publicly
warned France on 24 April against further border incursions,

Somalia - British Somaliland: Nationalists of the Italian-
administered trust territory of Somalia and of the British Soma-
liland Protectorate announced on 22 April, at the conclusion of
a week-long conference, their intention to unite the two terri-
tories under a new "Somali Republic" on 1 July. The conferees
apparently also reached agreement on the composition of a

26 Apr 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
national assembly, the selection of a president, and the formation
of a coalition government.

LATE ITEMS

*Laos: Conservative candidates appear to have achieved an
overwhelming victory in Sunday's National Assembly elections. In-
complete returns indicate that Communist or pro-Communist can-
didates won very few seats, if any. The defeated leader of the fel-
low-traveling Santiphab party has charged, probably with justifica-
tion, that the elections were "faked" and claims to have photographic
evidence of election irregularities. The apparent manipulation of the
vote may bring on an intensification of guerrilla attacks by the Com-
munist insurgents and would weaken the prestige of the new govern-
ment to be formed after 10 May.
[PAGE 07]
*South Korea: The National Assembly has requested
that President Rhee immediately resign as he had earlier
offered and has called for new presidential elections. Rhee's
resignation probably will place control in the hands of a care-
taker government now being formed. Such a government will
require military support. Martial law probably will be con-
tinued.

The populace, encouraged by the successes of its mass
action, probably will be easily aroused to take violent action
again should there be any delay in carrying out reforms or
if popular expectations are not satisfied.

26 Apr 60    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Reviews Soviet Position on Summit Topics

In his 25 April speech in Baku, Premier Khrushchev outlined
in standard terms the Soviet position on the major East-West is-
sues which he intends to take up at the summit. Prefacing his
statements with a prediction that the present "favorable" trend in
international affairs will continue after the meeting in Paris, Khru-
shchev singled out disarmament as the first item for discussion,
to be followed by the German and Berlin questions.

The Soviet leader sought to build up pressure for Western con-
cessions on Berlin by repeating his threat to sign a separate peace
treaty with East Germany. Although he did not spell out the timing,
by discussing the problem in the general context of the May meet-
ing he again gave the impression that lack of progress at the sum-
mit could be followed by such a treaty. In a further effort to urge
the West to seek an interim solution on Berlin, he repeated, as he
recently did in Paris, his claim that a separate treaty would end
all Western occupation rights, including access to Berlin. In a
private conversation with Ambassadors Thompson and Bohlen,
Foreign Minister Gromyko also restated the standard Soviet posi-
tion on a peace treaty and a free city, while hinting that an interim
agreement could be negotiated.

Khrushchev adhered closely to the Soviet position taken at the
disarmament talks in charging that the West continues to substitute
control for disarmament. Gromyko stated that at the summit Khru-
shchev would be seeking a "concrete" decision on disarmament,
which could be translated into future action. This approach provides
further evidence that Moscow will press for a joint statement en-
dorsing the main principles of a treaty for "complete and general
disarmament" which the Soviet delegation at Geneva could represent
as a directive to proceed with the Soviet plan.

On the question of nuclear tests, Khrushchev said he intended to
conduct serious negotiations at the summit, adding an optimistic

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 09]
assessment that a treaty could be concluded, in view of the
Eisenhower-Macmillan 29 March statement proposing a volun-
tary moratorium on small underground tests. The Soviet pre-
mier, however, implied that the length of the moratorium would
be a key question.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 10]
The USSR Refutes Chinese Views

The Soviet Union has used the major speech given in Mos-
cow in commemoration of Lenin's 90th birthday to refute the
views recently expressed by the Chinese Communists in their
two Red Flag editorials on the same occasion. Attributing the
Chinese views to "bold publicists in the West," Presidium mem-
ber Otto Kuusinen, without mentioning Communist China, con-
demned those who assert that Lenin was an opponent of peace-
ful coexistence.

Claiming that "these falsifiers" take from Lenin's works
only those passages which support their own thesis, Kuusinen
maintained that Lenin developed the idea of peaceful economic
competition in the world. Contradicting the Chinese, who in-
sist that wars are inevitable so long as imperialism exists,
Kuusinen stated that the conclusions reached at the 20th and
21st party congresses about "the absence of inevitability of
wars in our epoch" are "a new contribution to Marxism."

Kuusinen noted that to be loyal to Marxism-Leninism to-
day it is not enough to repeat the old truth that imperialism is
aggressive--as the Chinese do. To look on only this one side
of the question is "dogmatism," he said, and such dogmatism is
obsolete. Kuusinen alleged that Lenin foresaw long ago that
"the time will come when war will become so destructive as to
be impossible."

In developing the theme that the strength of the socialist
world will soon be such that it cannot fail to win out in peace-
ful competition, Kuusinen made the interesting observation that
the significance of violence is soon exhausted, but that "influ-
ence and example will tell." He asserted, therefore, that the
Leninist policy of peaceful coexistence, now being followed by
the Soviet Union, is the only correct and vital policy.

Kuusinen's observation echoes Khrushchev's admonition in
Peiping last September that Communists should not "test the
stability of the capitalist system by force." The speech as a
whole is an expression of Khrushchev's view that bloc coun-
tries should do nothing to jeopardize forthcoming negotiations
in which the West will have no choice but to make accommoda-
tions to Communist demands because of the shift in the balance
of power.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nehru-Chou Talks Fail to Produce Border Agreement

The inability of Prime Minister Nehru and Chinese Premier
Chou En-lai to make any real headway toward a border agree-
ment during their six days of talks in New Delhi makes it almost
certain that Sino-Indian relations will continue strained for
some time. The two leaders admitted in a joint communiqué
on 25 April that while their "long, frank, and friendly talks"
had led to a better understanding of their opposing views, they
"did not resolve the differences that had arisen."

During his stay in India, Chou
hinted broadly in public that acceptance of the Chinese posi-
tion could lead to an eventual exchange of disputed areas in
Assam for those in Ladakh. Attempting at the same time to
salvage some good will, Chou restated his old assurances
that Peiping would not send troops across the McMahon line,
even though the line "is completely unacceptable to China."

Nehru and Chou agreed to turn the border discussions
over to subordinate officials of both countries, who will meet

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 13]
from June to September to "examine, check, and study" the
historical evidence each side has advanced in support of its
territorial claims. These officials are not empowered to
recommend a solution but only to draft a report on points
of "agreement and disagreement." "Every effort" will be
made during this period to avoid further border clashes. These
meetings, to be held in Peiping and New Delhi, are likely to
accomplish little beyond keeping a channel open for eventual
negotiations.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 14]
Tunisian President Warns France And Rebels

President Bourguiba, striving to maintain Tunisia's offi-
cial noninvolvement in the conflict in Algeria, recently warned
both France and the Algerian rebels to refrain from actions
which would compromise his government's position. In a bel-
ligerent speech on 24 April he warned France: "Tunisia is
capable of successfully conducting a war if she is obliged to
do so by aggressions." He was referring to a series of recent
border incidents which have arisen from the stepped-up activi-
ties of both French and Algerian rebel troops in the Algerian-
Tunisian frontier area.

The Tunisian foreign minister has indicated that the efforts
of the Algerians to "internationalize" the conflict, particularly
the acceptance of "volunteers" from other states, would pose a
problem for his country. He said that any Tunisians volunteer-
ing would lose their citizenship. In the case of foreigners, Tunis
would hold their own governments responsible for their actions
in Tunisia.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
[PAGE 15]
Somalia Announces Agreement With British Somaliland

Nationalist leaders of the Italian-administered trust terri-
tory of Somalia and of the British Somaliland Protectorate an-
nounced on 22 April, at the conclusion of a week-long conference,
their intention to unite the two territories under a "Somaliland
Republic" on 1 July.

Britain has invited protectorate leaders to London in May
and apparently hopes to dampen enthusiasm for early independ-
ence and union. Various British officials have expressed doubts,
however, about their ability to influence developments, and Lon-
don might considerably shorten the present tentative schedule
calling for independence in two or three years.

The conferees--who met in Mogadiscio, capital of Somalia and
the designated capital of the new state--released a joint communi-
qué at the end of the conference outlining their plans for the union.
The legislative bodies of the two territories are to merge to form
the new national assembly which will elect a president to head a
coalition government formed by the political parties now in power
in the respective countries.

The agreement appears to be a major victory for Somalia's
Prime Minister Issa. He was believed to favor a loose associa-
tion with the protectorate in order to prevent upsetting the deli-
cate tribal balance which would permit him to remain in power,
but he now appears to have executed a clever political maneuver
which probably will strengthen the position of his party and greatly
enhance his own popularity.

Addis Ababa is apprehensive over the attraction such a union
would present to the nomadic Somalis who inhabit Ethiopia's Ogaden
region, and has substantially increased its security forces in the
Somali border areas during the past year.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 16]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 20]
