[PAGE 01]
6 February 1954

Copy No. 84

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 43
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: DEC
REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Technicians ready to survey Iran's oil installations (page 3).
3. Turkish-Pakistani treaty under consideration (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. New plebiscite proposal suggested by West Germans (page 4).

7. Paris seen not planning to replace sultan of Morocco (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA

8. Costa Rica may not attend Caracas conference (page 6).

* * * *


[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Technicians ready to survey Iran's oil installations:

The American embassy in London reported on 4 February that a technical mission of the oil consortium is ready to make a preliminary survey of the Abadan refinery and the Iranian oil fields if Tehran approves.

The group consists of four technicians from the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and two each from the five American companies, Royal Dutch Shell, and Compagnie Francaise des Petroles.

The mission will not visit Tehran. It plans to arrive at Basra in Iraq about 10 February and will fly from there to the oil installations each day.

Comment: The Iranian government will probably approve the survey, which is expected to provide the first comprehensive and reliable report on the condition of the Abadan refinery in nearly two years. The survey is necessary before the consortium can reach a decision on operating and marketing.


[PAGE 04]
3. Turkish-Pakistani treaty under consideration:

Turkish undersecretary of foreign affairs Birgi informed Ambassador Warren that the Pakistani governor general reacted favorably to a proposed treaty of friendship and collaboration between Turkey and Pakistan.

Birgi stated that the draft agreement provides for consultation in the defense field, including collaboration in the event of unprovoked aggression. There is also provision for the adherence of other countries.

Comment: The proposed treaty, a step toward strengthening the defenses of the Middle East, is further evidence of increasing Turkish leadership in regional defense.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. New plebiscite proposal suggested by West Germans:

Several prominent West German Bundestag deputies have suggested that the West accept Molotov's proposal for an all-German plebiscite,


[PAGE 05]
but recommend that the German people be asked to choose between the Soviet plan for German unity and the Allied plan as presented by British foreign secretary Eden.

According to American officials, Molotov's proposal for a plebiscite to choose between EDC and a peace treaty has been greeted with "satirical jeers" in Bonn.

Comment: The Allies are clearly ahead in the Berlin conference propaganda battle in West Germany.

7. Paris seen not planning to replace sultan of Morocco:

On the basis of recent conversations with a high Foreign Ministry official, the American embassy in Paris believes that France is not,


[PAGE 06]
as had been reported, considering a plan to replace the present sultan of Morocco with his predecessor's second son.

LATIN AMERICA

8. Costa Rica may not attend Caracas conference:

President Figueres of Costa Rica, through an intermediary, told the American embassy on 4 February that he had decided not to send a delegation to the Inter-American Conference in Caracas next month unless all political prisoners in Venezuela are freed beforehand. Ambassador Burr believes this was an attempt to pressure the United States into urging the release of the Venezuelan prisoners.

A high Costa Rican official believes Figueres is giving way under pressure from his cabinet members, who argue that the seriousness of the Communist menace in Guatemala makes it important for Costa Rica to participate in any conference discussions on this topic.

Comment: Figueres, who considers the Venezuelan dictatorship an unfit host for the conference, presumably realizes that it is unrealistic to expect the release of more than a few of the remaining 800 or more prisoners, who include some Communists.

Guatemala and Uruguay are the only other countries which have not announced that they will attend the conference, but it is unlikely that their decisions will be substantially influenced by Costa Rica.
