German barges traveling in West Berlin canals and on East German vehicles traveling in Western Germany. These countermeasures will
be implemented by 17 September at the latest if the USSR fails to remove
its restrictions as requested. They further decided that the West should
provide all possible assistance to alleviate Berlin transport difficulties,
particularly with respect to such perishable shipments as milk.
The meeting was characterized by French
reluctance to adopt firm retaliatory measures. France even suggested
that the Allies permit the signing of an interzonal trade agreement between
East and West Germany, but the US and UK representatives, rejecting
the proposal, emphasized that yielding to Russian pressure would represent "a horrible loss of face for the West." German officials from
the Federal Republic and West Berlin who were called in to discuss the
situation with the Allies showed little enthusiasm for firm countermeasures.
Comment: In applying its recent series
of harassing measures in Berlin, the USSR has succeeded in creating a
situation where discussion of countermeasures in each case inevitably
produces division and haggling among Allied and German officials,
therefore reducing the chances for effective retaliation.
12. Austrian Chancellor reported threatened by party revolt:
Socialist Vice-Chancellor Schaerf has informed
US Commissioner Donnelly that rightist
elements of the conservative People's Party,
spear-headed by governors of the Western
provinces and by several Cabinet ministers including Foreign Minister
Gruber, are seeking to replace Chancellor Figl with someone more
sympathetic to their views. Characterizing the maneuvering as the
beginning of a "Fascist" movement, Schaerf asserts that Figl may
survive until the next general election in 1953, but adds that the opposition is strong. The Socialists, Schaerf contends, fear the coalition
may break down; he asserts that they will never participate in a government that includes both the People's Party and the near-reactionary
Union of Independents.
