*Burma - Communist China:
Ne Win's negotiations on the Sino-Burmese border problem are proceeding smoothly. The Burmese apparently feel that China has made concessions and that the remaining differences can be referred to a "joint commission." A "draft agreement on the boundary and friendship treaty" was expected to be concluded before the Burmese delegation left Peiping on 28 January. Regardless of the prospect of future Chinese stalling tactics in the joint commission, the conclusion of an "agreement" would assist Peiping in its efforts to get a meeting between Nehru and Chou

Iraq: Chief of State General Rubai, military governor General Abdi, and several high Iraqi security officials have been accused in Col. Mahdawi's People's Court of having been privy to the attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Qasim last October. Testimony on 25 January by a defendant claimed that they planned to takeover the government following Qasim's death. These charges, which may have some substance, are likely to create a new political crisis in the Qasim regime.

*Algeria-France: Premier Debré, following his quick trip to Algiers yesterday, reportedly told De Gaulle that the army in Algeria is no longer reliable and will not use force against the settler insurgents. The question of using force had split the French cabinet on 25 January and several ministers who opposed such action, including Deputy Premier Soustelle, have threatened to resign. De Gaulle presumably will have to deal with these threats at the cabinet meeting scheduled for today.
Soustelle, who had planned to resign yesterday, postponed action on assurance from Debré that De Gaulle will state publicly --without revoking his declared self-determination policy for Algeria--that the government will work for the "Frenchification" of Algeria.

The European extremists barricaded in downtown Algiers, meanwhile, have built up their numbers from 1,000 on 24 January to about 4,000, and apparently are counting on the reluctance of the French army to attack them to induce a statement from De Gaulle pledging a "French Algeria." (Page 2)

27 Jan 60
DAILY BRIEF
