[PAGE 01]
13 October 1959

Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 October 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: The major political parties are opposed to the government's recent decree limiting the autonomy of regional governments. They apparently hope to use it as a test case during the present parliamentary session to define parliamentary versus executive powers under the new constitution. The government is taking steps to limit criticism of the decree.

III. THE WEST

Belgium: A serious treasury crisis and growing uncertainty over the viability of the Congo program have aggravated the precarious position of Prime Minister Eyskens' coalition. The government, faced with mounting financial difficulties in the Congo, for the first time in history has found it necessary to subsidize the Congo budget in the face of Belgium's weak financial

[PAGE 04]
position. Moreover, there are increasing indications of native hostility to the territorial elections scheduled for December.

Cyprus: Archbishop Makarios and General Grivas have concluded their three-day talks on the island of Rhodes with a communiqué consisting largely of vague generalities which soft-pedaled their differences. In promoting the talks, Grivas saw the chance to enhance his political prestige in Greece. Makarios probably has been able to avoid any commitments to Grivas which would seriously limit his freedom of action. However, issues which separate the two men apparently persist.

13 Oct 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Political Parties Oppose Sukarno Decree

All major Indonesian political parties, with the Communists in the forefront, oppose a presidential decree of 7 September limiting local autonomy. In addition to opposing the substance of the decree, the parties apparently also hope to use it as a test case during the present parliamentary session to define parliamentary versus executive powers under the changed constitution. Communist labor leaders are reported considering a nationwide protest strike, even though such action would be illegal and would provoke army retaliation.

The decree abolishes most of the local autonomy extended by parliamentary law in 1957 and restores to the central government direct responsibility for the provinces through the county level. These changes, if effected in December as planned, would further diminish party influence which has already been reduced at the national level by the return to the 1945 constitution last July.

Parliament reconvened on 1 October, and, despite a cabinet announcement that the decree will not be submitted to parliament for approval, will probably debate the measure. Party leaders fear the development of a constitutional interpretation by which parliament would lose substantial authority over legislation and be subordinated to the executive. Unless parliament can seriously embarrass the cabinet on the decree, however, and thereby induce government concessions, its protests are unlikely to be effective.

The interior minister has stated that the present parliament is not competent to debate a presidential decree, apparently hinting that significant bills will be submitted to the legislature only after the formation of the People's Congress--the legislative body provided for under the 1945 constitution. The Congress, on which the cabinet has promised "early" action, apparently will be composed of some members of the present elected parliament plus functional and regional representatives appointed by Sukarno. Meanwhile, the army has taken some steps, such as canceling a national conference of regional government officials, to limit criticism of the decree outside parliament.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Financial and Congo Problems Shake Belgian Coalition

A serious treasury crisis and growing uncertainty over the viability of its Congo program have aggravated the precarious position of Belgian Prime Minister Eyskens' coalition. If the Socialists succeed in calling an extraordinary session of parliament on Congo policy this week, the resulting debate could bring down the government. In any case, American Embassy observers in Brussels consider it problematical how much longer the Social Christian - Liberal coalition can survive its "internal contradictions."

At a cabinet session on 7 October, the government left unresolved Belgium's long-term financial problems in the Congo, but decided to underwrite the 1959 Congo budget to the extent of $100,000,000. This is the first time in Belgian history that a subsidy has been required for the Congo. It will aggravate the existing Belgian deficit, which is expected to lead to a major treasury crisis before the end of the year. The Liberals are committed to deserting the coalition rather than voting the taxes needed to meet the crisis.

Another complication facing the coalition is the evidence of increased Congolese hostility toward the program of accelerated political development announced by Brussels last January. Prominent Congolese nationalists have already denounced as undemocratic the elections for the proposed territorial councils scheduled for December.

Congo Minister de Schrijver is expected to issue a "clarification" of the Congo political program later this week. If this fails to satisfy the Congolese as well as domestic critics of the program, he will probably be in serious trouble only a little over a month after taking office. Although the Socialist opposition is still supporting a nonpartisan policy on the Congo, it is anxious to establish a position of confidence with the Congolese in the event the present coalition should fall.

13 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
Cyprus

The recent meetings on Rhodes between Archbishop Makarios and former EOKA leader General Grivas appear to have resulted in a victory for Makarios and added prestige for Grivas. The communiqué issued at the end of the three-day conference called for renewed unity and cooperation in the establishment of an independent Cypriot republic, but failed to mention specific issues which have increasingly separated the two men.

The Archbishop thus returns to Cyprus with enhanced prestige in the Greek Cypriot community for having re-established outward unity. Grivas' full acceptance of the London Agreements--even though he had previously "dissociated" himself from them--will do much to destroy the position of the hard-core Greek Cypriot nationalists who have consistently refused to accept anything less than "enosis"--union with Greece.

Grivas' major benefits appear to stem from acceptance by Makarios of his right to be consulted on important issues involving Cyprus, implied by the holding of the meeting itself, and the political prestige which he has secured through publicity connected with the meeting.

13 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
