[PAGE 01]
30 June 1956

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE POZNAN RIOTS (page 3).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]2. SOVIET OFFICIAL OUTLINES VIEWS ON NEAR EAST TO
ISRAELI OFFICIAL[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).

3. FOUR BURMESE OPPOSITION LEADERS ASSASSINATED
(page 5).

4. "LIBERATION" CELEBRATION MAY BRING NEW DISORDERS
IN GUATEMALA (page 6).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]5. PLOTTING TO ASSASSINATE VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]
(page 7).

6. PERUVIAN LABOR LEADERS ORDER COUNTRY-WIDE
STRIKES (page 8).

7. SOVIET OFFICIAL CLAIMS SOLUTION OF NUCLEAR AIR-
CRAFT PROPULSION (page 9).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. THE POZNAN RIOTS

The Poznan riots of 28 June, which probably involved 15,000 persons, appear to have been brought under control, but conditions have not returned to "normal" as claimed by the regime. A dusk-to-dawn curfew has been imposed. Reports that riots occurred in other cities remain unconfirmed.

The Polish government's admission of 29 June that as many as 38 were killed and 270 wounded indicates the severity of the suppressive measures. By comparison, the East German riots of 1953 resulted in casualties of 16 dead and 100 wounded in East Berlin and 40 dead and 250 wounded in Rostock and Warnemuende.

Although the riots appear to have spread spontaneously, some planning and organization probably preceded them. There had been rumors that a demonstration or strike was to occur at Poznan's Stalin Locomotive Works, according to an official of the American embassy in Warsaw who returned from Poznan late on 27 June. Some of the demonstrators carried arms and banners, and were prompt in blocking the main streets into the city with trucks.

The regime has implied in a party newspaper editorial of 29 June that the liberalization campaign will continue. However, the riots may result in a slowing of the process and a weakening of the position of liberal elements who were reportedly gaining strength in opposition to the stricter policies of party first secretary Ochab. Several Polish sources in Warsaw have told the American embassy that the riots occurred "too soon."

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET OFFICIAL OUTLINES VIEWS ON NEAR EAST TO ISRAELI OFFICIAL

Comment

Moscow's policy of playing down the Arab-Israeli dispute and its unwillingness to commit itself publicly to the Arab viewpoint on this issue was evidenced during Shepilov's tour of the Near East. In public, he avoided the question entirely and, in private, reportedly urged the Arabs to let time take care of the Palestine problem and expressed Soviet support for any UN move toward a peaceful settlement.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. FOUR BURMESE OPPOSITION LEADERS ASSASSINATED

Four leaders of the pro-Communist National United Front were shot and killed by unknown assassins while en route by motor vehicle to a town 80 miles north of Rangoon on 27 June, according to a Rangoon broadcast. They were in the company of Thakin Lwin, believed to be the Front's top leader, who apparently escaped death.

While the ambush may have been staged by Karen or Communist insurgents, it seems likely that it was arranged by the government in an effort to demoralize the Front before it could follow up the gains it registered in the recent elections. Prime Minister Ba Swe and Deputy Prime Minister Kyaw Nyein reportedly were involved in the murder some years ago of Burma's Foreign Minister U Tin Tut.

Whether the government is implicated or not, the National United Front will almost certainly accuse it of being responsible. The Front may attempt to retaliate against members of the cabinet.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. "LIBERATION" CELEBRATION MAY BRING NEW DISORDERS IN GUATEMALA

New disorders may develop in Guatemala in view of the decision of President Castillo Armas to hold the "Liberation" celebration about 1-3 July. Castillo told the American ambassador on 28 June that failure to hold the celebration would be detrimental because of the celebration's special significance for his supporters.

Following so closely the student disorders of 24-25 June, the celebration would seem particularly susceptible to exploitation by agitators and discontented students, and some of Castillo's advisers are reported to have recommended against having the celebration.

Castillo plans to request a "moment of silence" during the celebration for the innocent students who died as a result of "a Communist maneuver" on 25 June.

There are signs that the student strike against the government may be losing strength; no new serious disturbances have been reported. However, Castillo told the ambassador he had refused to discuss any conciliatory measures with students until they have denounced the agitators responsible for the disorders earlier this week. The students have been warned that prompt army action will break up new demonstrations.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. PLOTTING TO ASSASSINATE VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT

Comment

The Venezuelan underground of the outlawed Democratic Action Party is co-operating with exiled members of the party to assassinate President Perez Jimenez, security chief Estrada, and other top government officials as a means of setting off a popular revolution. The objective may be to effect a return to power of the Democratic Action Party under its exiled leader Romulo Betancourt, a close friend of President Figueres.

Figueres is believed to be granting not only moral support to the movement, but probably is aware of and condones the covert operations of Venezuelan exiles in Costa Rica, and may be supplying financial aid to support the revolutionary plans.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. PERUVIAN LABOR LEADERS ORDER COUNTRY-WIDE STRIKES

Labor unions are infuriated by government arrests of leaders of the leftist, non-Communist APRA party and have ordered strikes throughout the country, according to a joint telegram of 28 June from the American armed forces attaches in Lima. Expecting a strike on 1 July, officials of the American-owned copper mines have asked for troops to protect the mines.

President Odria has resigned and that a military junta will be formed by Saldias and Generals Mendoza and Villacorta.

Comment

APRA gained control of Peru's national labor confederation when the confederation was re-established in May after six years of inactivity, and is believed to control about half the country's unions. APRA probably also has sufficient appeal among student groups to foment further unrest.

Reports vary on the composition of the junta. While the senior Peruvian military are generally reputed to oppose APRA, General Mendoza, who is included in all lists of the prospective junta, is reported to have a following among APRA members.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. SOVIET OFFICIAL CLAIMS SOLUTION OF NUCLEAR AIRCRAFT PROPULSION

During the visit of the American air force delegation to the USSR for Air Force Day ceremonies, Khrushchev made the statement that "when we have atom-powered planes we will show you that too." First Deputy Minister of Defense Sokolovski, standing nearby, then said, "the problem of atomic power for aircraft has been solved, it only remains to build it."

Comment

It is not possible from this statement to determine whether work has progressed beyond feasibility studies or whether specific design features of a propulsion unit have been completed. However, it has been estimated that the USSR's nuclear-powered aircraft program will remain in the research phase for several years. Soviet development of a nuclear-powered aircraft with useful military characteristics would be a major effort and is unlikely to be completed until several years after the end of the research phase.

Aircraft, such as the BISON are suitable for use as flight test vehicles, though not adequate in their present design for military use as atomic-powered aircraft.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 29 June)

Egypt has protested the flight of an Israeli plane over the Sinai Peninsula and the El Auja demilitarized zone. According to one press report, Egyptian antiaircraft batteries fired on the plane. (Press)

Israeli prime minister Ben-Gurion reportedly has told UN truce chief Burns that Israel cannot accept "continued aggressions" by Jordan. Ben-Gurion also asked Burns to require Jordan to comply with a provision of the armistice agreement which allows Israelis access to the Wailing Wall in the Old City of Jerusalem, now controlled by Jordan, and normal use of Hadassah Hospital and Hebrew University on Mount Scopus outside the city. These subjects have not been brought up formally by the Israelis for several years.

Israel also has complained again to the UN Security Council about Egyptian interference with Israel-bound shipping passing through the Suez Canal. This interference was the subject of a Security Council resolution in 1951, which stated that the canal should be free to the vessels of all countries. The new protest, together with the one Ben-Gurion reportedly has made about Jordan, is further evidence that the Israeli government intends to insist on what it regards as its rights even more vigorously than it has in the recent past. This attitude is in large part a further reflection of Israeli disappointment with the council resolution of 4 June, from which the clause urging a "mutually acceptable settlement" was dropped at Soviet and Arab insistence. (Press)

Egyptian naval officers are undergoing submarine training in Poland,

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 10
[PAGE 12]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]a previous report that in mid-March two Soviet submarines, two Skoryy-class destroyers and four T-43-class mine sweepers had[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]] been observed berthed in the harbor of Gdynia. It is possible that these submarines, like destroyers and minecraft before them, are to be transferred to Egypt.

The American embassy in Damascus has been reliably informed that Jordanian chief of staff Nuwar visited Syria during the Shepilov visit there for talks with Syrian chief of staff Shuqayr. The two staff chiefs may have discussed the possibility of Jordan's acquiring Soviet bloc arms.

30 June 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 11
