Demonstrations in Japan

Leftists are staging nationwide demonstrations to exploit the emotional impact of the assassination on 12 October of left-wing Socialist leader Inejiro Asanuma by supporting demands of labor, Socialist party (JSP), and Communist leaders for Prime Minister Ikeda's resignation on the grounds that the government is responsible for the incident. Rallies called by the Socialists in connection with the assassination are to coincide with a half-hour strike and mass labor demonstrations against the government which have been planned since early September by Sohyo, the large leftist labor federation. Sohyo, which supports the JSP, was chiefly responsible for organizing and financing the demonstrations in May and June preceding the fall of the Kishi government.

The press, however, which encouraged the demonstrations last spring, is stressing the need to eliminate both leftist and rightist violence from Japanese politics. This view is moderating public reaction to the assassination in spite of widespread shock--perhaps the sharpest in Japan since the war--and sympathy for Asanuma. By recalling the recent stabbing of former Prime Minister Kishi, the press has attempted to counter leftist allegations of government responsibility in the Asanuma case.

The JSP, which hopes orderly demonstrations will arouse support for party opposition to the government in the special Diet session scheduled for 17 October, has joined the government in appealing against violence. The demonstrations so far have been relatively calm, but there have been clashes between students and the police.

In an effort to minimize adverse public reaction in the November election campaign, Ikeda has accepted the resignation of Iwao Yamazaki, who as chairman of the Public Safety Commission is the cabinet minister in charge of police. The Socialists, to preserve their unity in the campaign, have apparently decided to defer the intraparty contest over choosing Asanuma's successor until after the parliamentary election.

15 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
