Mali Moving Toward Early Diplomatic Ties With
Sino-Soviet Bloc

The leftist-oriented government of the Mali Republic apparently intends to establish early diplomatic ties with a number of Sino-Soviet bloc countries, including Communist China and North Vietnam. The government announced on 13 October that it had recognized the Peiping regime, becoming thereby the first of the 16 African states which have become independent so far this year to take such action.

This step will probably be followed shortly by a request for the departure of a Chinese Nationalist mission which had been seeking recognition for Taipei. The Mali announcement of 13 October revealed that a South Vietnamese envoy who had been in Bamako on a mission similar to that of Taipei's representative has already been directed to leave Mali. This action followed a recent visit to Bamako by the North Vietnamese ambassador accredited to Guinea.

The Mali announcement also stated that a Soviet delegation would arrive in Mali later this month. Earlier Mali authorities had announced receipt of a cable from Khrushchev proclaiming the USSR's readiness to proceed with an exchange of diplomatic representatives. Czechoslovakia is apparently already in the process of establishing both diplomatic and economic ties with Mali.

Since Mali was admitted to the UN on 28 September, its delegation in New York has consistently voted with the bloc on all East-West issues. In one instance--the inscription on the General Assembly's agenda of the Hungarian question--Mali alone among African states cast a negative vote. This pattern may change to some extent, however, after the arrival of Mali's new permanent representative to the UN and ambassador to the US--a man believed to be somewhat less ill-disposed to the West than are his country's present spokesmen at the UN. Top officials at Bamako, apparently desirous of preserving a neutral posture, balanced their gestures toward the bloc in their 13 October announcement with statements implying an intention to encourage friendly relations with Western countries.

15 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
