Afghanistan-Pakistan: High Pakistani Air Force officers have stated that on several occasions in recent weeks formations of Afghan IL-28 bombers have flown over Pakistani territory. Such overflights, the first indication of regular operations by Afghanistan's Soviet-equipped bomber force, seem almost certain to provoke eventual Pakistani reaction if they are continued. An Afghan-Pakistani clash would upset present efforts to ease the long-tense state of relations between the two countries.

(Page 3)

Belgian Congo: Serious nationalist disorders on 30 and 31 October spread for the first time beyond the coastal area when a violent clash took place between Belgian troops and native Africans at Stanleyville. The violence, which reportedly did extensive damage and claimed at least 24 lives, occurred after government forces attempted to disperse an unauthorized meeting of the Congo Nationalist Movement (MNC) independence group. The MNC recently rejected Belgian plans for gradual Congolese independence. Although order had been restored in Stanleyville by 1 November, the arrest of the MNC leader on that date may be expected to lead to further trouble.

France-Algeria: The announcement by Delegate General Delouvrier in Algeria on 30 October that a two-stage referendum will be required when Algerians exercise self-determination, as promised by De Gaulle, is viewed as a step backwards by proponents of a liberal Algerian solution. Delouvrier's "clarification" of De Gaulle's proposals, presumably made on orders from Paris, was probably intended to

III. THE WEST

France: De Gaulle appears reluctant to reopen the question of storing American atomic warheads in France for NATO use until after he has talked with Khrushchev. De Gaulle may hope that by having demonstrated French "independence" of the United States he can ask that Khrushchev meet his public demands for a show of good will on a world-wide basis as a precondition for a summit meeting. Finance Minister Pinay has complained that De Gaulle did not bother to consult the cabinet before inviting Khrushchev.

(Page 4)

2 Nov 59 DAILY BRIEF ii.
