Communist China - India: In an 8 September letter to Nehru, Communist China's Premier Chou En-lai made a display of willingness to discuss Sino-Indian border questions but stanchly reasserted Chinese claims to disputed territory. Stating Peiping "has consistently held" that both sides should seek a permanent settlement, Chou suggested, as a "provisional measure," that the "status quo" existing before the Tibetan revolt be maintained. He denied, however, the validity of Indian territorial claims and charged that Indian troops were guilty of "armed attacks" on Chinese frontier outposts. In urging that Indian troops be pulled back from areas on the McMahon line where they were sent last spring, Chou apparently was trying to shift to Nehru the responsibility for easing the current situation. Nehru--firmly committed to the McMahon line--will refuse to accept Peiping's territorial claims and to withdraw troops from established Indian posts, but probably will agree to diplomatic discussions.

*In a move to soft-pedal the dispute, Moscow issued a TASS statement on 9 September stressing the USSR's friendly relations with both India and Communist China and carefully refraining from assigning blame to either party. The statement said "Soviet leading quarters" are confident that the two governments will reach a peaceful settlement based on mutual interests and "traditional friendship." (Page 2)

Watch Committee conclusion--Taiwan Strait: Available information on air, ground and naval activities does not indicate that a major military undertaking by the Communists is in preparation for the immediate future. However, the Chinese Communists retain the capability to initiate military action in this area with little or no warning.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Despite minor gains claimed by government forces in Sam Neua Province, the town of Sam Neua apparently remains under threat of attack. (Meanwhile, there are indications of recent North Vietnamese airdrop activity in the vicinity of the demarcation line between North and South Vietnam which suggest)
