1. COMMENT ON ISRAELI INTENTION TO FORCE PASSAGE THROUGH GULF OF AQABA

Beirut
informed Cairo that Israel planned to attack Egypt if Cairo attempted to obstruct passage of Israeli ships through the Gulf of Aqaba. (See Item 1, CIB, 8 March 1957.)

This report is in general accord with the statement of Israeli foreign minister Meir on 5 March to UN secretary general Hammarskjold to the effect that Israel "next week" would exercise the right to pass shipping through the Straits of Tiran. Mrs. Meir stated that Israeli naval vessels would be used "if necessary" in this undertaking. Prime Minister Ben-Gurion on 6 March informed the Israeli parliament he would use force to protect Israeli "rights" in the Gulf of Aqaba.

The principal channel for shipping through the nine-mile wide entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba is Enterprise Passage, a 4,600 foot wide deepwater channel adjacent to the Egyptian coast. (See map, p. 4.) There is a second narrower and shallower entrance, Grafton Passage, just to the east of Enterprise Passage. The Israelis have destroyed the Egyptian gun positions commanding the entrance to the gulf, leaving Egypt no immediate local capability for opposing the passage of Israeli shipping from the shore. Egypt has one frigate and about eight motor torpedo boats in the Red Sea area, and the Gulf of Aqaba is within range of Egypt's 35 IL-28 jet light bombers. Nevertheless, Israel's air power as well as its naval strength in the gulf--two frigates and two armed launches--is sufficient to cover passage through the gulf.

It is probable that Israel will attempt to send its ships through the Straits of Tiran and support their passage with force of arms if necessary in the near future. Egypt will certainly react with protests to any Israeli attempt to force the straits and may use force. An important deterrent factor to the use of force by Cairo is the presence of UNEF units at Sharm el-Shaikh.

The political posture of Britain and especially France strongly suggests that they would give Israel at
