LATE ITEM

7. Comment on Soviet proposal for four-power conference:

The Soviet note of 4 August, proposing a four-power foreign ministers' meeting in August or September, reveals the strength of the Soviet concern with the pending French debate on EDC ratification. It suggests that Moscow was disappointed at the widespread negative reaction in the West to its 24 July proposal for an all-European conference on collective security. Issued on the eve of Western efforts to agree on a joint reply to the earlier note, it appears to represent a move to maintain the initiative which the Kremlin probably calculated lay on the Communist side after Geneva.

The latest note proposes that the four foreign ministers discuss the calling of the all-European conference and "measures contributing to its success," a vague item which would open the door to a barrage of Soviet propaganda on the dangers of EDC and German rearmament. The note also proposes that the foreign ministers discuss the German question, and--mentioning past disagreement on the basic issues of unity and a peace treaty--recommends that first of all they consider several unspecified questions relating to Germany on which agreement would be possible.

Moscow appears to be reluctant at this time to rehash stale peace treaty proposals on which Soviet maneuverability is very limited. At new talks, Molotov is likely to repeat his Berlin conference proposals for various all-German committees on such matters as limitation of police forces, freer travel, trade and cultural exchange within Germany. A more extensive set of proposals on German matters may result from the current visit of East German deputy premier Ulbricht to Moscow.

The renewed Russian insistence on a conference is likely to evoke a more favorable French press reaction than did the note of 24 July, but there will still be disappointment in Paris that Moscow has not made more specific or original proposals. Premier Mendes-France now may be inclined to accede to pressure from the Assembly to postpone a showdown on EDC until after the summer recess.

British and German opinion too is likely to criticize the lack of concrete suggestions on Germany. Both governments, however, will probably find it necessary to act cautiously in opposing the Soviet proposal.
