Much of the local dissatisfaction in both the Lithuanian and Ukrainian republics appears to be with the sycophantic attitude which the centrally appointed collective farm chairmen displayed toward everything Great Russian. Furthermore, their overzealousness in consolidating the collective farms has caused considerable disapproval in Moscow because of ensuing production losses. This latter point was particularly stressed by Malenkov at the 19th Party Congress.

FAR EAST
3. Comment on release of North Korean prisoners of war:
The Communists will almost certainly assert that President Rhee's release of 25,000 North Korean anti-Communist POW's was taken in collusion with the United Nations Command, undermines the basis of the truce talks, and "proves" a lack of good faith. While they may recess the talks pending assurances against future releases and will fully exploit the propaganda value in the incident, it is doubtful that they will break off the talks on this issue.

Rhee has several other possible weapons at his command, short of independent military operations, to hamper or block a truce, embarrass the United States, and emphasize South Korean opposition to an armistice. Measures which he may still adopt include refusal to sign an armistice, refusal to remove South Korean troops from the demilitarized zone, withdrawal from the UN Command, and employment of force against Indian troops.

While there is a real danger of South Korean unilateral military action, Rhee will find it more difficult to gain the army's cooperation for such a move than was the case with the rear area troops which are under the command of a "political" general completely loyal to the president.

Whether Rhee will make any further unilateral moves probably depends on the reactions which follow the prisoner release. In addition to his efforts to undermine the truce, Rhee apparently hopes to secure major concessions from the United States without making commitments. Any success he might have could change the widespread indecision in South Korea to support.
