India and Pakistan Near Final Agreement on Indus Waters Treaty

The way now seems clear for conclusion of the much-delayed treaty between India and Pakistan on the division of waters in the Indus River basin. While quibbling over remaining details could cause further delays, International Bank Vice President Iliff informed Ambassador Rountree on 15 August that during his recent talks in New Delhi and Rawalpindi, both governments had agreed to a compromise of the most important points still in dispute.

President Ayub confirmed publicly on 17 August that Nehru will visit Pakistan on 19 to 20 September to sign the treaty. Ayub reiterated that he hoped to discuss "all questions" of mutual interest with Nehru, including the dominant Kashmir dispute. The Pakistani President recalled in a broadcast on 13 August that he had made every conceivable effort to solve Indo-Pakistani problems even though the response from Indian leaders had been "very tardy indeed." He apparently feels the next move is up to Nehru. Ayub, concerned over growing domestic criticism, probably will exploit Nehru's visit as a foreign policy success. He is unlikely at this time, however, to risk further adverse reaction at home by making any substantial concessions.

On several occasions recently Nehru expressed his willingness to go to Pakistan, probably realizing that some reciprocal gesture on his part is necessary now if the improvement in relations is to continue. He denied in Parliament on 1 August that he had refused to talk with the Pakistanis, and said he would take the opportunity of a visit to discuss "whatever matters" are raised. Nehru made it clear that he was not interested in Ayub's joint defense proposals, and his later comments on Kashmir suggest he still is not prepared to negotiate a settlement of this 13-year-old dispute. The Nehru-Ayub meeting may nevertheless lead to exploratory talks on these and other questions at a lower level in order to further the rapprochement both leaders desire.

18 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
