II. ASIA-AFRICA

King Husayn Considering Possible Intervention in Iraq

Jordan's King Husayn, encouraged by a group of royalist
Iraqi exiles in Beirut, is contemplating possible Jordanian in-
tervention in Iraq to prevent Communist domination of the
country. He probably also fears that a successful UAR-sup-
ported overthrow of Qasim would increase Nasir's potential for
subverting the Jordanian Government. The King reportedly is
ready to lead a movement to re-establish the Iraqi monarchy,
believing that, as a cousin of the late King Faysal of Iraq, he
is best qualified to claim the throne.

Husayn, who has asserted Jordan would not take any action
in Iraq without prior consultation with the United States Govern-
ment, said on 8 October that he was not planning intervention
"at the present time," but that the Jordanian Army was making
preparations in case it became "necessary" to preserve the
integrity of Jordanian borders or to take action in Iraq. One
infantry brigade is being readied for a possible move to the
H-4 pipeline pumping station, about 50 miles from the Iraqi
border; other units are to be sent on maneuvers, and Jordanian
air units have been placed on alert. The American Army attaché
in Amman believes the Jordanians are capable of forming and
moving a small task force into Iraq in two or three days.

Husayn almost surely regards prior assurance of British or
American support as a necessary prerequisite to any interven-
tion. He also has conferred with Iranian intelligence chief Bakhtiar
about possible Jordanian-Iranian action against Qasim.

The group of Iraqi exiles in Beirut with whom Husayn is in
contact has been urging him for weeks to support them in opera-
tions against the Iraqi regime. Calling themselves the Iraqi Politi-
cal Exile Committee, they met on 3 October and selected former
Iraqi Prime Minister Ali Jawdat Ayyubi as president. Also associat-
ed with the group is Shammar tribal leader Shaykh Fannar Faysal.
In mid-September Husayn said they had not offered any specific
plan for overthrowing Qasim, but they claim to have supporters
in Iraq among various tribes as well as the Kurds.
