[PAGE 01]
9 October 1951

Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

USSR

1. Embassy Moscow comments on Stalin's atomic bomb interview (page 3)

FAR EAST

3. Chinese allegedly supply half of Viet Minh staff leadership (page 4)

NEAR EAST

5. Comment on Egypt's abrogation of the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty (page 6)

WESTERN EUROPE

6. French Premier predicts Assembly approval of Schuman Plan and European Army (page 6)

****

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
USSR

1. Embassy Moscow comments on Stalin's atomic bomb interview:

The US Embassy in Moscow characterizes Stalin's Pravda interview on the atomic bomb as a "strong, aggressive" statement directed particularly to the United States. The Embassy suggests that the Kremlin may consider the Soviet atomic weapons program now sufficiently advanced to warrant a belligerent attitude toward the West and reassurance to the Orbit that the armament gap has been spanned.

The Embassy does not see in Stalin's references to controls any increased possibility of a compromise control solution. It feels that his statement was apparently intended to frighten the West into accepting the Soviet control scheme, since agreement even on the USSR's terms previously offered in the UN was not mentioned.

Comment: Stalin's admission that the USSR now has developed and tested the atomic bomb follows the USSR propaganda theme on atomic energy adopted last August. At that time, in contradiction to the Russians' earlier line, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet announced that "only after a ban on atomic weapons is imposed can atomic power be truly utilized for peaceful purposes."

In view of the publicity given to US development of atomic weapons, the USSR undoubtedly wishes to impress upon the world that the Soviet armed forces also possess strength in the same field. Stalin's timing was probably determined by the official US announcement; what he said was obviously phrased to reconcile the development of the bomb with the various lines of the Soviet "peace campaign."

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Chinese allegedly supply half of Viet Minh staff leadership:

Charge Gullion that approximately half of the higher Viet Minh staff leadership is now composed of Chinese Communist officers, with heaviest representation in the quartermaster, medical, and other service corps. On the other hand, believes that Chinese seldom exercise command in the field.

states that the assignment of some 50 Chinese political advisers has antagonized the "hypernationalistic" Viet Minh, and that the tendency of these advisers to avoid the active fronts and spend all their time at "headquarters" in Cao bang has occasioned Sino-Viet Minh friction.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
Comment: Reports of the participation of Chinese Communist personnel in the Viet Minh have been received with increasing frequency for more than a year and a half. According to the French, Chinese advisers numbering between 5,000 and 10,000 have been assigned to Viet Minh units down to company level.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST

5. Comment on Egypt's abrogation of the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty:

With the Egyptian Parliament preparing legislation for abrogation of the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty and the 1899 Condominium Agreement on the Sudan, the Western position in the Middle East is seriously jeopardized.

For the present, the British will stand by their claim that abrogation has no validity. British troops may be expected to remain in the Suez Canal zone, since the Egyptians are incapable of ousting them by force.

If a solution is not found in the proposed Middle East Command, Egypt may be expected to resort to attritional measures designed to make the position of the British forces untenable, thus forcing on the West a decision between evacuation and provision of additional means of support.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. French Premier predicts Assembly approval of Schuman Plan and European Army:

French Premier Pleven has told US Ambassador Bruce that in the National Assembly session opening 6 November he expects to have a comfortable majority for ratification of the Schuman Plan and for approval of the government's policy on the prospective European Defense Forces. Both Pleven and Vice-Premier Bidault, who recently expressed similar confidence to Ambassador Bruce, assume that the Gaullists as well as the Communists will vote solidly against a European Army.

Comment: While this is the first reliable indication of the probable Assembly alignment on the Schuman Plan,

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
intermittent reports have warned that it would meet serious opposition when submitted for ratification.

- 7 -
