WESTERN EUROPE

6. East German defector describes unity campaign as tactical:
The current Soviet unity campaign for Germany is only a tactical maneuver, according to Gerold Rummler, personal relations officer for East German Foreign Minister Dertinger. Rummler, who fled to West Berlin, about two weeks ago, asserted that East German politicians were worried by the prospect of all-German elections until informed by Russian Ambassador Pushkin that the Soviet Union did not contemplate "sacrificing" the East German regime in free elections.

American observers in Berlin comment that the East German tactics support Rummler's statements.

Comment: Rummler later stated publicly that Dertinger does have plans for all-German elections, but that his plans call for separate simultaneous elections in East and West Germany, with the West German parties being excluded from East German election lists.

This information may disillusion the one-third of the West German populace which either supports the Soviet unity offer or has not as yet been convinced of its insincerity.

7. East German Politburo charts action to culminate in May:
East German Premier Grotewohl and his deputy, Walter Ulbricht, returned from Moscow about 13 April and convened a meeting of the Socialist Unity Party (SED) politburo to discuss action to be taken should West Germany sign the contractual agreement prior to the holding of a four-power conference.

The USSR will reportedly apply continuous pressure for a four-power conference while the SED takes immediate steps to mobilize the West German support. Through local action groups the SED will try to swing the West German Socialist Party over to the side of resistance before 1 May. The Communists plan May Day demonstrations for unity along the inter-zonal border, where large numbers of People's Police will be stationed.

The conference revealed that SED leaders believe the contractual agreement will be signed by mid-May, whereas the USSR believes it is still possible to "hinder" the signing.
