problematical whether any prominent members of the opposition Democratic party would participate in a coalition if such an arrangement is proposed by Rhee.

Chang Myon, the leader of the Democratic party whose term as vice president expires on 15 August, has resigned. His action is probably intended to exert maximum pressure on Rhee and maintain the momentum of the popular drive. The moves of both Rhee and Chang will provide further unsettling effects on the South Korean situation. (Page 4)

Meanwhile, restiveness continues throughout the country. One major demonstration by students yesterday in Inchon was dispersed by police. There were no casualties. (Page 4)

Nationalist China: The disorder in South Korea has increased the possibility of protest demonstrations over any irregularities during local elections tomorrow in Taiwan, where developments in Korea are followed closely. Defeat of any of several independent candidates by a narrow margin in hotly contested races could incite open accusations against the ruling Kuomintang and result in public protests.

Laos: The wife of the French UNESCO official, who was murdered on 21 April in a resort near Vientiane, says she received the "clear impression" that her husband's assailants had mistaken him for an American. The American Embassy in Vientiane comments that if this is valid, it would tend to support previously unconfirmed reports that the Communist Pathet Lao insurgents had issued a directive early this month calling for "positive action" against Americans. The embassy has prohibited Americans from traveling outside Vientiane until after the national elections this Sunday.

Japan: The nationwide leftist campaign against ratification of the US-Japanese security treaty is likely to be exploited by extremists who plan a violent student-led demonstration in front of the Diet building on 26 April. Government officials plan to mobilize 10,000 police equipped with tear gas to cope with the demonstrations. Leftist extremism could delay the ratification schedule, but it will antagonize the Japanese public and probably undercut opposition to the treaty. (Page 7)
