Split in Somalia's Governing Party Appears Imminent

The long-expected split in Somalia's moderate governing party--the Somali Youth League (SYL)--may be imminent following the government's acceptance on 8 May of Minister of Interior Hagi Musa Bogor's resignation. Hagi Musa is the recognized leader of the Darots--the country's second largest tribal group--and they, together with the politically advanced Hawias, constitute the coalition SYL. The Darots frequently have charged the Hawias with using their government positions to increase their control over the SYL and their prestige in the government. This issue prompted Hagi Musa to precipitate a government crisis in December 1957.

Hagi Musa's surprise resignation, which set off a governmental crisis, resulted from his unilateral order--against the will of the prime minister, who is a Hawia--to withdraw the 25 February ban imposed by the government on two smaller parties accused of inciting violence preceding the March parliamentary elections. The resignation must be confirmed by the Italian administrator, but in the past he has always supported the prime minister.

As a result of his resignation, Hagi Musa probably will either leave the SYL voluntarily or be expelled from the party at its forthcoming party congress, which is scheduled to begin on 16 May to consider the composition of the government for the next five years. Hagi Musa then may join the UAR-supported Greater Somalia League--one of the two parties banned by the government on 25 February--or form a new party composed largely of Darots.

The semblance of political unity which the SYL sought to preserve before the world and the United Nations, at least until the country achieved independence in December 1960, will end abruptly if the party splits along party lines. Moreover, the political instability which would result from such a split would provide an atmosphere conducive to further outside influence, especially from the UAR.

11 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
