[PAGE 01]
12 March 1952
Copy No. 43

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Heavy Viet Minh attacks in Tonkin foreseen (page 3).
2. Thai Premier admits intention to resign (page 3).
3. Chinese Premier says he cannot tolerate presence of Chinese Nationalists in Burma (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Senate aroused over violation of senatorial immunity (page 4).
5. Israel wishes closer ties with Italy and India (page 4).
6. Libyan King wants American military installations in Cyrenaica (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Heavy Viet Minh attacks in Tonkin foreseen:

The disposition of Viet Minh troops as reported by a usually reliable Vietnamese source in early March indicates "potential heavy attacks" against the French defense perimeter in the vicinity of Hanoi.

Comment: the Viet Minh offensive force has been largely spent and that, although continuing infiltration tactics, the Viet Minh will require some time for rest and regrouping. While French estimates during the past several months have been unduly sanguine, the known strength of Viet Minh forces does not appear sufficient to capture and hold key positions inside the French defenses.

2. Thai Premier admits intention to resign:

Premier Phibun confirmed to the American Ambassador in Bangkok recent reports that he wished to resign and become Speaker in Parliament. He mentioned the date of 15 March, when the present elections are expected to end.

Comment: Phibun's statement of intention to resign should not be considered final in view of past instances when he has continued as Premier because of the failure of rival political factions to agree on any other candidate.

3. Chinese Premier says he cannot tolerate presence of Chinese Nationalists in Burma:

The Burmese Ambassador in Peiping reported to Rangoon a conversation with Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai in which the latter stated that his government could not tolerate the presence of Nationalist troops in Burma "if USA imperialism came in." Chou asked if Burma were aware that the
[PAGE 04]
United States and Thailand were collaborating with these forces, and that 2,000 additional Nationalist troops had recently been parachuted into Burma.

The Chinese Communist Premier professed appreciation of Burma's difficulties in dealing with the Nationalists, but stated that he "keenly desires" Burma to liquidate them as a matter of urgency.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Senate aroused over violation of senatorial immunity:

The recent search of an Iranian Senator's home by the police has resulted in demands for the resignation of the Acting Minister of Justice. The Senate, which considers the search a violation of the constitutional immunity of its members, has already demanded apologies from the Acting Minister. The Embassy comments that the incident may be used to demand Prime Minister Mossadeq's resignation.

Comment: Many Senators have become alarmed in recent weeks over the consequences of Mossadeq's policies and have reportedly been considering a vote of no-confidence in the Prime Minister. There is no evidence, however, that the Senate, whose present session will end on 16 March, is any more capable of decisive action than in the past.

5. Israel wishes closer ties with Italy and India:

The Turkish Minister in Tel Aviv has received information that Israel is seeking closer ties with countries in the Mediterranean area and in Asia because it fears that the Israeli position in the proposed Middle East Command will be inferior, from both a political and a military standpoint, to that of the Arab States.
[PAGE 05]
Accordingly, Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett intends to visit Rome on 17 to 20 March, and Foreign Undersecretary Eytan has gone to New Delhi. They hope through these official visits to discover the attitude of Italy and India toward establishing closer relations with Israel.

Comment: Discussions between Israeli officials and American and British representatives have revealed Israel's strong interest in the development of the proposed Middle East Command, as well as a fear that Western military aid to the Arab States, under the provisions of this defense plan, may endanger Israel's security.

6. Libyan King wants American military installations in Cyrenaica:

King Idris of Libya has made it unmistakably clear that he would welcome the establishment of American military installations in his home province of Cyrenaica. The Governor of Cyrenaica was even more outspoken in his approval, citing as reasons the economic benefits resulting from the presence of US troops.

The American Minister points out that rivalry between Cyrenaica and the more populous and prosperous province of Tripolitania -- which has the important US airbase, Wheelus Field -- strongly colors the viewpoint of Cyrenaican authorities. He observes that strategically important Cyrenaica is nevertheless almost unique in actively encouraging the establishment of American bases and that this friendliness ought not to be neglected in over-all military planning for the Middle East.
