charged initially with securing the airfield and the protection of King Husayn, and the Amman area. They may later be sent to other towns and the West Bank. Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, however, extracted a promise from the UK that British troops would not be involved in any operation on the Israeli border. While there were demonstrations in Nablus on 16 July, the remainder of the country has been calm. The acute shortage of gasoline and fuel oil has already caused interruption of electric power and threatens to shut down water pumping stations.

Jordanian public opinion was almost unanimous in hailing the fall of the Iraqi regime, but now is dejected over the US landings in Lebanon, which visibly strengthened the morale of progovernment circles. Since the arrival of British troops, however, many now "approve" the influx of troops. Reports state that "Syrian troops on the Jordanian border have 'disappeared'." Baghdad Radio, however, appealing principally to the Jordanian Army and the Bedouin tribes, is exhorting them to "crush your enemy as your brothers did in Iraq."

Moving into line with the UAR, the new Iraqi regime has recognized Communist China and restored relations with the USSR, which were broken during World War II.

the trend in Iraq is toward federal union with the UAR." Egyptian officers are being sent to Iraq to organize "people's resistance forces," and an announcer from Radio Cairo has been sent to give direction to Baghdad broadcasts. Damascus has urged Cairo to "swamp" Iraq with Egyptian teachers, newspapers, pictures of Nasir, and pamphlets on the Egyptian revolution.

Foreigners now are being allowed to leave Iraq only via Basra. The ports of Basra, Khorramshahr, and Abadan are fully open. The Iraq Petroleum Company's operations in northern Iraq are continuing in a normal fashion. Iraqi Foreign Minister Jamali now is reported to be under arrest, rather than dead.

The Saudi Arabian reaction to the landing of US troops in Lebanon and the Iraqi revolt is varied. King Saud,

18 July 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN 7a
