Report No. 113 of the IAC Current Intelligence Group for the Taiwan Strait Problem, Covering the Period From 9 January To 12 February 1958

1. There were no significant combat operations in the area during the period.

2. Chinese Communist air defense capabilities have shown progressive improvement during the past few months. There has been a noticeable increase in the frequency and scope of Ground Control Intercept attempts by Chinese Communist jet fighters against Nationalist jets overflying the China mainland. This intensified effort to counter Chinese Nationalist air activities is primarily a result of additional fighter coverage in Southeast China.

While these factors reflect a tightening of Chinese Communist air defenses and are chiefly attributable to Chinese Communist willingness to challenge Nationalist air operations, the Chinese Communist Air Force, with an estimated 1,625 jet fighters, is still believed to be deficient in many areas. Sufficient numbers of all-weather fighters are lacking; pilot proficiency is relatively low; and major logistic support is still dependent on the USSR.

3. the port of Amoy now is open to Japanese shipping. It is probable that the Chinese Communist motive in opening the port to the Japanese was in part a desire to embitter relations between Japan and Nationalist China. The Chinese Nationalists on 3 February issued a statement reiterating their "port closure" of all China mainland ports and warned that foreign shipping entering the Taiwan Strait should inform Nationalist officials in advance. If Japanese shipping does commence using Amoy, the Nationalists probably will confine their protests to the diplomatic field. British ships since last August have been entering Amoy without interference.

4. Chou En-lai, in his foreign policy address on 10 February, devoted considerable attention to the charge that the US was attempting to create acceptance of the status quo on Taiwan and thus to bring about a "two Chinas" situation, which he termed "absolutely unacceptable." Chou reaffirmed Peiping's determination to gain control of Taiwan but did not discuss the means by which this is to be accomplished.

13 Feb 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
