I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Backs Indonesian Currency

The USSR has complied with an Indonesian request of
early June to earmark gold reserves in Moscow to raise do-
mestic confidence in Indonesia's currency.

The value of this gold loan may be $25,-
000,000, the amount the USSR reportedly was offering Indo-
nesia in April.

In late May, Foreign Minister Subandrio suggested to
the American ambassador in Djakarta that the United States
should establish a gold reserve of $25,000,000 to support
Indonesian currency.

Indonesia's gold and foreign exchange reserves have
dwindled to such a critical point that Prime Minister
Djuanda has publicly mentioned the seriousness of the coun-
try's economic condition. Indonesia's chronic difficulties
have been aggravated during the past 18 months by decreased
production, the disruption of normal trade channels, and the
increased government expenditures imposed by the Sumatran
and Celebes revolts.

This loan could make it possible for Indonesia to use
its dwindling gold and hard currency resources in trade
with the West. Anticipating this, the Soviet deputy foreign
minister reminded the ambassador that the Soviet Union is
ready to supply "vital goods to Indonesia on the basis of a
credit agreement," which would eliminate any need to use
these resources in free-world markets. The USSR, by re-
taining physical possession of the earmarked gold reserves,
will be in a position to exert additional pressure on Indonesia.

While Indonesia's trade remains largely oriented to free-
world markets, the Sino-Soviet bloc is increasing the impact
of its relatively small rubber purchases by dealing directly
with Indonesian producers rather than with brokers in West
Europe, and has met Indonesian food shortages by emergency
rice shipments on long-term credits. The bloc also is sup-
plying military equipment and under a $100,000,000 credit
vessels necessary for interisland shipping on credit.

11 June 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
