Nasir May Institute Purge in Syrian Region of UAR

Resumption of attacks on UAR Vice President Hawrani
and his followers by the semicontrolled Damascus press
may presage a purge by Nasir of the Syrian regional gov-
ernment. The attacks are accompanied by a suggestion
that Egyptians--"statesmen from the southern region"--
be brought in.

Similar attacks, centering on an agrarian labor reform
which Hawrani was sponsoring, occurred during Nasir's
visit to the USSR. In the present instance, Hawrani's sup-
porters among the regional government ministers are be-
ing criticized for their handling of the petroleum shortage
which has developed since the fighting in Lebanon cut the
normal supply routes for refined POL. A recent change
in the Syrian customs tariff, which had been interpreted
as aimed at bringing Syria's customs duties into line with
those of Egypt, has also been criticized in Damascus and
cited in press reports from Cairo as having irritated Nasir.

At the same time, Nasir's hatchet man in Syria, In-
terior Minister Sarraj, is being praised by the Damascus
press for his statements urging further efforts to solve
the POL situation. Sarraj and Hawrani, a demagogic po-
litical leader and theorist, have not gotten on well to-
gether in the Syrian regional government. Hawrani has
been especially suspect since it appears that his Arab
Socialist (Baath) party has not dissolved itself as was
agreed when the UAR was formed last winter. Nasir
almost certainly would like to eliminate any vestiges of
independent followings which Syrian politicians have car-
ried over into the UAR, and there have been several re-
ports that he is concerned about the situation in Syria and
has intended to take action since his return from Mos-
cow. In addition to the political situation, Nasir may be
concerned by reports of friction--possibly involving a
shooting affray--between Egyptian and Syrian army of-
ficers.

11 June 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
