II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Political Parties Oppose Sukarno Decree

All major Indonesian political parties, with the Communists in the forefront, oppose a presidential decree of 7 September limiting local autonomy. In addition to opposing the substance of the decree, the parties apparently also hope to use it as a test case during the present parliamentary session to define parliamentary versus executive powers under the changed constitution. Communist labor leaders are reported considering a nationwide protest strike, even though such action would be illegal and would provoke army retaliation.

The decree abolishes most of the local autonomy extended by parliamentary law in 1957 and restores to the central government direct responsibility for the provinces through the county level. These changes, if effected in December as planned, would further diminish party influence which has already been reduced at the national level by the return to the 1945 constitution last July.

Parliament reconvened on 1 October, and, despite a cabinet announcement that the decree will not be submitted to parliament for approval, will probably debate the measure. Party leaders fear the development of a constitutional interpretation by which parliament would lose substantial authority over legislation and be subordinated to the executive. Unless parliament can seriously embarrass the cabinet on the decree, however, and thereby induce government concessions, its protests are unlikely to be effective.

The interior minister has stated that the present parliament is not competent to debate a presidential decree, apparently hinting that significant bills will be submitted to the legislature only after the formation of the People's Congress--the legislative body provided for under the 1945 constitution. The Congress, on which the cabinet has promised "early" action, apparently will be composed of some members of the present elected parliament plus functional and regional representatives appointed by Sukarno.

Meanwhile, the army has taken some steps, such as canceling a national conference of regional government officials, to limit criticism of the decree outside parliament.
