Student Unrest in Northeastern Brazil

In addition to military precautions, Quadros sent his minister of education to Recife on 5 June with instructions to evict--with force if necessary--the striking students who had occupied university buildings there, an action which was carried out two days later. The minister was also instructed to demand that the students return to classes as a prerequisite to any consideration of their complaints. Moreover, during an interpellation about student unrest, the minister of justice advised Congress on 9 June that the government would uphold the law without compromise. Although Recife was reported relatively quiet yesterday, the strike was still unsettled and a number of students were still being held under arrest.

Quadros probably will take into account fully the attitude of the military in meeting any crisis in order not to further compound his current difficulties with the army. Friction between the President and the military was revealed most recently when Minister of War Denys resisted a presidential order to arrest Marshal Lott, defeated candidate in the 1960 presidential election. Lott had granted a press interview in which he sharply criticized Quadros personally and also the President's favorable policy toward Cuba.

There are indications that student sympathy strikes may break out in the neighboring state of Paraiba, in Sao Paulo, and possibly in other areas. Labor groups in Recife have considered supporting the strikers, and labor unions elsewhere may join, particularly the Communist and pro-Castro sectors under the influence of Vice President Goulart, an unprincipled politician and head of the Labor party who is at odds with Quadros.

The pro-Castro Peasant Leagues, headed by pro-Communist Francisco Juliao--who was recently in Cuba and visited the Sino-Soviet bloc in late 1960--have headquarters in Recife and can be expected to give some kind of support to the student strikes there. The leagues are pressing for radical agrarian reform in the economically depressed northeastern area of Brazil, which is frequently subject to drought.

The Recife unrest could become Quadros' first confrontation with the subversive potential of pro-Castro forces in the

12 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
