were made by Cuban Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs Carlos Olivares, while on a "good-will" trip to these countries during the last half of May. Olivares reiterated Cuba's unwillingness to use the machinery of the six-nation ad hoc good offices committee set up by the OAS foreign ministers last August. The presidents of Mexico, Brazil, and Ecuador all told Olivares that they favored the use of this committee but would consider other methods of conciliation, not involving the OAS, if such other methods offered a chance of success. Cuba's refusal to use the OAS is based on Havana's oft-repeated charge that the OAS is a "tool of US imperialism." (Backup, Page 5)

Brazil: Student unrest in Recife, capital of the state of Pernambuco in northeastern Brazil, has created a tense situation which could spread to other parts of the country and touch off nationwide political repercussions. Military forces in the area are on the alert; 400 to 600 troop reinforcements were airlifted to Recife from Rio de Janeiro on 7 June, and naval units--a cruiser and two destroyers--have also been ordered there. The unrest developed when the director of the Recife law school in early June refused to permit the mother of Cuban leader Che Guevara to speak on the university campus. The Brazilian Army is reported to have insisted on strong measures in Recife to prevent the unrest from threatening national security. President Quadros, already confronted with serious discontent among a segment of the officer corps, is taking a firm stand against the student agitators. (Backup, Page 6)

South Korea: The dominant position of Major General Pak Chong-hui, strong man of the military regime, is emphasized by the announcement that he will head the standing committee of the Supreme Council for National Reconstruction (SCNR), which is expected to become the policy-making group in South Korea. The standing committee, established under the terms of an SCNR law announced on 9 June, will consist of the chairmen

12 June 61 DAILY BRIEF
