[PAGE 01]
7 October 1959

Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 October 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Jordan: Jordan's King Husayn has decided not to meet UAR President Nasir at a tripartite conference which King Saud has been trying to arrange since his early September talks with Nasir in Cairo. Husayn's decision resulted from a new propaganda battle between Cairo and Amman radios on the subject of resistance to Communism--a controversy which has arrested the recent trend toward a detente between the UAR and Jordan. Jordanian broadcasts commenting on UAR efforts to rally the Arab world against Communism had charged that it was the UAR which initially "opened the door" to Communism in the Middle East. Cairo's Voice of the Arabs replied on 3 October by referring to Jordan as an "opportunist" following "orders of imperialists" who are aligned with Communists against Arab nationalism.
[PAGE 05]
Yemen: The director general of the Yemeni Foreign Ministry told the American charge on 3 October that the Yemeni treasury is "virtually empty," and requested urgent American assistance. The charge reports the consensus of Western representatives in Taiz that Yemen is approaching bankruptcy and that the Imam's dominant position will be endangered unless the government can soon find an estimated $3,000,000 to $5,000,000 to tide it over. The Yemeni director general will be visiting Moscow this month, at which time the USSR may seek to bolster its influence in Yemen by offering economic assistance.

India: Prime Minister Nehru told Ambassador Bunker on 24 September that the immediate cause of the Sino-Indian border problem is Peiping's irritation over India's treatment of the Dalai Lama, but that eventually there would have been trouble over the border anyway. Nehru said the Chinese have always had an "aggressive nature," which manifests itself particularly when the Chinese feel powerful as a nation, and that they consider Indians to be "second class."

Indonesia: Chinese Communist pressures on the Indonesian Government to repeal a decree banning foreign retail merchants in rural areas of Indonesia have been "terrific," according to Foreign Minister Subandrio. The Chinese ambassador has argued the issue heatedly with Subandrio, and leaders of the Chinese Communist community have threatened to bring down the government by economic retaliation. Sukarno is reported to have been shocked by the unfriendly Chinese attitude.

III. THE WEST

Ecuador: Guayaquil is the stronghold of opposition elements and a center of economic unrest, which the Communists are attempting to exploit with new

7 Oct 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
aggressive tactics. The city, Ecuador's largest, displayed hostility toward Ponce during his last visit there in July. In June it was the scene of extensive violence which threatened the stability of his government.

Panama: Chronic dissatisfaction with the traditional ruling oligarchy in Panama resulted in a "hunger march" on the capital on 5 October. Hundreds of unemployed workers and other disgruntled groups took part in a demonstration to demand enactment of economic relief measures by the newly convened National Assembly.

7 Oct 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia Under Strong Chinese Communist Pressure to
Repeal Anti-Chinese Measure

Immediately before his departure for Peiping on 4 October, Foreign Minister Subandrio informed the American ambassador that Communist China was exerting "terrific" pressure for repeal of an Indonesian decree requiring withdrawal of alien merchants from rural areas. He said the Chinese Communist ambassador in Djakarta would not even listen to Indonesian explanations of the measure. Leaders of the Chinese community in Indonesia have threatened to raise prices to such a level that popular feeling may force the cabinet to resign. In order to increase pressure on Djakarta to rescind or postpone carrying out the decree, Peiping may hint to Subandrio that it might slow up its economic aid to Indonesia, as well as withdraw offers of military aid.

Subandrio stated that regardless of Chinese pressures, he would stand firm in his talks in Peiping. Although Indonesia does not desire a "showdown" with Communist China, it is prepared for one if necessary. Subandrio stated that he has President Sukarno's strong support in the position he is taking, and that Sukarno had been shocked by the Chinese Communist attitude.

Subandrio plans to explain to Peiping that the current measure is a phase of Indonesia's "socialization" program. Djakarta apparently hopes to turn alien retail trade in rural areas over to independent Indonesian nationals or to the Indonesian cooperative movement. Theoretically this change would end the usurious hold of the Chinese shopkeeper on the Indonesian peasant and would strengthen the economic role of the Indonesian business class.

7 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
III. THE WEST

Violence May Spread in Ecuador

Guayaquil, Ecuador's largest city, is the stronghold of opposition elements and a center of explosive labor and economic unrest which the Communists are attempting to exploit with aggressive new tactics. The Third-of-June Youth Movement, controlled by Communists and including the youth of two leftist parties, is being used to foment unrest designed to unseat Ponce, disrupt the 11th Inter-American Conference scheduled for Quito in February 1960, and block a possible meeting of American presidents in Guayaquil after the conference. The movement was behind the 1 October riots and is planning demonstrations for 9 October.

Extensive violence in Guayaquil in early June posed the most serious threat to Ponce since his election by a slim plurality in 1956. The city also displayed a deep hostility toward him during his last visit there in July.

The armed forces, which are believed capable of maintaining order, have canceled invitations to foreign military attaches to attend the 9 October ceremonies, and the local commander reportedly has requested the imposition of martial law

7 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
Panamanian Hunger March Indicative of Social Unrest

The "hunger march" on the Panamanian capital on 5 October by hundreds of unemployed Colon workers and other disgruntled groups was an expression of deep-seated popular resentment against the economic policies of the Panamanian Government. The purpose of the march, led by Colon labor leader Andres Galvan, was to demand the immediate enactment of unemployment relief measures and a minimum wage law by the newly convened National Assembly.

The 50-mile trek to the capital was undertaken by about 600 persons, whose ranks were swelled to approximately 1,000 by the time the orderly procession reached the Legislative Palace. When the National Assembly adjourned for lack of a quorum, marchers occupied the legislative chambers and demonstration leader Galvan exhorted the self-styled "people's deputies" not to budge until the government enacted the desired legislation. Two and a half hours later National Guardsmen using tear gas ejected the demonstrators and arrested Galvan and other leaders.

Unless immediate measures are taken to improve the economic situation of Panama's lower and middle classes, further disorders are likely. President de la Guardia frankly acknowledged in his 1 October state-of-the-nation address that Panama currently lacks the economic means to support a rapidly increasing population. With the approach of the May 1960 presidential election, dissident politicians are likely to exploit popular grievances.

7 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
