Japan Seeks Broader Role in Ryukyuan Affairs

The US-Japanese peace treaty acknowledges Japan's residual sovereignty over the Ryukyu Islands but authorizes the United States to exercise exclusive authority there for an indefinite period. Since 1952, Tokyo has maintained a small, quasi-consular agency in Naha, Okinawa's capital city.

Discontent among the Okinawans was first manifest in 1956 when a Communist was elected mayor of Naha during a period when there was considerable resentment against US procedures in acquiring land for military purposes. Although land acquisition is not now a problem, it awakened reversionist sentiment in both Japan and the Ryukyus, and the Japanese have not diverted their attention from the Ryukyuan question.

The Kishi government initiated moves for a greater Japanese role in Ryukyuan affairs in 1958. Tokyo has been permitted to provide technical and economic assistance on a project-by-project basis and to engage in teacher-training programs. The Government of the Ryukyu Islands, an indigenous structure operating with limited powers granted by the US high commissioner, has been promoting Tokyo's cause.

The high commissioner indicates that Okinawan support for reversionist activities has been somewhat greater recently, possibly due to Ryukyuan hopes in connection with Ikeda's visit to Washington. He believes it desirable to expand consultation with the Japanese on purely technical matters but doubts that this would satisfy reversionist elements.

In Japan, the moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP) is introducing a bill in the Diet which would authorize seats for nonvoting representatives from the Ryukyus. The DSP, which heretofore has taken an equivocal position on the Okinawan question, is supporting Ryukyuan demands for increased autonomy for popular election of the Ryukyuan chief executive -- he is at present appointed by the high commissioner -- and for transfer of administrative jurisdiction from the Department of Defense to the Department of State. Symptomatic of the

8 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
