[PAGE 01]
23 December 1960

DIA and DOS have no objection to declassification and release.

Copy No. C 74

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Morocco: The government of Morocco will soon recognize both North Vietnam and North Korea as a further demonstration of "positive neutrality," according to statements made to the American chargé by a Moroccan diplomat close to palace circles. In view of Morocco's expanding ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc, the government, and particularly the crown prince, might see recognition as a counterbalance to Morocco's receipt of US aid and the relatively close relations which it has maintained with the West. (Page 4)

Ethiopia: The military and political situation throughout Ethiopia is rapidly returning to normal. The greatest impact of the abortive coup is likely to be felt by the small, educated group which was sympathetic to or implicated in the coup and which is now suspect in the Emperor's eyes. Unless changes in Ethiopia's political and social system occur, the "intelligentsia" will probably eventually make another effort, according to the US military attaché in Addis Ababa. (Page 5)

23 Dec 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Morocco May Recognize North Vietnam and North Korea

The government of Morocco will soon recognize both North Vietnam and North Korea as a further demonstration of "positive neutrality," according to statements made to the American chargé in Rabat. The source, a former minister to Washington and now Moroccan ambassador to New Delhi, is close to palace circles.

Morocco's continued need for US aid and the desire for good relations with the West frequently professed by both King Mohamed V and the crown prince would seem to militate against such a step. Moreover, Morocco would be unlikely to offend South Vietnam, whose first ambassador to Morocco presented his credentials less than six weeks ago, or to align itself with Cuba as the second free world country to recognize North Korea.

However, Morocco's ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc have been expanding and its relations with the West, especially France, deteriorating. Shipments of cobalt have been made to Communist China, and Rabat announced on 15 November that the USSR would furnish jet aircraft. These planes are expected to arrive in the near future.

Consequently, the Moroccan Government, and especially the crown prince, who apparently asked the Soviet ambassador for the jet aircraft without consulting the cabinet and only vaguely informing the King, might see this recognition as a means of increasing bloc ties or as an appropriate response to the Soviet veto of Mauritania's UN admission. Any unfriendly Western act, such as countermeasures reportedly planned by the French against Morocco's threats to their base rights, could precipitate such recognition.

23 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
Ethiopian Progressives to Suffer From Coup

The progressive younger elements in Ethiopia may lose considerable influence because many of the more enlightened ministers and intellectuals were involved in the abortive coup against the Emperor, according to an Ethiopian member of the UN staff. In his event, efforts to increase personal freedom, improve living standards, and accelerate economic development would be set back several years. The Emperor's public remarks suggest a lenient attitude toward rebel sympathizers, but in view of his suspicion of the progressives, he is expected to rely for advice increasingly on representatives of traditional Ethiopian society.

Notices posted at the University College in Addis Ababa state that any student signing a letter of apology to the Emperor will be allowed to continue his studies, although he may be subject to later punishment. The students were strongly in favor of the coup and demonstrated in its behalf on 15 December.

The American military attaché in Addis Ababa reports that the situation is rapidly returning to normal, although troops are still hunting down two coup leaders and some 325 missing Bodyguard personnel. Of the 5,000 men in the Bodyguard, about 475 were reported killed or wounded in the fighting in Addis Ababa and 1,800 are held by the army or police. The remainder have been released. The attaché believes that the Bodyguard will be broken up, but that the Emperor will probably have to re-create a household guard--perhaps by using the two battalions of Bodyguard troops in the Congo as a nucleus--to act as a counterpoise to the army.

He adds that unless reforms are carried out by the government, the "intelligentsia" will organize another revolt within the next year or two in an attempt to overthrow Ethiopia's feudalistic government.

23 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
TOP SECRET
