[PAGE 01]
11 March 1953
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]Copy No. 59[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
Comment on appointment of new Soviet Ambassador to Peiping
(page 3).

FAR EAST
Taipei proposes joint group to survey Nationalist situation in Burma
(page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE
Comment on shooting down of American plane by Czech MIG-15
(page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
US Political Adviser analyzes Trieste demonstrations (page 4).
Danes adamant on early return of MIG-15 to Poland (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Comment on appointment of new Soviet Ambassador to Peiping:
The appointment of Deputy Foreign Minister Vasili Kuznetsov as Soviet Ambassador to Communist China suggests that the new regime feels the need not only to assure the Chinese Communists of continued support, but also to accord Peiping even greater prestige.

Kuznetsov's political importance was shown by his election last October to the Party Presidium, even though he was excluded when that body was reduced from 25 to 10 members. The Chinese Ambassador in Moscow is a member of the Chinese Communist Politburo and the only leader at this level assigned as an ambassador.

Kuznetsov's specialized knowledge in the development of the Soviet steel industry and his experience with state planning may be useful to China as it launches its first Five Year Plan. His former position in the World Federation of Trade Unions improves the USSR's ability to supervise the Chinese role in Communist strategy throughout Asia.

FAR EAST

2. Taipei proposes joint group to survey Nationalist situation in Burma:
The Chinese Nationalist Government has requested an early American reply to its proposal that a joint Chinese-US-Burmese investigating group survey the Nationalist situation in Burma.

General Li Mi, commander of the Nationalist troops in Burma, was hospitalized in Formosa on 9 March with a possible nervous breakdown.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: Chinese authorities on Formosa have repeatedly questioned the reliability of reports of Nationalist [[PRED_REDACTION_2]]depredations[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]] in Burma and have urged an impartial survey before any decision is made to evacuate Li Mi's forces. The dispatch of an investigating group would indefinitely postpone a solution to the problem.

An extended illness of Li Mi would also delay a settlement.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Comment on shooting down of American plane by Czech MIG-15:
Preliminary pilot interrogation indicates that the incident in which an American F-84 was shot down by a Czech Air Force MIG-15 occurred over the US zone of Germany.

On 21 November, following several alleged violations of Czech air space by American planes, the Czech Government issued a warning that aircraft violating Czech air boundaries would be forced to land or be shot down. This warning culminated a series of actions designed to prohibit border surveillance by American planes.

Last fall Czech planes, including MIG-15's on border patrol, made shallow penetrations of the US zone of Germany and paralleled US Air Force patrol flights while remaining inside Czechoslovakia.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. US Political Adviser analyzes Trieste demonstrations:
Following the demonstrations in Trieste on 8 March, in which 23 persons were wounded, Italian Political Adviser De Castro reversed his position and agreed that no meetings of
[PAGE 05]
any kind should be authorized for 20 March, the anniversary of the 1948 Tripartite Declaration on Trieste. US Political Adviser Higgs believes that the more moderate groups in Trieste may now refrain from participating in any demonstration that may nevertheless occur on 20 March.

The actual instigators of the trouble on 8 March were neo-Fascists who had come to Trieste from North Italy. Higgs believes that De Castro's prior warning to the Allied Military Government of possible violence may have been based on advance information given him by Italian authorities.

Comment: This incident illustrates the great difficulty that will face the Allied Military Government in preventing disorders on 20 March.

5. Danes adamant on early return of MIG-15 to Poland:
The Danish Foreign Ministry informed the British Ambassador on 9 March that test flights of the Polish MIG-15 which landed on Bornholm last week will not be permitted and that all tests must be completed by 16 March. It indicated that this was the government's final position and stated that a "Danish facade" for examination of the plane must be maintained.

According to the US Embassy in Copenhagen, American technicians now believe a reasonably complete primary examination can be made within four days.
