Situation in the Congo

The threat the Gizengist incursion into Luluabourg appeared to pose to Leopoldville reportedly aroused many leaders of Kasavubu's government to the point of being willing, for the first time, to take forceful action. These leaders are said to be urging Mobutu, who is now near Bumba with about 1,500 men, to attack Orientale Province "even if the troops must open fire." It is questionable, however, whether Mobutu's forces would fight even if such an order were given, especially since the threat to Leopoldville has at least temporarily been reduced.

Hammarskjold said that the Luluabourg episode was not a military victory for Stanleyville but that it did show the disintegration of the Congolese Army. He implied that a parallel situation is now shaping up in Equateur Province, where Stanleyville troops easily disarmed the garrison at Ikela and are now moving toward Coquilhatville, which is virtually unguarded by troops of the Leopoldville government because Mobutu has taken most of its garrison to the Bumba area. Press reports on 1 March say that Mobutu forces in Coquilhatville are defecting to Gizenga.

Hammarskjold also questioned where Mobutu stood in relation to recent events, pointing out that he was not particularly loyal to Kasavubu or Ileo, and that he had never broken personally with Lumumba. The secretary general pointed out that Mobutu had started toward Stanleyville with "the most publicized--and slowest--military offensive in history" and then last week told UN Commander McKeown that he was taking up positions only for defense against infiltrators from Stanleyville. Hammarskjold felt there was a chance, although not a probability, that Mobutu and Lundula, Gizenga's chief of staff, might be planning a military grouping directed against all politicians.

An indication that Gizenga is planning to leave Stanleyville appeared on 28 February when Gizenga asked his representative in Cairo to send him "two suits of heavy weight English worsted cloth."

2 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
