Tito to Visit Latin America

The Brazilian ambassador in Belgrade was instructed on 23 February to tell the Yugoslav foreign minister "that the new Brazilian administration is interested in increasing relations with Yugoslavia in all areas, political, economic, and cultural. . . . Proceed at once to make discreet inquiries on the reception which an official invitation for Marshal Tito would receive." The Brazilian ambassador reported a favorable Yugoslav reply on 25 February and advised that the matter "continue to be secret," but Foreign Minister Arinos has publicly suggested a Tito visit to Brazil.

Quadros' invitation to Tito is intended to demonstrate the "truly independent" foreign policy he promised in his inaugural address on 31 January and during his campaign. Before the election Quadros publicly expressed admiration for the independence of Tito and Nasir and during a pre-inauguration visit to Europe apparently hoped to arrange a meeting of neutralist leaders on the Yugoslav island of Brioni.

Yugoslavia's first serious effort to broaden its economic and political relations with Latin America came in mid-1959 when a Yugoslav cabinet officer led a good-will mission to seven Latin American capitals. Several months later, another high regime official visited four other Latin American states, resulting in rumors that Tito would tour the area the following year.

Yugoslavia's relations with the West are generally good; the West is Belgrade's primary source of developmental capital and provides roughly 65 percent of Yugoslavia's foreign trade. In January, Yugoslavia put into effect a foreign trade and exchange reform which brings its foreign trade practices into closer accord with those of the West. Tito has long wanted to make an official state visit to the United States, but his regime continues publicly to view the West as the chief villain in international affairs.

Tito is currently in Ghana, the first stop on a two-month African tour that will include official visits to Togo, Liberia, Guinea, Morocco, and Tunisia and an unofficial call on UAR

2 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
