[PAGE 01]
15 August 1960  
Copy No. C 70

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized persons, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.

[PAGE 03]
15 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR fires second unusual missile from
Kapustin Yar rangehead.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Congo--Entry of UN forces leaves polit-
ical status of Katanga unresolved.

III. THE WEST
Belgium--Political pressure continues
for drastic cut in defense budget.
British find Adenauer favors concentrat-
ed effort to close breach between Com-
mon Market and Outer Seven.

LATE ITEM
The situation in Laos.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
15 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: At 1230 EDT on 13 August the USSR fired a bal-
listic missile about 2,000 nautical miles from the Kapustin
Yar Missile Test Range. It impacted in an area midway be-
tween Krasnoyarsk and the northern tip of Lake Baykal. Sim-
ilar range and launching azimuth were used on 3 August.
This second launching confirms Soviet intent to use a launch-
ing azimuth considerably north of the normal one and an im-
pact area outside the limits of the Kapustin Yar Missile Test
Range.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Congo: The entry of UN forces into Elisabethville, and
the beginnings of a Belgian troop withdrawal from Katanga, have
not brought any resolution of the political status of the disputed
province. Katanga Premier Tshombé has stepped up the train-
ing of his own security force, and would probably take any ac-
tion necessary to prevent the entry of representatives of the
Lumumba government. Congo Premier Lumumba, in demanding
withdrawal of "white" contingents of the UN force, may hope that
an all-African force would be responsive to his demands and
would take action against Tshombé. In Leopoldville, President
Kasavubu's 14 August appeal for national unity stopped short of
endorsing Lumumba's policies, and appears unlikely to halt anti-
Lumumba plotting among elements of the Abako party.
(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Belgium: While no decision has been taken to cut the Bel-
gian defense budget in line with Prime Minister Eyskens' an-
nouncement on 9 August that Belgium will revise its NATO com-
mitments in view of Congo developments, political pressure
continues for a drastic reduction of $120,000,000--one third of
the budget. Cancellation of the F-104G fighter-plane program and
a partial withdrawal of Belgian troops from West Germany are
considered likely first steps in the event such a reduction is or-
dered. According to a high Belgian defense official, the whole
future of Belgium's military forces is very fluid and depends on
events in the Congo, especially the effect on the public of loss
of the Kamina base and the removal of troops from Ruanda-
Urundi. (Page 3)

Adenauer-Macmillan Talks: The chancellor has accepted
the indefinite postponement of further steps toward the supra-
national integration of Europe in favor of a concentrated effort
to close the breach between the European Common Market and
the British-led Outer Seven. Such a major shift in Adenauer's
foreign policies would be motivated by concern that the Common
Market's farm policies would cause Adenauer serious difficulties
in the 1961 elections, by a desire to present a united European
front against any future Soviet pressures, and possibly by fear
that De Gaulle's concept of European cooperation would tend to
place West Germany in a secondary role. (Page 4)

15 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
*Laos: The rebel-controlled Vientiane radio has announced
that King Savang has designated National Assembly President
Souvanna Phouma to form a new government. This action follows
Savang's acceptance on 14 August of the resignation of the Som-
sanith government, which had received a vote of no confidence
the previous day from the assembly in Vientiane. The assembly's
vote, which was "unanimous," apparently had been forced by the
rebel Kong Le group controlling Vientiane, and Premier Som-
sanith and other government leaders in Luang Prabang initially
dismissed it as illegal. The king presumably acted to avert
a military showdown, which was becoming increasingly likely
with the failure of repeated efforts to negotiate a settlement
with Kong Le.

Lao Defense Minister General Phoumi, chief advocate of
forceful action against the rebel units in Vientiane, has refused
to accept the king's decision on the Somsanith government. He
apparently intends to go forward with his plans for military
counteraction, but it is problematical that a unilateral move in
defiance of the king's wishes could succeed.

Souvanna Phouma engineered the short-lived integration
settlement with the Communist Pathet Lao dissidents while
premier in 1957. He still feels that Laos' best interests can
be served by a rapprochement with the Pathet Lao and pursuance
of a policy of strict neutrality. (Page 5)

15 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
The Situation in the Congo

The entry of UN forces into Elisabethville and the begin-
nings of a Belgian troop withdrawal from Katanga have not
brought any resolution of the political status of the disputed
province. Katanga Premier Tshombé
has stepped up the training of his own security force, which
possibly will be led by former Belgian officers of the Force
Publique. its European
commander left Elisabethville for Brussels on 8 August "to ac-
celerate recruitment." the number of
volunteers for the Katanga force was taxing available facilities.

Although spokesmen for Tshombé have characterized his
talks with Hammarskjold as "cordial," it appears likely that
there are considerable areas of disagreement. Hammarskjold
almost certainly failed to recognize the "independence" of Ka-
tanga, and probably indicated that he could not permit Tshombé
to establish the number and nationalities of the UN soldiers to
be moved into Katanga.

Congo Premier Lumumba's 13 August demand for the with-
drawal of white contingents of the UN force appears likely to
meet an equally negative response from the Secretary General.
Lumumba possibly hoped that an all-African force would be sus-
ceptible to pressure for the forcible unification of the Congo if
sufficiently pressed by himself and his Ghanaian and Guinean al-
lies. The anti-white sentiment implicit in Lumumba's demand,
however, will increase the apprehension of Europeans in both
the Congo and Katanga.

On 14 August, Congo President Kasavubu broke a long silence
with a radio speech in which he urged Congolese to support the cen-
tral government. He stopped short of endorsing Lumumba's pol-
icies, however, and his plea appears unlikely to halt anti-Lumumba
plotting among elements of the Abako party. Spokesmen for Lu-
mumba have hinted at the imposition of press censorship, and

[PAGE 08]
Lumumba has alluded to "special tribunals" which would be set
up to judge any persons who "provoke trouble" by their attitudes
or writings.

[PAGE 09]
Drastic Cuts Threatened in Belgian Defense Budget

The American Embassy in Brussels reports continuing polit-
ical pressure for a one-third reduction of the Belgian defense
budget, in line with Prime Minister Eyskens' announcement on
9 August that developments in the Congo will result in a revision
in Belgium's NATO commitments. Cancellation of the F-104G
fighter-plane program and a partial withdrawal of Belgian troops
from West Germany are considered likely first steps in the event
such a reduction is ordered.

According to a high Belgian defense official, the whole future
of Belgium's military forces is very fluid and turns on the outcome
of events in the Congo, especially on public reaction to the loss of
the Kamina base and the removal of troops from Ruanda-Urundi.
The embassy expects considerable "infighting" at the highest lev-
els of the government before the defense issue is resolved.

At his press conference on 9 August Eyskens, embittered by what
he considered lack of support from Belgium's NATO partners
during the Congo crisis, announced that his government would ini-
tiate an "austerity program" involving reductions in orders for
military equipment within the framework of NATO and amortization
of the Belgian bases in the Congo, which were built in the rearma-
ment period following the Korean war at a cost of $70,000,000.
Some Belgian political leaders have already privately criticized
Eyskens' statement as "untimely and childish."

Prior to the Congo crisis, however, parliament had already
trimmed the defense estimates calling for an 8-percent increase
over the 1959 budget and the Senate had asked to reconsider de-
fense expenditures in the fall. The weak Eyskens coalition gov-
ernment, sensitive to a strong public sentiment in favor of reduc-
ing defense spending, has never fully met its NATO requirements
since it took office in November 1958. Moreover, the Belgian press,
angered by the Security Council's resolutions on the Congo,
has stressed the uselessness of continuing costly military efforts
within NATO when the Western powers have demonstrated complete
indifference to Belgian interests.

[PAGE 10]
Adenauer-Macmillan Major Shift in Policy on European Integration

In his recent discussions with Prime Minister Macmillan,
Chancellor Adenauer apparently indicated that he has decided to
postpone indefinitely further steps toward the supranational in-
tegration of Europe in favor of an accommodation between the
European Common Market and the British-led European Free
Trade Association or Outer Seven.

This subject was the major problem discussed by Adenauer
during Macmillan's visit to Bonn on 10-11 August, and while no
decisions were made, this major shift in Adenauer's
postwar policies was "confirmed."

In deciding to delay indefinitely his ideal of an integrated
Europe, Adenauer probably was motivated by both domestic and
foreign policy considerations. The decision earlier this year to
accelerate the institution of the Common Market's agricultural
policy has confronted the West German farmer with a prospective
reduction in prices, and Adenauer fears he may in consequence
lose votes in the 1961 Bundestag elections. Adenauer evidently also
sees an urgent need for European unity on basic policy and pos-
ture toward the USSR, and he stressed again in his talks with Mac-
millan his concern that Washington may not be able to act firmly
during the American elections.

A bid by Adenauer for Six-Seven unity may cause trouble be-
tween Bonn and Paris. It is doubtful that De Gaulle would welcome
London in the European confederation he has hoped to develop under
French leadership. Even though Adenauer's shift toward a looser
form of European integration would be in line with De Gaulle's views,
British Foreign Office sources have the impression that Adenauer
is "piqued" with the French leader, and he may fear that in a "Gaul-
list" Europe Bonn would be reduced to a satellite.

The Bonn Foreign
Ministry is extremely uneasy that in the course of talks with De
Gaulle on 29 and 30 July Adenauer may have undercut the Common
Market's institutions. Similar expressions of concern have been
heard from other Common Market countries.

[PAGE 11]
Situation in Laos

King Savang has designated National Assembly President
Souvanna Phouma to form a new government, according to the
rebel-controlled Vientiane radio. This action follows Savang's
acceptance on 14 August of the resignation of the Somsanith
government, which had received a vote of no confidence the pre-
vious day from the National Assembly in Vientiane. The assembly's
"unanimous" vote apparently had been forced by the rebel Kong Le
group controlling Vientiane, and Premier Somsanith and other
government leaders in Luang Prabang initially dismissed it as
illegal. Subsequent negotiations in Luang Prabang between the
government and a rebel delegation, however, resulted in "complete
understanding,"

These developments occurred when the government seemed to
be gaining the upper hand over Kong Le, who had been unsuccessful
in extending his control beyond Vientiane and only had about 1200
troops at his disposal. The king presumably acted in the interests
of national unity, since a military showdown was becoming in-
creasingly likely with the failure of repeated efforts to negotiate
a settlement with Kong Le. Lao Defense Minister Phoumi, chief
advocate of direct action to settle the revolt, had already initiated
psychological warfare activities against the rebel paratroop units
in Vientiane with the introduction of Lao special agents and teams,
and was proceeding rapidly with attack plans.

When informed of the king's decision to accept the resignation
of the Somsanith government, Phoumi is reliably reported to have
expressed surprise. He said that he refused to accept the decision
and indicated that he intends to go ahead with his plans to salvage
the situation by military means from his command post at
Savannakhet in southern Laos. It is doubtful, however, if a uni-
lateral move against the king's wishes could succeed.

The king's course may have been influenced by fear that Kong
Le might defect with his troops to the side of the Communist Pathet
Lao dissidents if he couldn't derive satisfaction from the government
for his demands for policy reforms. Kong Le has sharply accused the
United States of interfering in Laotian affairs, and advocates friendly
relations with all nations including the Communist bloc.

[PAGE 12]
Premier-designate Souvanna engineered the short-lived
unification agreement with the Pathet Lao dissidents in
November 1957 while premier, and still feels strongly that
Laos' best interests can be served by finding common ground
with the Pathets and by following a policy of strict neutrality.

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
