Laotian Coup Developments:

The area controlled by the rebellious second parachute battalion and other small units allied with it apparently still does not extend beyond Vientiane and its immediate environs.

The provisional executive committee announced by the revolutionary high command in Vientiane on 10 August is a diverse group united mainly by hostility toward the Somsanith government. Its most prominent member is Souvanna Phouma, a former premier who has long advocated stricter neutrality for Laos and believes the Communist Pathet Lao can be more easily handled if brought back into the national community than if forced to continue in armed insurrection. Also on the committee are two generals whose quarrel with the government was based on personal considerations of advancement and opportunities for graft rather than on ideological considerations. A number of disgruntled politicians of varying degrees of leftist persuasion are also included, among them Bong Souvannavong, a neutralist politician who long served as an apologist for the Pathet Lao. Two of Bong's extreme leftist sons appear to have played an important role in the coup.

The Somsanith government apparently will try to mount a counteroffensive against the Vientiane group from Luang Prabang. There is some indication that Defense Minister General Phoumi is shuttling between Thailand and southern Laos in an effort to organize loyalist support in that area. The task of dislodging the rebels from Vientiane by military means during the current rainy season may be sufficiently difficult to dispose Somsanith toward some form of compromise with the revolutionary group. Armed Forces Commander General Ouane's arrival in Vientiane on 10 August apparently represented an effort to find out the rebels' terms. There is some danger that Ouane may be won over to the rebel cause, however, and it seems hardly likely that he will be permitted to leave the capital.

Any compromise between the two contending regimes would in all likelihood lead to some loosening of Laos' ties with the United States,
