[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Hong Kong to keep impounded aircraft from Chinese Communists
(page 3).
2.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. General instability reported in Rumania (page 4).
4. Polish-French trade talks stall (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Delivery of Danish tanker to USSR may be delayed until next week
(page 5).
6.

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Hong Kong to keep impounded aircraft from Chinese Communists:

The Hong Kong Director of Civil Aviation
has informally assured an American official that Communist China will not be permitted to take possession of the former
Nationalist aircraft which were sold to the
Chennault interests and which have been impounded at Hong Kong
pending the Privy Council's decision in London on their ownership.

If the Privy Council decision is favorable
to Peiping, the Hong Kong government nevertheless plans to prohibit
export of the planes to Communist China. In the event Peiping requests clearance to transport the planes to another area, such as
Vladivostok, Hong Kong would seek the advice of the British Foreign
Office.

Comment: The colony's government has
impounded 71 transports, ownership of which is disputed by Peiping
and the Chennault interests. The appeal to the Privy Council was
made to reverse a Hong Kong court's decision favoring the Communists. The decision of the Privy Council is expected during July.

2.
[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE

3. General instability reported in Rumania:

The American Legation in Bucharest
reports rumors of imminent radical changes
and such general excitement that some
people are staying away from work. Unidentified radio broadcasts reportedly have been counseling people to
keep quiet and await instructions. There have been numerous indiscriminate arrests.

The Legation suggests that the recent purges
and apparent playing down of Soviet control may have released pentup hopes. On the other hand, the regime may have inspired these
rumors in order to incite, identify and eradicate opposition elements.

Comment: These rumors probably indicate
how extensive the continuing purge really is in Rumania.
[PAGE 05]
4. Polish-French trade talks stall:

The French Foreign Office has informed
the American Embassy in Paris that because of a last-minute Polish rejection of
French offers, no new trade agreement has
been concluded. France had requested 300,000 tons of Polish coal
and offered in exchange half of the strategic goods desired by Poland.

Discussions with the Poles are scheduled to
be resumed on 2 July in Paris.

Comment: Poland was anxious to expand the variety of goods
to be exchanged between the two countries. The Poles offered food
stuffs and timber, in addition to coal, in exchange for ball bearings,
electrical equipment and phosphates.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Delivery of Danish tanker to USSR may be delayed until next week:

The Director General of the Danish Foreign
Office informed the American Embassy in
Copenhagen on 30 June that the director of
the shipyard which has constructed a tanker
for the USSR was "fairly hopeful" of delaying delivery until next week.
The Foreign Office achieved this result after Foreign Minister Kraft's
28 June conversation with Secretary Acheson.

6.
[PAGE 06]
