4. UK High Commissioner’s views on the situation in Vietnam:

In an interview with US Minister Heath at Saigon, the UK High Commissioner for Southeast Asia, Malcolm MacDonald, claimed that the French were not deliberately delaying the creation of a Vietnamese Army and that De Lattre was becoming increasingly aware of the subtleties of the political situation. Observing that Prime Minister Huu was obviously not popular, he thought, however, that Huu was getting real results and was putting the Vietnamese Government on a working basis.

With regard to Chinese Communist intentions in Indochina, the UK High Commissioner stated that Korea probably was a restraining influence on the Chinese Communists, but pointed to the probability that the sort of limited Chinese intervention which occurred in Tonkin during April would be repeated.

Comment: MacDonald is an experienced observer of Southeast Asian affairs, but tends to be optimistic.

5. Problem of Chinese Nationalist troops in Burma still unsolved:

Acting on instructions from the US Department of State, US Ambassador Key in Rangoon has informed the Burmese Foreign Minister that the US has directed its Minister in Taipei to obtain from the Chinese Nationalist Government an estimated date by which Nationalist troops will have been withdrawn from Burma. At the same time, Ambassador Key pointed out to the Foreign Minister that a Burmese appeal to the UN for aid in expelling the Nationalists would be advantageous only to the Chinese Communists. After expressing his deep appreciation of prompt US action, the Burmese Foreign Minister said he would advise his government to postpone an appeal to the UN until the outcome of the US approach to Taipei has been established.

According to US Minister Rankin in Taipei, the Chinese Nationalist Foreign Minister can see no practical early solution to the problem and has declared that if the issue were forced he would have to state publicly that his government cannot control these troops and that the Burmese Government is free to take "appropriate action."

Comment: When it becomes apparent that the Taipei authorities are incapable of controlling Nationalist forces in Burma, the Burmese Government may well carry out its threat to appeal to the UN in order to prove to the Chinese Communists that it is not voluntarily harboring the Nationalists.
