[PAGE 01]
20 October 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. COMMUNIST CHINA RENEWS BID TO NORMALIZE
RELATIONS WITH JAPAN (page 4).

3. FRENCH-SPANISH RIFT OVER MOROCCO WIDENING
(page 5).

* * * *

THE FORMOSA STRAITS
(page 6)

[PAGE 04]
2. COMMUNIST CHINA RENEWS BID TO NORMALIZE
RELATIONS WITH JAPAN

Radio Peiping also announced on 17
October an "agreement" with the head of the Japanese
Diet delegation now in China which called for closer Sino-
Japanese trade and cultural relations, freer travel, pro-
tection of nationals residing abroad, and the exchange of
permanent trade missions with diplomatic status.

Comment
The Chinese Communists are taking
advantage of the relaxation of inter-
national tensions to intensify their efforts to establish
de facto relations with Japan

There are indications that Tokyo will
await the results of the foreign ministers' conference at
Geneva before considering any major change in its policy
on cultural and trade relations with Peiping. Japan's con-
tinued recognition of Taipei presumably precludes full
diplomatic relations with Peiping for the foreseeable fu-
ture.

[PAGE 05]
3. FRENCH-SPANISH RIFT OVER MOROCCO WIDENING

American officials in Paris report
that Foreign Minister Pinay and the
Spanish ambassador had a stormy
session on 17 October over Madrid's
publication of its 15 October note to Paris protesting the
anti-Spanish press and radio campaign in France.

The chief spokesman for the French
Foreign Ministry believes that the stiffer line taken by
the Spanish ambassador in talks over the past two weeks
indicates that Spain intends to continue its anti-French
attitude for some time.

Comment
Freewheeling military commanders
in both French and Spanish Morocco
have been largely responsible for the resurgence of ill
feeling, but the retention of the strongly anti-French
Garcia-Valino as high commissioner of Spanish Morocco
indicates that Madrid is bent on continuing a pro-Arab
policy.

French charges that Spain is aiding
the Moroccan rebels and Spanish pressure for consulta-
tion on reforms will probably continue to worsen rela-
tions between the two countries.

[PAGE 06]
BIWEEKLY SUMMARY
6 October-19 October 1955

THE FORMOSA STRAITS

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Formosa Straits Problem

1. Military activity in the area was marked by the first
Chinese Nationalist success against Chinese Communist jet
fighters and by the first Communist shelling of an island in
the Matsu group.

A clash between four Nationalist F-86's and at least
five Communist jet fighters near Nanchishan on 15 October
resulted in the loss of one of the Communist aircraft.

Communist shelling of Kaoteng, northernmost island
in the Matsus, was light, and apparently has been for either
for registration or harassment. A total of 49 rounds was
fired at Kaoteng on 7, 11 and 14 October.

[PAGE 07]
4. Another Chinese Communist railway construction
division has been identified as working on the rail line from
Yingtan to Amoy, making a total of at least eight such divi-
sions engaged in the work. According to Peiping's Five-Year
Plan, the Chinese Communists were scheduled to complete
only 270 miles of the 400-mile Amoy line by the end of 1957.
Since the Five-Year Plan goals were formulated, however,
the Chinese Communists have continued to assign more rail-
way construction units to the project, and have declared that
the line will be completed "ahead of schedule."

5. Chinese Communist propaganda on international sub-
jects during the past two weeks increased somewhat in hos-
tility. Peiping repeatedly accused the US of obstructing the
Geneva talks, and of seeking to build up Japanese military
strategy, in order to promote further "aggression" in the
Far East. Comment on Formosa, which remained at a low
level, reiterated Peiping's previous formulation--that the
question of "liberating" Formosa is a purely internal affair,
and that only "US aggression" is a subject for international
negotiation.

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
