[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
6 April 1961
Copy No. C 58
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
State Dept. review completed
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
6 April 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CONTENTS
4. USSR: Gromyko-McCloy discussion on disarmament. (Page iii)
8. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page v)

[PAGE 04]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
*USSR-Disarmament: The head of the Polish UN delegation told an American official that Gromyko, as a result of his interview with Presidential Adviser McCloy on 30 March, is returning to Moscow with the belief that the US is launching a serious disarmament effort. Although Foreign Minister Gromyko repeated to McCloy the standard Soviet criticisms of the US approach to disarmament, he sought to give the impression of
6 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iii

[PAGE 06]
serious interest in achieving progress in the forthcoming negotiations. Gromyko indicated interest in "first-step" measures outlined by McCloy, but contended that partial steps taken independently without a program for complete disarmament would create "disequilibrium." Gromyko took a less positive line in discussing the nuclear test talks, indicating that the Soviet proposal for a tripartite administrator for the control system would be a "sticking point" and admitting this was related to the Soviet demand for revising the UN structure. The Polish delegate subsequently told an American official that he had received the impression from Gromyko that the test ban talks would be "locked," with no real progress until general disarmament negotiations had shown signs of advance. (Backup, Page 7)
6 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iv

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS
A. No change from last week.
B. No change from last week.
C. LAOS: Carried on Page i of the Daily Brief.
SOUTH VIETNAM: Carried on Page ii of the Daily Brief.
6 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     v

[PAGE 09]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
Soviet Position on Disarmament and Nuclear Test Ban
Gromyko's statements together with remarks by the head of the Polish UN delegation, Deputy Foreign Minister Winiewicz, suggest that, although the USSR will not abandon its insistence on an agreement in principle to general disarmament, Moscow may be considering a procedural move to meet US emphasis on giving priority to "first-step" measures in negotiations. Winiewicz claimed that Gromyko told Zorin that the fact that the American suggestions for immediate measures were not new did not lessen their importance. Prior to these conversations he had told Western officials at the UN that Moscow was thinking in terms of two parallel negotiations, one on complete and general disarmament and the other on first-stage measures.
On the nuclear test ban conference, Gromyko maintained the generally pessimistic line taken by the Soviet delegation at Geneva. He said that the USSR hoped for new things to be brought out by the US at Geneva, and would make a serious study of the proposals. He added, however, that Moscow was not impressed thus far. As an example he stated that the USSR did not consider Western reduction in proposed control posts in the USSR from 21 to 19 an important gesture. Gromyko admitted that the proposal for a tripartite administrator reflected the USSR's desire for a veto but contended that Moscow would be "reasonable" in the operation of the veto.
The Polish delegate's remark on the link between the test ban talks and the general disarmament negotiations may foreshadow a Soviet move to merge these issues. Since the talks between Khrushchev and Ambassador Thompson on 9 March, Soviet officials have minimized the importance of a test ban. The chief Soviet delegate at Geneva told the British delegation that a test ban was of "extremely limited significance," and Gromyko made a point of asking Ambassador Stevenson whether the US considered a test ban agreement a condition to agreement on general disarmament, which Gromyko viewed as a separate although "related subject." An Izvestia correspondent in Geneva also told an American official that if the US
6 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7

[PAGE 11]
failed to produce "something new" at the test ban talks the issue would be put into the framework of general disarmament. The UN delegation at Geneva feels that in view of the forthcoming disarmament talks the next French test may be taken as a possible pretext for a Soviet move to terminate the talks--on the grounds that a test ban by the three powers in itself would not contribute to disarmament--and to propose a merger of a test ban with other disarmament plans. Tsarapkin's recent line that only comprehensive disarmament would warrant far-reaching controls probably would be used by Moscow to justify such a move.
6 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 8

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
