CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
21 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Pervukhin to Moscow: Soviet Ambassador to East Germany Pervukhin has been suddenly summoned to Moscow probably to be briefed on First Deputy Premier Mikoyan's forthcoming visit to West Germany from 25 to 28 April. Pervukhin is scheduled to return to Berlin on 24 or 25 April. There is a possibility, however, that Pervukhin's recall is connected with recent vituperative press attacks against the "antiparty group." Pervukhin was reduced to alternate Presidium status last June when the "antiparty" big three were purged.

Yugoslav-bloc relations: The expected Sino-Soviet bloc boycott of the Yugoslav party congress has been confirmed by Belgrade. The Soviet attack on the Yugoslav party program was cast in terms of an ideological schism between the Yugoslav party and the entire socialist camp. The Yugoslavs are unlikely to make concessions on their basic ideological position, which would place them once again in ideological isolation from the bloc.

Mikoyan visit to West Germany: Bonn expects Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan during his 25-28 April visit to exploit German public opinion on behalf of the Soviet view of a summit conference and to play up the dangers inherent in Bonn's decision to rearm with nuclear weapons. West German government officials fear his activities may stimulate the current Socialist campaign against nuclear armament and are trying to curtail his activities after the signing of the German-Soviet trade and repatriation agreement. (Page 8)

France: President Coty's selection of Popular Republican Georges Bidault to make the first attempt to form a cabinet is probably largely an effort to give the appearance of action while the necessary compromises between the non-Communist left and the right, which will be time-consuming, can be worked out. Coty probably felt that the selection of Soustelle would complicate the situation by benefiting the extremists who are demanding the return of de Gaulle. Antoine Pinay, leader of the more moderate Independents, is reported already to have turned down an informal request from the president, presumably because he thought his chances would improve later on.

Bidault's position on North Africa has evolved well to the right of the rest of his party--only he and one other of its 75 deputies voted against Gaillard--and he therefore may have some appeal to the rightists. The Popular Republicans have generally geared their policies so as not to move too far away from the Socialists who have shown signs of abandoning Minister for Algeria Lacoste's strong line on Algeria.
