Japanese - South Korean Relations

Discussions between Japan and South Korea for a post-World War II settlement began in October 1951. Major outstanding issues consist of a basic relations treaty, the status of some 550,000 Koreans living in Japan, claims to vessels of Korean registry which were taken by the Japanese during their withdrawal in 1945, mutual property claims, and fishing rights in international waters around Korea. Behind the issues have been general Korean bitterness toward Japan for its 40-year occupation of the country and, in the past, President Rhee's strong personal hatred for the Japanese.

The negotiations have been stormy and have been suspended frequently by Seoul following refusals by the Japanese to accede to South Korea's "all or nothing" demands. Tokyo usually has made compromise offers, but Seoul's position has been essentially negative. Except for exchanges of captured Japanese fishermen and Korean nationals detained in Japan for illegal entry, there has been little progress. Following the most recent resumption of talks in October 1960, however, the Chang Myon government has demonstrated more interest than the Rhee administration in negotiating in good faith for a settlement.

The most difficult issue is that of fisheries. In January 1952, Rhee unilaterally proclaimed his "peace line" excluding Japanese fishermen from rich fishing grounds adjacent to Korean territorial waters. The line is approximately 1,600 statute miles in length and extends between 20 and 200 miles off the Korean coast. As a precedent, Rhee cited a protected Korean fishing zone established earlier by General MacArthur. Later he asserted that the Sea Defense Zone established by General Clark during the Korean war supported the Korean position.

Since the line was established, South Korea has seized 173 Japanese fishing vessels, of which 150 have been confiscated, 2 have been sunk, and 21 released. Of 2,230 Japanese fishermen captured, most were imprisoned for periods ranging between six months and five years; five died in captivity. Three seizures have occurred since Rhee was ousted in April 1960.

13 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
