Iraqi Regime Cracks Down on Communists

Moscow radio's broadcast on 11 February of an appeal by the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions to Prime Minister Qasim, urging the release of imprisoned Iraqi Communists, indicates the declining position of the Communist party in Iraq. The appeal followed publication of articles in the Soviet press last week complaining of "persecution" and expressing concern over "cruel and unjust" sentences meted out to those who stood in the "forefront of the July 1958 revolution!"

Anti-Communist actions by the Iraqi Government since last November have been extensive. In late December 66 Communists were given long sentences for atrocities perpetrated in Mosul in March 1959; others have been jailed for circulating "false news among the peasants," carrying out unlawful strikes, and publishing articles critical of the regime. Other measures taken against the party include the closure of schools dominated by Communists, dismissal of suspected Communist employees from the railways, forced relocation of a number of prominent Communists, the suspension of several pro-Communist newspapers, and the banning of a number of Communist-front organizations. Warrants have been issued for the arrest of several party leaders who apparently have gone underground.

Close watch is kept on activities of the party, numerous arrests of Communists have been made in the provinces, and party leaders' bank accounts in Lebanon are being investigated. Soviet personnel in Iraq are under surveillance at all times.

Growing unpopularity of the Communist cause in Iraq is evidenced by the recent, published statements of several labor groups that they would no longer accept "pamphlets, booklets, and journals" sent them by the Soviet Embassy. Anti-Communist articles, including revelations of Communist methods, in the government-controlled press have increased greatly during the past several months. One article charged the Iraqi Communists with trying to "imitate the role of Lenin... and with considering Qasim as Kerenski."

Mullah Mustafa al-Barzani, Iraq's prominent Kurdish leader who returned in triumph at Qasim's invitation after over ten years

13 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
