American ambassador Riddleberger reports that Yugoslav foreign secretary Popovic is telling foreign diplomats that the conversation was about the Pravda article which answered in mild terms Tito's 7 March speech attacking Soviet handling of normalization. Riddleberger observes that there is considerable speculation in Belgrade that Valkov brought "soft answers to Tito's complaints."

Comment: Valkov's sudden trip to Moscow following Tito's criticisms of Soviet "normalization" tactics and his return to Belgrade just before the interview with Tito suggest that Yugoslav complaints were an important topic. The recent editorial exchange between Moscow and Belgrade indicated that the USSR desired to improve further Yugoslav-USSR relations.

Belgrade's acceptance of the Soviet invitation for an exchange of parliamentary delegations would be consistent with its professed desire of pursuing a policy of "active coexistence"

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Raab reported to fear partition of Austria if treaty negotiations fail:

Austrian chancellor Raab, who is scheduled to leave for Moscow on 11 April, has ambitions to be "the man who got the Russians out of Austria," according to Ambassador Thompson in Vienna.

Thompson understands that Raab believes if he does not achieve a treaty "on this round," Austria will probably be partitioned. Raab thinks that even if he has to pay too high a price for a treaty, he can later renege on his agreements.

Thompson notes that Raab apparently believes Austrian ambassador Gruber in Washington is inaccurate when he presents the United States as opposed to four-power guarantees of Austrian neutralization.

Comment: Top-level Austrian officials assert that the Austrian delegation will make no commitment in Moscow, but will explore the nature of neutralization and anti-Anschluss guarantees desired by the USSR.

The delegation, nevertheless, could make clear Austria's tendency to accept such guarantees.

LATE ITEM

8. Paris wants Diem's powers limited immediately:

In a note delivered to American chargé Achilles in Paris on 2 April, the French government states that "the Diem government must without delay become more widely based or give place to another." The note enumerates Diem's failures since he has been in power, and says he has alienated the "great majority of political, military and spiritual forces" in Vietnam.

The French secretary of state for the Associated States had told Achilles on 1 April that the French government was convinced the "Diem experiment" had failed and that the idea of finding a solution now through strengthening the Diem government was completely unrealistic.

Comment: In the note the French considerably exaggerated Diem's weaknesses, possibly to suit their apparent decision to make every effort to bring about his removal. General Ely's recommendation that Bao Dai invite Diem and the sect leaders to Paris may be designed to further such an aim.

The French have long distrusted Diem, and there is evidence that some French officials have been plotting with anti-Diem elements. Paris now fears as well that Diem's actions will involve France in civil strife in Indochina, a situation which any French government will avoid at all costs for domestic political reasons.
