"French" African Leaders to Confer on Algeria

A new initiative toward resolving the Algerian conflict seems likely to result from the conference of leaders of former French territories in Black Africa which is scheduled to begin on 24 October in Abidjan, the capital of the Ivory Coast. Invitations to the meeting, organized by Ivory Coast Premier Houphouet-Boigny, apparently have been sent to the heads of 12 of the 13 "French" African states which became independent earlier this year--including Cameroun and Togo but not the Malagasy Republic--and most of them are expected to attend or send representatives. Mauritania, which becomes independent on 28 November, and Guinea, which Houphouet hopes can be induced to re-establish close ties with other former French territories, may also be represented.

The meeting is aimed primarily at concerting policy with a view to heading off a UN vote on a strong Algerian resolution--such as one endorsing the Algerian rebels' call for a UN-supervised plebiscite in Algeria. Houphouet and other pro-French leaders have displayed increasing concern over such a development, observing that no African leader could survive if he opposed an Algerian resolution. Present indications are that the meeting will result in the naming of a delegation charged with urging a "liberal solution" on De Gaulle and also aim at agreement on tactics to be pursued at the UN. Senegal's UN representative has already indicated his preference for a resolution based on De Gaulle's repeated calls for a cease-fire and directed toward encouraging a resumption of direct talks between France and the rebels.

Should the "French" Black African states not support France against a strong Algerian resolution, the American Embassy in Paris believes the French Government may curtail drastically, and possibly cut off entirely, the economic aid on which all these states depend. Direct French assistance amounted to over $200,000,000 in 1960. Houphouet stated in August he had been told flatly by two high-ranking members of De Gaulle's regime, under circumstances which suggested De Gaulle's concurrence, that all economic and technical assistance would be cut off from African states which voted against France on the Algerian question.
