Filipinos Concerned Over Inadequacy of SEATO

Philippine Foreign Minister Serrano has expressed deep concern to an American Embassy officer over the weakening of the SEATO alliance, which he tends to blame on British and French attitudes, particularly with regard to the Laotian crisis. According to Serrano, his principal reasons for calling the conference of foreign ministers from South Korea, South Vietnam, and Nationalist China, which opened in Manila on 18 January, were SEATO's apparent inability to act in the Laotian situation and the need to exchange views with non-Communist neighbors and to indicate support for the American position.

Reiterating firm Philippine support for the role now played by the United States in the Far East, Serrano emphasized his fear that any indications of wavering would have wide repercussions. He expressed the belief that the British and French were motivated by a desire to reduce their own commitments toward SEATO and weaken American influence in the area by encouraging neutralism. He also voiced fear that Pakistan might be wavering in its attitude toward SEATO. Serrano asserted that a continuation of the present trend in the organization might force the Philippines to reappraise its policy toward SEATO.

Serrano has indicated a long-standing desire to forge closer ties with non-Communist Asian neighbors within the framework of firm American defense commitments in the area. Although Serrano may be partly motivated by his desire to gain personal political credit for Philippine initiatives, there have been several previous efforts to organize top-level consultations, sparked partly by the desire of South Korea and Nationalist China for greater regional anti-Communist unity. Neither Thailand, which shares current Philippine disillusionment with SEATO, nor Pakistan accepted invitations to the Manila meeting, but Serrano apparently envisages subsequent bilateral talks with those governments and with Malaya.

American ambassador Johnson in Bangkok reports SEATO morale to be "at low ebb," and fears that the organization may be "fatally discredited" unless it can soon persuade its Asian members that it is able to take some meaningful action with regard to the Laotian crisis.

19 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
