The existence of an early warning-GCI radar in the Nanchang area has been confirmed. Together with radar coverage along the Fukien coast, this will provide for continuous radar surveillance, within equipment limitations, from any point opposite the Formosa Straits to approximately 260 nautical miles inland.

Transfer of BEAGLE (IL-28) jet light bombers to Manchuria from the USSR continued, with 15 more of these aircraft received in the past month. Three of them arrived on 19 July, the day after the opening of the summit conference. The total of such aircraft deliveries to Manchuria since late March has now reached 70. Although present evidence indicates that most of these aircraft have been allocated to the Chinese Communists, the possibility exists that some of them may be going to the North Koreans.

Navy:
Some of the Soviet destroyers and submarines reported near Tsingtao in late June have apparently been transfered to the Chinese Communist Navy. Sightings at Tsingtao from 1 to 4 July and thereafter indicate that all four Gordiy-class destroyers there were flying Chinese Communist colors and it is probable that one of the four recently arrived submarines was also flying the Chinese Communist ensign. The expected transfer in the near future of the other three recently arrived Soviet submarines would increase Chinese Communist naval strength to a total of four destroyers and nine, possibly 11, submarines, one of which is nonoperational. The Chinese Communist capability to employ these ships effectively remains unknown.

Logistics and Transportation:
Another Communist railway engineer division has moved to Fukien Province. This bring to four, and possibly five, the total of such divisions working on the projected rail lines to Amoy and Foochow. Photos show that the Communists had completed by early June at least 65 miles of cleared right of way in central Fukien along the line toward Amoy, and that preliminary work is under way along the line toward Foochow.

Improvement of existing roads and the construction of new roads, particularly to the Peiling Peninsula, north of the Matsu Islands have continued at a rapid pace.
