[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 JANUARY 1961

I. SPECIAL ITEM

Situation in Laos.

II. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

III. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkish cabinet resigns; President Gursel may select new cabinet members with view to increasing government's popularity in Turkey.

Syrian dissidents still plotting to overthrow UAR regime in Syria with support, including weapons, from Jordan.

Apparently as a reminder to US not to take Pakistan's cooperation too much for granted, Pakistani press, probably with government approval, calls for reduction in ties with West and improved relations with bloc.

Burmese General Ne Win reported under increasing pressure from army leaders to resume control of government.

Situation in the Congo.

IV. THE WEST

French Army attitudes on government's Algerian policy may hamper any new De Gaulle initiatives following 6-8 January referendum.

Ecuadorean foreign minister has commercial talks with Soviet ambassador in Washington.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

I. SPECIAL ITEM

Laos: Formal approval of the Boun Oum government by parliamentary vote on 4 January will probably be viewed by the Communist bloc as illegal. Souvanna Phouma, who is still in Cambodia, had declared that he would formally step down as premier if the Boun Oum government were invested by constitutional procedure.

Airlift flights into Laos continued on 4 January with all ten Soviet IL-14s active. The five Soviet MI-4 helicopters are scheduled to arrive in Hanoi on 5 January.

Moscow statements dwell on alleged differences among Western allies over means of solving the crisis in Laos, while North Vietnam has issued a new appeal for another Geneva Conference and reactivation of the International Control Commission.

II. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

III. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: The resignation of Turkey's 18-man cabinet on 4 January appears to have been pro-forma, preparatory to the convocation of the new Constituent Assembly on 6 January. Those who resigned will continue in office until a new cabinet is named from among the members of the new assembly, probably sometime next week. President Gursel may use this opportunity to increase his popularity among the Turkish people by selecting ministers who have political influence rather than primarily professional experience. The two previous cabinets, made up mainly of technicians, have failed

[PAGE 05]
to attract popular support to the new regime. Some of the key ministers such as Foreign Minister Sarper will probably remain in the new cabinet. (Page 1)

UAR (Syria)-Jordan: Syrian dissidents are still plotting to overthrow the UAR's regime in Syria and have again sought support, including weapons, from Jordan.
The conspiracy is said to include some of the high-ranking unit commanders in the Syrian Army and to have the support of most of the inhabitants of the Jabal Druze.
Amman has asked for more details and promised that aid will be provided if the plot is valid.

Pakistan: Recent editorials in two of Pakistan's leading papers, probably approved by the military government, have called for "gradual disengagement" from Western alliances and for improved relations with the bloc. While President Ayub has made it clear that Pakistan remains committed to its alliance with the US and strongly supported Western positions during his recent Middle and Far Eastern tours, the government probably hopes such press comment will serve as a reminder to the United States that it should not take Pakistan's cooperation for granted and increase aid to India at Pakistan's expense. (Page 3)

Burma: General Ne Win is under increasing pressure from army leaders to resume control of the government. Ne Win agrees that the situation in the country "has reached serious proportions" and asserts that Premier Nu's continued misrule might force him to act "very soon." Meanwhile, Nu is having trouble in his own Union party. Nu is expected voluntarily to relinquish formal leadership of the party at a conference in February but will continue as the dominant political figure in Burma. He is planning, however, to back a minority faction (Page 4)

5 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

[PAGE 07]
of the party for party leadership and, should his efforts fail, he may lose control of his party. (Page 4)

Congo: an IL-14 aircraft which landed at Gemena on 1 January, ostensibly carrying spare parts and welfare supplies for the UAR battalion in Equateur Province, included money, arms, and presumably technical personnel for the Gizenga dissidents. Gemena, about 400 miles northwest of Stanleyville, is the location of the UAR's Congo battalion.
the UN "is not to be notified" of the names of persons aboard the plane, who were to be described merely as technicians.

IV. THE WEST

France-Algeria:
lowered army morale since the government's decision to hold the referendum on its Algerian policy and the pro-rebel Moslem demonstrations during De Gaulle's 9-13 December visit.
the 6-8 January referendum is having repercussions among officers in Algeria. Widespread military disapproval of De Gaulle's policy will pose a threat to any new initiative he may attempt following the referendum if the over-all majority is slim, and particularly if there should be a negative result in Algeria.
Minister of State for Algeria Louis Joxe is said to have commented that "serious trouble"

5 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 08]
lies ahead in Algeria and there will probably be a major uprising just before or during the referendum,
both Moslems and Europeans in Oran are planning a general strike today. (Page 5)

Ecuador-USSR: Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Jose Chiriboga
"Yesterday I had the opportunity of discussing with the Russian ambassador future visits of a commercial nature." Chiriboga came to the United States in late December to discuss US economic assistance to Ecuador. Ecuador during the last month re-established active diplomatic relations with Czechoslovakia. (Page 7)

V. WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the United States or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends deliberately to initiate direct military action against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to the bloc in the immediate future.

C. With continuing substantial bloc logistic support, particularly airlift, the Kong Le/Pathet Lao forces have achieved a tactical capability of bringing substantial pressure against government forces in a number of areas throughout Laos.
In the event of a Pathet Lao move against such major points as Luang Prabang, Vientiane, or Pak Sane, the Boun Oum government will probably ask for overt outside assistance.
Although the bloc probably prefers that the Laotian conflict not be expanded beyond its present scale, it apparently is

5 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 09]
determined to maintain such military pressure as is required to achieve at a minimum a "neutralized" Laos. The bloc is probably prepared to increase its military commitments within Laos to the extent required to counter such outside military support as might be provided to the Phoumi forces.

The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, would omit the last two sentences for the following reasons: 1) The content of these two sentences is estimative in nature and thus beyond the purview of the Watch Charter. 2) The statements prejudge conditions which may not actually arise. 3) There is insufficient intelligence information to justify the statements made in the next to last sentence, and there is no intelligence information to support the assertion contained in the last sentence.

The Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, is in agreement that the bloc probably prefers that the Laotian conflict not be expanded beyond its present scale but does not believe sufficient evidence exists to warrant the conclusion that the minimum bloc objective is the achievement of a "neutralized" Laos. The Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, further believes that the conclusion that the bloc is probably prepared to increase its military commitments in Laos to the extent required to counter such outside military support as might be provided to the Phoumi forces cannot be supported by available information.

5 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 10]
Resignation of Turkish Cabinet Prefaces Convocation
Of Constituent Assembly

The resignation of Turkey's 18-man cabinet on 4 January appears to be pro forma, preliminary to the convocation of the new Constituent Assembly on 6 January. Despite rumors in Ankara of a cabinet shake-up, there is no indication of widespread discord within the government. Finance Minister Alican resigned on 24 December, ostensibly to gain political freedom of action but in reality because he disagreed with the plan of the ruling Committee of National Union (CNU) to raise military salaries substantially.

The resignation may reflect the concept, not clearly defined in Turkish constitutional law, that a cabinet should resign when a new government is established. Some of those who resigned, such as Foreign Minister Sarper, Deputy Premier Ozdilek, and Minister of Defense Ataman, will probably be included in the new cabinet.

The Ankara Home Service announced on 4 January that the cabinet had submitted its resignation in order to permit President Gursel full freedom of action "at a time when our democratic development has entered a new stage. . . ." The former cabinet ministers will continue in office pending the formation of a new cabinet. The CNU may have prompted the resignations to clear the way for broader political representation in an effort to win popular support. The two previous cabinets were made up primarily of technicians who lacked both political appeal and political comprehension. President Gursel may also hope to promote his own political future by selecting men who are more loyal to him. The new appointees may indicate the political leanings of the CNU; some of the suggested ministers are strong supporters of the Republican People's party (RPP).

Preparations continue for the meeting of the Constituent Assembly. Several prominent figures have been selected,

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 11]
including the leaders of the two main parties, several former deputies, and at least two former cabinet ministers. The RPP is rumored to have strong support in the nonpolitical groups to be represented. In a move probably designed to gain added support from the minorities and attract international good will for the regime, Gursel has included in his personal selections representatives of the Greek, Armenian, and Jewish minorities. Nonetheless, there continue to be undercurrents of resistance and potential unrest throughout the country.

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 12]
Pakistan Taking More Independent Position

In recent editorials probably approved by the military government, two leading Pakistani papers have called for Pakistan's "gradual disengagement from the role of a committed nation" and for improved relations with the bloc.

President Ayub has recently expressed concern over the flow of news articles that the United States would concentrate its aid on India, adding that Pakistani reaction to these stories was a problem for his government. The military regime probably hopes the recent editorials will serve as a warning to the incoming American administration that it should not take Pakistan's cooperation for granted and increase aid to India at Pakistan's expense.

President Ayub has made it clear that Pakistan remains committed to its alliance with the United States and strongly supported Western positions during his recent Middle and Far Eastern tours. During his visit to Cairo in early November, Ayub reportedly told newsmen who asked for his views on nonalignment: "I don't understand positive neutralism. You should ask President Nasir; he's the expert on neutralism." In Tokyo in mid-December Ayub told reporters that Pakistan stood ready to send troops to Laos if SEATO decided to intervene there.

While Pakistan plans no basic change in its commitments, it has moved to make a show of independence in its foreign policy, starting with its decision in the summer of 1959 to adopt a tougher line toward Afghanistan. Pakistan's current negotiations with the USSR for oil-exploration assistance are part of its more recent efforts to improve relations with Moscow. Rawalpindi probably considers Moscow's silence on the September border clashes with Afghanistan north of the Khyber Pass an encouraging sign. In addition, Ayub apparently hopes to persuade other Afro-Asian nations that it has a "flexible" foreign policy.

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 13]
Burmese Government

Senior Burmese Army officers, long discontented with administrative deterioration under Prime Minister Nu, have obtained assurances from General Ne Win that he intends to do something about it.

Ne Win told his colleagues that if the lack of government discipline continued, "the army would have to act very soon." an army takeover may occur in February or March.

Since Nu resumed the office of prime minister last April, Ne Win has opposed persistent demands from his army subordinates for a return to army rule, insisting that the elected civilian government be given an opportunity to prove its worth. It now appears, however, that the continued decline of law and order in the country and the deterioration of the economy since he resigned the prime ministership are convincing Ne Win that he should resume office. He told his staff and brigade commanders that he had hoped the present leaders would "step up the pace of managing the government, but they were too busy fighting among themselves," and he reportedly added, "The Burmese people have again shown that they are not ready for democracy and self-rule."

There have been persistent reports of dissension within Nu's Union party and indications that he cannot control its actions. Nu considered the party poorly organized, with many "wrong" people in power. A national party conference is scheduled for February, at which time a showdown for party control is possible. Nu intends to step down from the party presidency, but will remain the dominant political figure in Burma. However, he is backing the minority faction against Union party Secretary General Kyaw Dun, a political hack whose party role was the immediate cause of the 1958 breakup of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League. Should Nu lose this struggle, his organizational backing and control of the government may disintegrate completely. There has been one report suggesting that because of the dissension within his party, Nu would welcome the army's return to power.

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 14]
Deteriorating Military Morale Poses Threat to De Gaulle's
Algerian Policy

lowered army morale since the government's decision to hold the 6-8 January referendum on its Algerian policy and since the pro-rebel Moslem demonstrations during De Gaulle's 9-13 December visit. The air force is described as similarly affected, though to a lesser degree. The unity of the army is reportedly endangered by cleavages between junior officers and older generals and by differences between various units.

The recent open letter by Marshal Alphonse Juin, France's highest ranking military figure, explaining why he will vote "no" in the referendum has reportedly stimulated "considerable thought" among French officers in Algeria. Repercussions of the Juin letter have also occurred among the military in France itself, where 16 reserve army generals who had previously held high commands in North Africa—including former chief of staff Guillaume—have publicly endorsed Juin's appeal in even more vehement terms.

Widespread military disapproval of De Gaulle's policy will pose a threat to any new initiative he may attempt following the referendum. De Gaulle expects to gain about a 65-percent majority in France; a narrower over-all majority or especially a negative result in Algeria would serve to stiffen military opposition to a new offer to negotiate with the rebel government. Extensive Moslem abstention, as ordered by the rebel Algerian government, or further pro-rebel demonstrations in Algeria would probably also be interpreted by many French officers as evidence of the failure of De Gaulle's policy and of the impossibility of keeping an independent Algeria from rebel domination.

Meanwhile, there are signs that some French officers now feel Algeria is lost to France and the West and are adopting attitudes of bitter resignation or indifference. If such sentiment spreads, it will probably lower the army's efficiency in

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 15]
controlling settler and Moslem extremists after the referendum. Minister of State for Algeria Louis Joxe is said to have commented that "serious trouble" lies ahead in Algeria and that there will probably be a major uprising just before or during the referendum.
both Moslems and Europeans in Oran are planning a general strike today. (Page 5)

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 16]
Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Reports Meeting
With Soviet Ambassador

Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Jose Chiriboga on the previous day he had had "the opportunity of discussing with the Russian ambassador future visits of a commercial nature." Chiriboga arrived in the United States in late December to discuss US economic assistance to Ecuador and the Eleventh Inter-American Conference which is scheduled to be held in Quito this year.

Ecuador has indicated increased interest in relations with the Soviet bloc in the past six months. The conservative Ponce administration which preceded the incumbent administration of President Velasco permitted the Czechoslovak minister to Brazil to be accredited also to Quito last summer. Ecuadorean-Czech relations had been inactive since the closure of the Czech legation in Quito in 1957. Under the Velasco regime, the leftist minister of education traveled to Prague where he entered into a preliminary agreement to purchase about $630,000 in technical equipment for schools and received a Czech offer to provide a $10,000,000 credit. The contract for technical equipment has now been signed, according to a press report of late December. Ecuadorean representatives have recently talked with Frantisek Mares, key figure in Czech arms deals, about the exchange of Czech small arms for Ecuadorean cacao. Ecuador has given Czechoslovakia permission to reopen its legation in Quito, and a Czech representative was scheduled to arrive there on 27 December.

5 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 18]
