[PAGE 01]
25 April 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET LEADERS ATTACK WESTERN DISARMAMENT VIEWS (page 3).

2. KHRUSHCHEV SAYS SOVIET ARMS TO YEMEN MEANT TO HARASS BRITISH (page 4).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]3. SAUDI ARABIA REPORTED PREPARING GUERRILLA ACTION IN BURAIMI AREA (page 5).

4. PLAN TO ASSASSINATE CUBAN PRESIDENT REPORTED[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 6).

5. MOROCCAN NATIONALIST PROBES AMERICAN ATTITUDE ON AIR BASES (page 7).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]6. SOVIET REGIME USES STALIN METHODS TO END PARTY STRIFE (page 8).

7. FRANCE NEGOTIATING ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FRENCH TRADE OFFICE IN PEIPING (page 9).

8. ESTABLISHMENT OF JAPANESE COMMERCIAL MISSION IN PEIPING UNDER NEGOTIATION[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 10).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 11)

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. SOVIET LEADERS ATTACK WESTERN DISARMAMENT VIEWS

The British delegate to the UN Disarmament Subcommittee, Anthony Nutting, told his Western colleagues on 23 April that on the basis of discussion thus far with Bulganin and Khrushchev on disarmament, the Russians appear to be "fed up" with the subcommittee and are very suspicious of the Western position. The Soviet leaders charged that the American aerial inspection proposal was designed to photograph the USSR for target and espionage purposes.

Bulganin and Khrushchev said they had omitted nuclear disarmament from their 27 March proposals because previous discussion had proved it was impossible to solve the problems of nuclear and conventional arms simultaneously. The Soviet leaders showed no interest in any partial approach to disarmament and insisted that the Western powers had complicated the disarmament problem by retreating from their earlier positions.

Nutting concluded that he believes the USSR wants disarmament but not control and, therefore, does not want an arms agreement.

Comment

The Soviet leaders' remarks on the aerial inspection proposal show no change in the views Khrushchev expressed in his Supreme Soviet speech on 29 December in which he charged that aerial photography amounted to military reconnaissance and claimed that such a plan "can only fan war passions and war psychosis."

The omission of nuclear disarmament provisions from the Soviet 27 March plan apparently was intended to create an impression that the Soviet position is moving closer to that of the West, particularly that of the United States, by offering a separate agreement in the field of conventional arms, where the USSR has superiority. The Soviet leaders probably believe such ostensible concessions to Western views will lead Western governments, under the pressure of public opinion, to curtail military spending and reduce armed forces even in the absence of an arms agreement.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. KHRUSHCHEV SAYS SOVIET ARMS TO YEMEN MEANT TO HARASS BRITISH

Khrushchev told Foreign Minister Selwyn Lloyd on 21 April that as long as Great Britain supports the Baghdad pact, it must expect the USSR to take measures, such as arms sales to Yemen, to cause maximum annoyance to Britain. Khrushchev made the statement in answer to a question from Lloyd as to why the Soviet Union was selling arms to Yemen when those arms could only be used against the British in Aden.

Comment

Khrushchev's statement, like the Soviet Foreign Ministry statement of 17 April, serves notice that Soviet tactics in the Middle East will not be changed without a quid pro quo from the West. The Soviet leaders have repeatedly attacked the Baghdad pact as being anti-Soviet.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. SAUDI ARABIA REPORTED PREPARING GUERRILLA ACTION IN BURAIMI AREA

Saudi Arabia is air-lifting troops to a point near the disputed Buraimi Oasis in eastern Arabia.

the forces are to be used for sabotage and raids in the Buraimi area in order "to give the British no peace there." The airlift allegedly had moved 800 troops by 22 April and the operation was continuing.

Comment

A British mission is expected to arrive in Saudi Arabia about 26 April to re-open negotiations on the disputed Buraimi Oasis, which British-led forces occupied last fall in the name of the sultan of Muscat.

If the Saudi troop movement is confirmed, the British may refuse to open the talks in order to avoid appearing to be negotiating under duress. Mounting Saudi pressure on the British is also evident in King Saud's reported loan of $10,000,000 to Yemen for arms--presumably to support its dispute with Britain over boundaries of the Aden Protectorate in southern Arabia.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. PLAN TO ASSASSINATE CUBAN PRESIDENT REPORTED

A general revolt led by men who were officers under former president Prio Socarras will be set off by the assassination of General Batista, planned for the first opportunity.

The president's assassination was originally scheduled for 20 April, but no attempt was made then owing to lack of opportunity.

Batista does not know whom he can trust in the army and reportedly is extremely nervous. The source says that his life could be saved if within the next few days he guaranteed free elections this year.

Comment

Oppositionists, particularly the followers of ex-president Prio, ousted by Batista in 1952, are exploiting the tense situation that has developed since 3 April when a military conspiracy was revealed. They reportedly will attempt a coup, and they may have included President Batista's assassination in their plans. Such an event would probably lead to considerable bloodshed throughout the island.

Sympathy with the officers convicted of the 3 April conspiracy and antipathy toward the army command, extending increasingly to Batista, is being felt throughout the army, according to reports.

The opposition has insisted that the November 1954 election was a fraud and has demanded a new election for all offices including that of president. Batista has adamantly opposed an election before 1958 and apparently has considered changing the constitution so as to be eligible to run again.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. MOROCCAN NATIONALIST PROBES AMERICAN ATTITUDE ON AIR BASES

Ahmed Balafrej, secretary general of the Moroccan nationalist Istiqlal party, has asked the American consul general in Rabat what attitude the United States government would take if the Moroccans desired to open direct talks on "military subjects" after the appointment of a Moroccan foreign minister. Balafrej indicated that the sultan was now considering the matter.

Comment

The Moroccan government is likely to press soon for a renegotiation of the 1950 bilateral American-French agreement which permitted the building of the four strategic air bases in Morocco. The Moroccans hope that American payments for the continued use of these bases will partially cover Morocco's annual financial deficit which will probably run between $142,000,000 and $200,000,000 in the future. Heretofore, these deficits have been covered by French subsidies and loans.

The Moroccans probably also hope to use an early agreement with the United States as a lever for bargaining during the forthcoming financial and economic negotiations with France, which were recently postponed at the request of the Moroccan government.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. SOVIET REGIME USES STALIN METHODS TO END PARTY STRIFE

the central committee of the Soviet Communist Party issued a resolution which disciplined the party organization of a thermodynamics laboratory and indicated that the collective leadership continues to use Stalin's methods to control dissension within the party.

the central committee decreed that the party organization in the laboratory be dissolved; that all party members and candidates in this organization be investigated; and that engineer-technical personnel of the laboratory be re-examined and replaced where necessary.

revealed publicly the party's concern over this problem when it condemned, in language similar to that of the resolution, "recent party meetings, including one held in a scientific institute," where "slanderous statements directed against the party's policy" were made. It is probable that repercussions of this nature were fairly widespread and that the party has moved swiftly and ruthlessly, as in the case of the thermodynamics laboratory, to remove such opposition to its policies.

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. FRANCE NEGOTIATING ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FRENCH TRADE OFFICE IN PEIPING

the establishment of a French commercial office in Communist China is now under active negotiation in London. France hopes to send a staff of about 25 members who would have the same status as commercial attaches which Paris sends to other countries. The authority of the office would be confined to commercial matters. Under the French proposal, the establishment of a French agency in Peiping would not give Communist China reciprocal rights to establish a commercial agency in Paris.

Comment

Although the French had approached the Chinese Communists to establish a permanent commercial office in Peiping, this is the first report of the terms which were submitted by Paris. Communist China would welcome a French commercial office in Peiping and the presence of French commercial attaches as improving its chances for obtaining eventual French recognition.

France may believe that the dispatch of a commercial delegation to China will increase its share in China's trade with non-Communist Europe. While West German and British trade with Communist China has tripled since 1952, Sino-French trade has remained at about the same low level. (Prepared jointly with ORR)

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 9
[PAGE 11]
8. ESTABLISHMENT OF JAPANESE COMMERCIAL MISSION IN PEIPING UNDER NEGOTIATION

Japan is working out an agreement with Communist China to set up an unofficial trade mission in Peiping.

Referring to the French negotiations for an official mission in Peiping, Foreign Minister Shigemitsu commented that if the French are successful, "our government will not be in any position to thwart the wishes of our people." Japan's talks with Peiping are probably being conducted by private Japanese businessmen rather than by government officials.

Peiping has exerted steady pressure on Tokyo for the establishment of closer ties and has sought to exploit Japanese hopes for profitable trade with the mainland. The Chinese Communists would probably prefer to have the trade mission operate on an official basis and can be expected to press for this point during the reported negotiations. Peiping would probably accept an unofficial mission, however, as a step toward eventual official recognition.

(Concurred in by ORR)

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 10
[PAGE 12]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 24 April)

Three Israeli water engineers and their driver were ambushed and killed on the Beersheba-Eilat road near the Jordan border. (Press)

Syria has announced that it has agreed to a cease-fire on the Syrian-Israeli border on condition that Israel pledges to respect the resolutions of the UN Security Council. A UN resolution in 1953 requested Israel to cease activities at Banat Yacov pending an agreed solution. ([[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Press)

Egypt is sending an emissary to other Arab capitals to inform them of its discussions with UN secretary general Hammarskjold.

Egypt had agreed to a proposal which would help both sides to observe the terms of the armistice agreement, particularly Article II, to evacuate troops 500 meters each side of the demarcation line, and to remove from demilitarized zones all military or police weapons and all settlements or fortifications that have been built since the armistice.

Egypt had excluded from the discussions anything connected with the Jordan River waters, the navigation of the Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba, the ending of the state of war with Israel, and any new proposals outside the scope of the Hammarskjold mission.

a Jordanian mission to Cairo will co-ordinate Jordan's war plans with Egypt and Syria.

Jordan will ask Egypt to supply it with British arms and ammunition[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

Egypt, according to press and radio reports, has "presented" arms worth a half a million pounds ($1,400,000) to the Sudan, including tanks, armored cars and other vehicles, and light arms and ammunition. (Press)

25 Apr 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 11
