[PAGE 01]
23 March 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. French views on Kremlin BW campaign (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
2. New Communist program for India and East Pakistan (page 3).
3. Comment on the death of the Ceylonese Prime Minister (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Jordan-Syria rapprochement isolates Iraq (page 5).
5. Political crisis in South Africa precipitated by court ruling (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. French views on Kremlin BW campaign:
that the Communist campaign against the alleged American biological warfare in Korea is part of the USSR's strategy to continue the present stalemate in Korea, rather than an indication of an impending rupture of the armistice negotiations. Moreover, according to the Charge, a specific aim of Moscow and Peiping is to convince the peoples of Asia that the BW charges are true.

the United States is resigned to maintaining the Korean conflict in a state of suspension for lack of power to impose a settlement. Consequently the Soviet Union must urge the Chinese to join in respecting the status quo in Korea and look to the southeast where expansion involves less risk.

The ultimate Kremlin strategy is to use the Korean impasse as a trump card to force the three Western powers to accept a compromise in Europe or Asia.

Comment: current Communist tactics are designed to delay the Korean talks. the Kremlin hopes to force the United States to keep a large part of its available military force in Asia, and to use the time to aggravate the threat to Indochina in the hope of inducing Washington to accept five-power discussions on Far Eastern affairs.

SOUTH ASIA

2. New Communist program for India and East Pakistan:
The Indian Communist leader, S. A. Dange, received new instructions in February for the Communist program in India, according to The instructions were presumably
[PAGE 04]
based on the possibility of an outbreak of war between the USSR and the West, with India and Pakistan maintaining "hostile neutrality" towards the Soviet Union.

Some of the highlights of the program reportedly are:
Communist Party activity is to be concentrated in eastern India and in East Pakistan, which have been selected for joint Indian-Pakistani guerrilla activity.
The agrarian campaign is to be limited to areas where the peasantry is experienced in militant resistance or where the Indian Government lacks military control.
United Front tactics in state assemblies, especially in South India where the Communist Party has recently won sizeable representation.
Reorganization of cells in transport, war production and dock industries.

Comment: obvious objectives of the Indian Communist Party, particularly in the light of Communist successes in the elections in South India. Proposed guerrilla activities in the areas adjacent to Burma and Tibet were reported to be Communist objectives as early as March 1951.

3. Comment on the death of the Ceylonese Prime Minister:
Prime Minister Senanayake's death removes from South Asia one of the West's staunch friends, making possible the development of the latent political trends unfavorable to American interests.

Since the present Ceylonese government was held together largely by the strong hand of the Prime Minister, his death may leave the balance of power in the hands of small splinter groups. While the Prime Minister's son, now Minister of Agriculture, is a likely successor, other able but opportunistic and unreliable leaders will try to take over and, if unsuccessful, may be expected to head strong opposition groups.
[PAGE 05]
The Communists in Ceylon, although split into three parties, have an exceedingly vocal representation in Parliament, and may be expected to maneuver for more power.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Jordan-Syria rapprochement isolates Iraq:
Top Syrian officials have concluded an extremely cordial three-day visit in Jordan. The Syrian Chief of State, Fawzi Selo, credited Jordan's King Talal with bringing about this new friendliness between their two states as well as that between Jordan and Saudi Arabia. It is generally believed that Jordan and Syria will soon establish diplomatic relations and negotiate trade agreements.

Comment: This visit highlights the re-alignment of the Arab states that has been taking place since the assassination of Jordan's King Abdullah on July 18, 1951.

Jordan and Iraq, once bound closely by Abdullah's dream of a Hashemite dynasty in the Near East, are now split because Abdullah's successor abandoned this ambition. Jordan's rapprochement with Syria on the north, following that with Saudi Arabia on the south, now leaves Iraq isolated.

Iraq's Prime Minister, moreover, is reported to be dissatisfied with the Arab League; this attitude will further alienate Egypt, which actively sponsors the League.

5. Political crisis in South Africa precipitated by court ruling:
A tense atmosphere in Capetown is reported by the American Embassy, following Prime Minister Malan's indication that he will try by parliamentary means to reverse the Supreme Court's 20 March ruling that a law placing mixed-breed voters on a separate electoral role is invalid.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: Malan had earlier told a political intimate that this case, which involves the government's racial segregation program, was the most serious political issue in his country's history. Action against the court by the Nationalist government, on the other hand, would add to the fears of the large English-speaking minority that without such judicial protection its own constitutional rights might be imperiled.

The crisis arises on the eve of the nationwide demonstrations by non-Europeans scheduled for 6 April in protest against the Nationalists' segregation policies.
