[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
16 February 1961
Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
16 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. Austria: Chancellor Raab to resign; picks successor. (Page iii)

6. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page iii)
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
Austria: Chancellor Julius Raab has sent a letter to the People's party conference in session this week at Semmering in which, according to a reliable source of the US Embassy in Vienna, he announced his intention to resign "in the near future," probably around the first of April. Raab, who assumed office in April 1953, has recommended as his successor Alfons Gorbach, present chairman of the party and a strong right-winger. The source foresees no serious controversy within the party over the selection of Gorbach and infers that it will be satisfactory to the USSR, which apparently anticipates no change in Raab's policy of maintaining friendly relations with Moscow and opposing Austrian membership in the European Economic Community (Common Market), both of which the USSR considers essential to the maintenance of Austrian neutrality.
(Page 8)

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. (No change from last week)

B. (No change from last week)

C. The Communist forces in Laos continue their delaying tactics along the approaches to the Plaine des Jarres,

16 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 06]
but their resistance will stiffen as they fall back on that important base. Although there are no indications that they will step up the intensity of military operations, they have the capability of making a determined active defense of their base in order to retain a strong bargaining position in any future negotiations. The Communists will probably continue to depend upon the forces presently in Laos and the present flow of supply as long as these forces are not being used to their full potential.

D. Maximum Soviet propaganda exploitation of Lumumba's death in an effort to rally neutralist opinion against further UN activity in the Congo is now likely to be coupled with increased attempts by the UAR and other radical African states, supported by the bloc, to provide military aid to the Gizenga regime. Lumumba's death raises the specter of possible reprisals against Europeans in the Congo and substantially diminishes prospects for reconciliation of opposing factions.

16 Feb 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Next 8 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
Austrian Chancellor Reportedly to Resign Soon

Chancellor Raab's health has been precarious following a stroke in 1957, and he has been reported on the verge of retirement since he stepped down last February as party chairman in favor of Gorbach. An effective and able political leader, Raab has brooked no opposition from his associates. His foreign policy reflected his desire to serve as a mediator or bridge between East and West, which on occasion led him to pursue a more conciliatory course toward the USSR than was deemed wise or expedient in many pro-Western quarters. His prestige suffered somewhat last summer during Khrushchev's visit to Austria when--against the wishes of his cabinet and party--he accompanied the Soviet leader on a tour of the country and made no protest against Khrushchev's violent attacks on Austria's Western friends. It was Raab's hope, only partially realized, that Moscow would reduce Austrian reparations payments and increase mutual trade.

Raab's hand-picked successor, 62-year-old Alfons Gorbach, is a stanch right-wing conservative. His elevation to the party chairmanship last year was a minimum concession to those who were demanding reform within the party organization to broaden its popular appeal. In domestic policy, he may be somewhat more liberal than Raab. He is said, however, not to be a warm advocate of a representative form of government but to prefer the rule of an intellectual elite undisturbed by interference from the mass below.

A veteran of World War I, in which he lost a leg, Gorbach is a member of the National Defense Committee of the Austrian Parliament, a strong opponent of neutralism and communism, and an advocate of "military neutrality" for his country. His aversion to communism has led him to endorse certain neo-Nazi activities in rural Austria as a matter of vote-getting expediency. A shrewd and tough negotiator in party affairs, he enjoys good relations with the Socialist leaders in the coalition government. His impressions of the United States, gained from a 60-day leader exchange grant visit in 1957, are reported to be favorable. His foreign policy is likely to be similar to that of his predecessor.

16 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
[PAGE 18]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 19]
TOP SECRET
