[PAGE 01]
23 July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Evidence of 1952 production of modified or new type MIG (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Vietnamese Cabinet lacks cohesion (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
3. Communist-front organizations in Pakistan renounce politics (page 4).
4. India may recognize Farouk's title as "King of the Sudan" (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Comment on Mossadeq's return to power (page 5).
6. Yugoslavia invites Greece to participate in joint naval exercises (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Serious bearing shortage in Bulgaria (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. West German officials suggest active defense preparations be started now (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Evidence of 1952 production of modified or new type MIG:

Comment: The fact that the designation "SI" has been observed suggests that a new version of the MIG-15 or a new type of MIG fighter is now in production.

FAR EAST

2. Vietnamese Cabinet lacks cohesion:

The Vietnamese Cabinet is torn by feuds between key ministers and by resentment at Prime Minister Tam's reluctance to delegate responsibility to subordinates. Tam allegedly intends to rely on French advisers assigned to the various ministries.

Comment: Since Tam has the strong backing of French officials in Saigon, he should be able during the immediate future to continue in office despite his widespread unpopularity and the maneuvers of his political enemies. It is clear, however, that with a disorganized cabinet he will not be able to conduct a vigorous campaign against the Viet Minh.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

3. Communist-front organizations in Pakistan renounce politics:

Two Communist-front organizations, the Pakistan Trade Union Federation and the Pakistan Progressive Writers' Association, have issued statements admitting past errors in policy and stating that henceforth they would confine themselves solely to trade union activities and literary pursuits.

Comment: The above statements appeared shortly after the release from jail of all but two of the top Communist leaders in Pakistan and less than a month after the Indian Communist Party allegedly received new policy instructions from abroad. The statements suggest that the Communist Party of Pakistan is being reorganized and revitalized following the return of its leaders. The withdrawal of front organizations from political activity presumably indicates recognition of an immediate need to increase popular support, which is more easily obtained when there is no police repression.

4. India may recognize Farouk's title as "King of the Sudan":

The Turkish Ambassador in New Delhi reported to his government on 9 July that local political circles considered it probable that India would recognize the title of Egypt's ruler as "King of Egypt and the Sudan." According to the Ambassador, the main reason for recognition would be an Indian desire to strengthen the Asian-African bloc in the United Nations.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The Indian Government has delayed recognition of Farouk's title since mid-April, at which time the Egyptian Ambassador in New Delhi was officially informed that India would soon do so.

Recognition by India would add another important, non-Moslem nation and a member of the British Commonwealth to the growing list of countries ranged against Britain on this question.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Comment on Mossadeq's return to power:

The reappointment of Mossadeq as Iran's Prime Minister destroys any hope for an early solution of the oil problem. Prior to his resignation on 16 July, Mossadeq requested that he be given extraordinary powers to cope with the deteriorating economic situation. He also asked the Shah to appoint him Minister of War as well as Prime Minister.

Mossadeq's known desire to limit the influence of the Shah and the army suggests that he will now attempt to strengthen his position further. In addition, the International Court's decision on 22 July that it is not competent to rule in the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute will heighten Mossadeq's intransigence and his popularity in Iran.

Mossadeq is a self-proclaimed constitutionalist. His unwillingness to compromise on the oil issue, however, as well as his desire to restrict the army and the court and his increasing inclination toward dictatorial action, offers little hope for an improvement in the country's affairs.

[PAGE 06]
6. Yugoslavia invites Greece to participate in joint naval exercises:

Greek Defense Minister Mavros has informed Ambassador Peurifoy that the Greek Navy has been invited to join Yugoslav naval forces in maneuvers scheduled for late August. The Greek Government is withholding its reply until it can obtain an official American reaction. According to Ambassador Peurifoy, the Greeks are "highly elated" over this Yugoslav overture.

Comment: Greek officials have in the past exhibited unwarranted optimism over Yugoslav readiness to enter into mutual defense talks, and Marshal Tito has made it abundantly clear that he will sign no formal defense pacts. If Mavros' statement is true, however, this request for joint naval exercises would be concrete evidence of Yugoslavia's willingness to assume an active role in regional defense planning.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Serious bearing shortage in Bulgaria:

Since the first of the year Bulgaria has suffered an increasingly serious shortage of bearings. Identified types in short supply are bearings for electric dredges, vacuum pumps, and threshing machines.

Comment: It appears likely that planned shipments of bearings to Bulgaria have been interrupted either by the granting of priority to other consumers or as a result of the failure of the USSR and Czechoslovakia to meet production goals. During 1952, Western quotas for the delivery of bearings which would serve to supplement domestic production in the Soviet Orbit have been reduced by approximately 30 percent as compared with the previous year.

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

8. West German officials suggest active defense preparations be started now:

West German Finance Minister Schaeffer and "Defense Minister" Blank have suggested that barracks be built now for the use of the German troop contingents in the European army. They propose that the barracks be constructed ostensibly for American use, but paid for by the Germans.

Both officials expressed concern that formation of German units might later be delayed by the lack of quarters.

Comment: Although the West German Government must facilitate its troop build-up by planning its defense production schedules, any such action as they suggested would probably bring sharp French criticism.

Until the European Defense Treaty is finally ratified, the West German Government will not have the legal right to proceed with overt defense preparations.
