[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

27 October 1956

Copy No. 115

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. NEW LARGE-SCALE MOBILIZATION IN ISRAEL

3. IRAQ REPORTED DISTRIBUTING ARMS IN SYRIA FOR
LATE OCTOBER COUP

5. SINGAPORE RIOTS

6. ARAB STATES PROTEST FRENCH ACTION IN ALGERIA

7. PLOT AGAINST COLOMBIAN GOVERNMENT REPORTED

10. REPORTED DISSATISFACTION IN BURMESE ARMY

* * * *
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
2. NEW LARGE-SCALE MOBILIZATION IN ISRAEL

New Israeli mobilization on a "very large scale," with an extensive call-up of reservists, civilian vehicles and construction equipment, probably indicates preparation for a limited objective action against Egypt or Jordan, with full capability to exploit any Arab response. Prior to these new call-ups, Israeli strength had been increased to about 100,000.

The main weight of the new troop and vehicle movements has been southward from Tel Aviv. Very heavy concentrations of troops and materiel have been reported southeast of Tel Aviv, and in the Southern Command, where a build-up of armor was previously reported. Earlier in the week Israeli troop activity increased in forward areas near the Jordanian frontier, and extensive laying of field communication wire was reported.

The American embassy reports that the mobilization resembles that which occurred before the El Auja raid in November 1955. An embassy officer was also advised by an Israeli official to cancel week-end trips and stockpile food supplies.

An Israeli strike against Egypt would ostensibly be in retaliation, not only for the recent Egyptian mining of two military vehicles in the El Auja area, which resulted in three dead and 27 wounded, but also for a series of recent incursions by Egyptian-directed terrorists from

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
Egypt, Syria and Jordan. In the most recent such incident on 25 October, a terrorist was killed near the Gaza strip by Israeli security forces four kilometers inside their border.

Israel is also prepared for possible action against West Jordan if Iraqi or other Arab forces enter Jordan.

* * * * * *

Members of the Watch Committee have individually examined reports received since their last meeting concerning Israeli military and associated developments. They generally agree that the likelihood has increased of major Israeli reprisals, probably against Egypt in the near future. It is believed that the present Israeli mobilization, though on a large scale, is not a full mobilization, and therefore Israel does not intend that this action lead to general hostilities although it is preparing to meet the possibility of broader action.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
3. IRAQ REPORTED DISTRIBUTING ARMS IN SYRIA
FOR LATE OCTOBER COUP

Iraq is distributing arms among Druze tribes in southern Syria as part of an Iraqi plan to execute an antileftist coup in Syria in late October,

Comment
A possible Iraqi-sponsored coup against leftist elements in Syria has been repeatedly reported since last June. If arms are actually being distributed to dissident elements, the rightists may be about to move.

The Druze are reported to be increasingly restive, hostile to the present Syrian government, and disappointed that Iraq has taken no action in Syria to overthrow the government. In this situation it seems likely that a number of different groups may be trying to win them over.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
5. SINGAPORE RIOTS

Communist-led rioting--with extensive property damage and some casualties--is continuing in Singapore. Matters may be complicated by efforts of some Chinese secret societies and criminal elements to exploit the situation.

The police have dislodged student strikers from school grounds where they have been barricaded for the past two weeks. The latest information suggests that the students' organization is collapsing. Troops of the local army garrison have taken up stations to assist in preserving order, and police and army reinforcements from Malaya have been ordered to Singapore.

Chief Minister Lim has appealed to the schools to return to their role of institutions of peaceful Chinese culture rather than continue as pawns in a political campaign. This may reduce the rising antagonism among Singapore Chinese based on the belief that the government is attacking Chinese culture. A successful solution of the school issue would encourage the government to press its anti-Communist campaign, and there are already indications that it is moving against the political elements of Communist-front "cultural" organizations.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9

[PAGE 10]
6. ARAB STATES PROTEST FRENCH ACTION
IN ALGERIA

The Arab world is reacting strongly to the capture by the French on 22 October of five Algerian leaders of the Front of National Liberation (FLN).

Tewfik el-Madani, FLN leader in Cairo on 23 October exhorted the Algerian Army of Liberation over the Cairo radio to continue the battle "more energetically and determinedly than before."

Strong protests have been made to France by most members of the Arab League. Its political committee has cabled a protest to the secretary general of the United Nations and a special meeting of the Arab League's council considered the situation on 25 October. The Jordanian Chamber of Deputies has demanded the recall of Jordan's ambassador to France.

Anti-French demonstrations have occurred in Amman, where the French ambassador has requested government protection, and in Tripoli, where crowds demonstrated enthusiastically outside the Egyptian and Soviet embassies. Libyan, Iraqi and Saudi Arabian officials have requested American intercession to obtain the release of the captives. A group of Iraqi deputies requested Pakistan and India to use their good offices.

The French chargé in Tunis claims to be receiving no instructions from Paris and believes the situation is very serious for all French residents, though somewhat better than for French residents in Morocco.

A government spokesman in Paris expects an interval "little better than an armed truce" for

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10

[PAGE 11]
two or three months. He told American embassy officials the French intend to use this interval to advance a political settlement in Algeria in order not only to solve the Algerian problem, "at least temporarily," but also to renew friendly relations with the Moroccans and Tunisians.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11

[PAGE 12]
7. PLOT AGAINST COLOMBIAN GOVERNMENT REPORTED

The Colombian government is greatly concerned over a possible coup, which reportedly has the support of a group within the military.

The Rojas regime has leaned increasingly on the military in recent months since its other support has eroded rapidly. The military has remained loyal to the government, although dissatisfaction has been reported among junior officers. However, only the air force endorsed the "Third Force," the recent unsuccessful government effort to organize popular support.

Rojas' unexpected convocation on 11 October of the National Constituent Assembly, the sole constitutional element of his regime, has injected an element of controversy and uncertainty in the situation, in part because of the critical speeches of opposition deputies during the initial meetings.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12

[PAGE 13]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 14]
10. REPORTED DISSATISFACTION IN BURMESE ARMY

The Burmese army's capability to restore and maintain law and order, which has been steadily improving in the past few years, may be seriously affected by increased political interference in the assignment of its personnel. The American army attaché in Rangoon has received a number of reports of dissension among army officers, who resent War Office insistence that they join the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League, the government coalition party. Officers who refuse to join, as well as those who are not "pure" Burmans, are allegedly being relegated to less important posts and in some cases separated from the army.

The Burmese Socialist Party, the dominant element in the government coalition, has for some time been cautiously attempting to gain more effective political control over the army and to place more Burmans in key positions. An acceleration of this process could seriously weaken the army's leadership, especially since many of its ablest officers are either Anglo-Burman or belong to ethnic minority groups.

General Ne Win, the commander in chief, who has generally sought to keep politics out of the military, appears to be taking little interest in army affairs since his return from abroad last month. Several reports suggest he is "on his way out."

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 16

[PAGE 15]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 26 October)

The American embassy in Amman points out that Jordanian chief of staff Nuwar signed the military agreement with Egypt and Syria on 24 October without permission of the cabinet and that it has not been ratified by parliament. The under secretary of the Jordanian Foreign Ministry commented that Nuwar seems to consider himself a government apart. It is possible, however, that Nuwar's failure to obtain cabinet approval may be deliberate, to enable the government to claim that the agreement is invalid should it desire to do so at some future date.

The American military attaché in Amman reports that Syria's gift of heavy weapons to Jordan includes 60 Bren gun carriers and eight prewar model French 105-mm. howitzers. The attaché in Damascus has also observed antitank artillery there being readied for Jordan's use. Egypt presented the Jordanian air force with five Vampire jet fighters on 25 October.

27 Oct 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 17
