No Progress at West Indies Constitutional Congress

Lack of any progress at the constitutional conference among members of the West Indies Federation may cause Trinidad's anti-American Premier Eric Williams to seek dramatic means to achieve his goal of wider federal powers and early independence.

The conference reached an impasse over the first agenda item of representation and adjourned on 7 October, apparently leaving for committee consideration this and other issues--including federal finances and taxation and the question of a customs union. The deadlock resulted from Jamaica's demand for 49 percent of the legislative seats in order to reflect its numerical and economic preponderance in the Federation. Trinidad and the smaller islands were willing to increase Jamaican representation by offering 40 percent of the seats in an enlarged legislature instead of Jamaica's present 37.7 percent.

The delegates apparently preferred to delay political and economic evolution of the Federation rather than take decisions unpalatable to Jamaica, which has threatened to secede. Divisive factors have been accentuated by the open clash between profederalist forces led by Williams and Jamaica's insistence on "states' rights." Williams wants broader federal powers involving a budget nearly 15 times the present size. Jamaica vehemently opposes a federal income tax and customs union, which it considers threats to its present economic advantage. Future developments will be influenced by whether London continues its present role as observer or intervenes more actively in an effort to keep the Federation together and proceeding toward independence--which London hopes to grant within about five years.

Williams evidently seeks to create a strong federal system which would give him a wider political forum if he becomes its prime minister. He may revive his now quiescent campaign against the US naval base at Chaguaramas in an effort to arouse West Indian "nationalism." He may also maneuver to unseat the weak federal prime minister, Sir Grantley Adams.
