Christian organization, of instigating sectarianism to the detriment of Arab unity. He asserted that the UAR which out of courtesy to the Lebanese people had remained silent on the activities of "imperialist agents" in Lebanon, could no longer remain silent. "We have ways to stop elements which go too far," he threatened. In a previous speech he noted, "The Phalange party is represented in the Lebanese Government; we cannot forget or ignore this fact."

These attacks were in response to earlier criticisms of Nasir by Phalange leader and Lebanese Minister of Finance Pierre Gemayel as well as by the party's newspaper. Nasir implied that the Phalange is subservient to France and likened Gemayel's comments to those of the Israeli radio.

Following Nasir's first attack, Gemayel retorted that the UAR President apparently "is not looking for friends but for followers and agents." However, Moslem extremists in Lebanon, together with Druze leader Kemal Jumblatt, have sided with Nasir. As a result, an upsurge of Moslem-Christian tension has occurred which the embassy in Beirut fears may lead to violent incidents.

Nasir also has attacked as "fascist" the Social National party of Lebanon, an affiliate and remnant of the Syrian party which was purged in 1955 following the assassination of pro-Nasir Colonel Malki, who was slated to be chief of staff of the Syrian army. Some members of the party escaped to Lebanon. Nasir has revived this pre-UAR episode together with past allegations of United States complicity in the party's activities. In a speech on 24 February he stated flatly that the party "is financed by America to attack the UAR."

Nasir fixed "guilt" for Lumumba's murder primarily on Tshombé, secondarily on Kasavubu for delivering Lumumba to Tshombé, and on the United States for continuing to support Kasavubu despite his "guilt." He claimed the United States was equally guilty because its "agent," Kasavubu, has just contrib-

27 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10
