[PAGE 01]
7 March 1961
Copy No. C Ed

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Argentina: Frondizi moves to mediate between US and Cuba. (Page 1)

4. Bolivia plans arrest of Communist union leaders if teachers' strike continues; requests arms from US for use in case of violence. (Page 1)

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 March 1961

DAILY BRIEF

1

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Argentina-Cuba: Argentina has decided to send special envoys to the United States and Cuban governments to seek means of alleviating "tension" between the two countries, despite its previous skepticism regarding the value of single-country mediation efforts. This action is probably intended to counter the apparent bid of Brazilian President Quadros for Latin American leadership through a play to leftist sentiment. Although officials have denied that domestic political considerations are responsible for the move, it is probably also influenced in part by the recent electoral triumph in Buenos Aires of a Socialist deputy who campaigned on a pro-Castro platform. (Backup, Page 2)

Bolivia: President Victor Paz Estenssoro told American Ambassador Strom on 5 March that his government plans extensive arrests of Communist trade union leaders if the Confederation of Urban Teachers--which is reported under strong Communist influence--continues its strike for higher wages after the morning of 7 March. Anticipating possible violence, Paz is asking for tear-gas grenades, machine-gun ammunition, and small bombs for use in P-51 aircraft, from the United States. A substantial wage increase for teachers would strengthen wage demands from other government employees and impede the Paz government's drive to increase the country's production. The powerful unions of the nationalized tin mines are threatening to strike beginning 8 March.

7 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    11

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Argentina to Send Special Envoys to US and Cuba

In its reply to Cuba's circular note of late February soliciting sympathy from the various Latin American governments, Argentina announced its intention to send special envoys to the US and Cuban governments. Argentina apparently acted without consulting any of the other countries in advance.

A Foreign Ministry official said on 4 March that Argentina's initiative was based on the following considerations:
1) the Cuban situation remains a disturbing influence on the relations of other countries with the US; 2) a solution to the problem must be one which will eliminate Soviet and Communist influence in Cuba and, without arousing leftist elements in the hemisphere, stop Cuba's efforts to spread its revolution abroad; and 3) the overthrow of Castro by anti-Castro Cubans from the US or Guatemala would probably prompt criticism which would worsen inter-American relations.

Argentina's action, however, is probably intended primarily for its effect on public opinion both at home and abroad. Heretofore, Argentina has been the strongest critic of Cuba among the large Latin American countries and has maintained that the Cuban problem should be handled only through the OAS. Recently, however, President Frondizi expressed doubt that a vote for collective action would get even a slim majority.

Brazilian President Quadros' statements on Cuba increase pressure on Frondizi to make a gesture of his own on Cuba. A Brazilian press report on 4 March quoted Quadros as stating that "even supposing that there is Communist infiltration in the Cuban Government, the Castro revolution has our sympathies and we are not in any manner disposed to uphold any action contrary to the principle of nonintervention in internal affairs of other countries so long as Castro does not try to export Fidelismo."

7 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
TOP SECRET
