[PAGE 01]
DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

29 November 1955

Copy No.
100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. INDIA WEIGHING OFFERS OF SOVIET AID (page 3).

2. POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BANGKOK MAY BE NEAR (page 4).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 6)

29 Nov 55
Current Intelligence Bulletin
Page 2
[PAGE 03]
1. INDIA WEIGHING OFFERS OF SOVIET AID

India will probably accept some Soviet aid because of its urgent need for foreign economic and technical assistance to ensure fulfillment of its second Five-Year Plan, according to the secretary general of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs in a conversation with Ambassador Cooper. The Indian government, however, does not wish to accept from the Soviet Union a technical co-operation program similar to that of the United States, though the USSR has suggested that this be done.

The secretary general, who is chairman of the group discussing economic matters with Soviet first deputy foreign minister Gromyko in New Delhi, feels that his government will be able to "ride out" the effects of the Bulganin-Khrushchev visit and to evaluate not only Soviet proposals but also any possible alternatives of aid from the West before committing itself.

Comment
The statements of the secretary general indicate the caution with which the Indian government is approaching the subject of increased economic relations with the USSR. So long as India has hopes of obtaining substantial aid from the United States, it will probably continue to maintain a reserved attitude toward Soviet offers of extensive aid.

29 Nov 55
Current Intelligence Bulletin
Page 3
[PAGE 04]
2. POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BANGKOK MAY BE NEAR

Events seem to be moving toward a showdown between Thai premier Phibun and Police Director General Phao, in the opinion of the American embassy in Bangkok. Phao is under heavy attack from Phibun's newspapers, and is reported showing considerable strain. His headquarters is being heavily guarded by his supporters.

Comment
Since last summer Phibun, supported by the army chief, General Sarit, has progressively circumscribed Phao's powers. It is possible that the ambitious and often impetuous police chief is contemplating a coup.

29 Nov 55
Current Intelligence Bulletin
Page 4
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 November)

A minor clash between Egyptian and Israeli patrols near the southern end of the Gaza strip is the only border incident reported for 28 November. Each side claimed a border violation by the other's patrol.

On 26 November Egyptian prime minister Nasr told Ambassador Byroade emphatically that Egypt is not directing guerrilla operations into Israel. Nasr said he felt a great deal of the trouble is spontaneous. He admitted that there is an organization for such operations, and suggested that the ex-Grand Mufti of Jerusalem might be doing something on a small scale without Nasr's knowledge or approval. In his denial Nasr referred specifically to the impression of "Glubb and some Jordanians" that Egypt is responsible for the raids.

Unconfirmed press reports assert that a new shipload of Soviet bloc arms for Egypt was unloaded at Alexandria on 25 November.

Other press reports, also unconfirmed, state that Egypt has sent a unit of jet planes to Syria to participate in the newly established Syrian-Egyptian joint command.

29 Nov 55
Current Intelligence Bulletin
Page 6
[PAGE 07]
