[PAGE 01]
29 November 1955

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. INDIA WEIGHING OFFERS OF SOVIET AID (page 3).

2. POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BANGKOK MAY BE NEAR
(page 4).

3. BURMA'S ACCEPTANCE OF SOVIET AID MAY PRECLUDE
IBRD PROGRAM (page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 6)
[PAGE 03]
1. INDIA WEIGHING OFFERS OF SOVIET AID

India will probably accept some Soviet
aid because of its urgent need for for-
eign economic and technical assistance
to ensure fulfillment of its second Five-
Year Plan, according to the secretary general of the Indian
Ministry of External Affairs in a conversation with Ambas-
sador Cooper. The Indian government, however, does not
wish to accept from the Soviet Union a technical co-opera-
tion program similar to that of the United States, though
the USSR has suggested that this be done.

The secretary general, who is chairman
of the group discussing economic matters with Soviet first
deputy foreign minister Gromyko in New Delhi, feels that
his government will be able to "ride out" the effects of the
Bulganin-Khrushchev visit and to evaluate not only Soviet
proposals but also any possible alternatives of aid from the
West before committing itself.

Comment

The statements of the secretary general
indicate the caution with which the Indian
government is approaching the subject of increased economic
relations with the USSR. So long as India has hopes of ob-
taining substantial aid from the United States, it will proba-
bly continue to maintain a reserved attitude toward Soviet
offers of extensive aid.
[PAGE 04]
2. POLITICAL SHOWDOWN IN BANGKOK MAY BE NEAR

Events seem to be moving toward a
showdown between Thai premier Phibun
and Police Director General Phao, in
the opinion of the American embassy in
Bangkok. Phao is under heavy attack
from Phibun's newspapers, and is re-
ported showing considerable strain.
His headquarters is being heavily guarded
by his supporters.

the
army ordered an alert on 23 November which apparently
is still in effect.
this action
was taken following rumors of a possible coup attempt by
Phao's police.

Comment

Since last summer Phibun, supported
by the army chief, General Sarit, has
progressively circumscribed Phao's powers. It is possible
that the ambitious and often impetuous police chief is con-
templating a coup.

It is equally possible, however, that
Phibun ordered the army alert not in anticipation of a spe-
cific coup attempt but to forestall police resistance to pos-
sible cabinet changes designed further to reduce Phao's
power, or even to eliminate him from the government.
[PAGE 05]
3. BURMA'S ACCEPTANCE OF SOVIET AID MAY PRECLUDE
IBRD PROGRAM

Burmese prime minister Nu
is committed to ac-
cept a Soviet team to prepare a program for diversifica-
tion of agriculture. He asked if the presence of Soviet tech-
nical advisers would adversely affect the prospects for an
IBRD program.

In the opinion of the official who is lead-
ing the IBRD mission in Burma, Burma's acceptance of
Soviet technicians and aid in return for its rice exports may
leave little or no scope for assistance from the bank. The
mission is investigating the possibilities of developing Bur-
mese ports, railways and agriculture.

Comment

Although U Nu is known to have made
several requests for assistance during
his recent visit to the USSR, this is the first indication of
Moscow's favorable response. Soviet offers of assistance
have great appeal to Asian nationalists because they are
made without requests for political commitments.

An IBRD mission which visited Burma
earlier this year wrote a report criticizing Burma's devel-
opment plans as poorly conceived and overly ambitious.
The Burmese government was offended by the report and for
a time it seemed questionable whether further negotiations
would be conducted.
[PAGE 06]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 28 November)

A minor clash between Egyptian and
Israeli patrols near the southern end of the Gaza strip
is the only border incident reported for 28 November.
Each side claimed a border violation by the other's pa-
trol. (Press)

On 26 November Egyptian prime min-
ister Nasr told Ambassador Byroade emphatically that
Egypt is not directing guerrilla operations into Israel.
Nasr said he felt a great deal of the trouble is spontane-
ous. He admitted that there is an organization for such
operations, and suggested that the ex-Grand Mufti of
Jerusalem might be doing something on a small scale with-
out Nasr's knowledge or approval. In his denial Nasr re-
ferred specifically to the impression of "Glubb and some Jor-
danians" that Egypt is responsible for the raids.

Unconfirmed press reports assert that
a new shipload of Soviet bloc arms for Egypt was unloaded
at Alexandria on 25 November. (Press)

Other press reports, also unconfirmed,
state that Egypt has sent a unit of jet planes to Syria to par-
ticipate in the newly established Syrian-Egyptian joint com-
mand. (Press)
[PAGE 07]
