GENERAL

2. Summary of possible Soviet position at Berlin passes censors:
Soviet censors passed an Associated Press dispatch from Moscow which described the probable Soviet position at the Berlin conference as follows: (1) unalterable opposition to EDC and rearmament of West Germany within the framework of Western defense; (2) opposition to internationally supervised all-German elections; (3) support for a provisional all-German government; (4) a demand for the elimination of American bases abroad; (5) rejection of security guarantees and an emphasis on the Franco-Soviet pact as a better idea for real security; and (6) support for a five-power conference and perhaps a five-power peace pact.

Ambassador Bohlen notes that the mere fact that the report passed Soviet censorship does not assure its accuracy but does lend it additional weight. He believes that the only deletions from the dispatch, references to exclusion of the United States from Europe, resulted from a Soviet desire to avoid attracting attention to this point rather than from inaccuracy of the statement.

Comment: Both diplomatic hints and Soviet propaganda have indicated that the Soviet position at the Berlin conference will follow the above lines.

3. Latin American bloc opposed to early resumption of UN General Assembly:
According to the chief Colombian delegate, a Latin American caucus on 18 January agreed that a General Assembly debate on Korea was inadvisable under conditions which threatened a clash between India and other members over interpretation of the armistice agreement.

The Colombian delegate said he felt that a direct approach to the Indian delegation concerning Latin American opposition to a recall of the assembly in February might influence New Delhi to request postponement until April. Then, he said, the "atmosphere might be more conducive to general debate."

Comment: The Latin Americans may also prefer postponement until April in order to avoid a conflict with the Tenth Inter-American Conference scheduled to open in Venezuela on 1 March.

With the opposition of the Latin American bloc and most of the UN members with troops in Korea, India's chances of getting 31 votes in favor of a recall in February are very slim.
