East Germany Receives Substantial Additional Aid From USSR

The Soviet agreement to provide the estimated $500,000,000 credit is a result of more than six months of effort by East Germany to obtain Soviet help in carrying out its long-term economic plan. Last September, East Germany asked for and was refused $375,000,000 to cover prospective trade deficits in 1961. The resulting readjustment in trade plans was followed by a cutback in 1961 investments and was a factor in the lower rate of economic growth planned for this year. Since then East German State Planning Chief Bruno Leuschner has made four trips to Moscow to discuss economic matters; the first of these trips was in October, when he requested aid specifically to meet the anticipated effects of the West German threat to cancel the interzonal trade agreement on 31 December. Throughout the negotiations the Soviets have been hard bargainers, and this may account for Leuschner's emphasis, in his remarks at the signing of the protocol, on East Germany's firm intention to fulfill its trade commitments to the USSR.

Since 1945 the USSR has provided, exclusive of this latest credit, economic development aid to East Germany amounting to some $878,000,000, about $665,000,000 of which has been for commodity deliveries and economic development and $215,000,000 has been in the form of foreign exchange. Although the form of this new credit is not known the announcement implies that it is an additional credit to finance purchases of commodities. On the other hand, the new credit may be in the form of a deferment of repayments due on previous Soviet credits which, it is estimated, may be roughly of the same magnitude during the next five years. In either case, the credit constitutes substantial aid and should make it possible for East Germany to adhere more closely to its original goals for investments.

Increased Soviet deliveries will include complete installations for the metallurgical, power, and chemical industries; non-ferrous metals; rolling mill products; chemicals; and machine tools--many of which are of priority importance in East Germany's investment program. Although there is no evidence that the agreement includes specific provisions against the contingency of a Western trade embargo, it is a strong indication of Soviet readiness to support East Germany in the event of such an embargo and as such could make the threat of West German economic sanctions less effective in deterring East German harassment of West Berlin.

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
