Salvadoran Senior Officer Plot Reportedly Gaining Strength

A group of junior officers has been insisting that the government which came to power in January undertake social and economic reforms to undercut Communist demands.

The plotters believe they are gaining strength among junior officers who are jealous of the roles other junior officers are playing in the present government. The plotters claim the allegiance of at least half the provincial army garrisons, some air force officers, and some important officers in Fort Zapote, which dominates the city of San Salvador.

A representative of the cabal is planning to seek support from Col. Jorge Rovira, the chief of the air force. Col. Rovira purportedly is a personal friend of former Defense Minister Col. Castillo Navarrete, who reportedly was elected leader of the coup and head of the interim regime which the dissidents plan to set up after assuming control. Col. Castillo Navarrete also is a lifelong friend of Col. Anibal Portillo, a member of the ruling directorate.

The plotters, if successful, reportedly plan to call for congressional elections within a week and have congress choose a provisional president to govern for two years. The plotters claim the wealthy landholders will be excluded from any part in the coup and that former President Osorio will back the coup but will divorce himself from future political activity.

There is considerable doubt that the plotters have the capability to carry out their plans. Although anti-Communists and avowed proponents of reform, these men proved irresolute against Communist infiltration of the provisional government overthrown in January, and most of them probably would again be susceptible to influence from wealthy landowners who are resisting the present government's reform program. Any interruption of this program would be exploited by Communists and Castro sympathizers.

A leftist university federation, where Communist and Cuban influence has been strong, is planning a "parade of silence"

3 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
