Tunisia and France Negotiating on Bizerte

Tunisia and France have at last begun serious talks looking toward a provisional agreement governing France's continued use of its important military base at Bizerte. Preliminary discussions on the subject were held last fall in accordance with an agreement reached in June 1958 under which all French forces were withdrawn from Tunisia except (the approximately 15,000 army, air, and naval personnel remaining at Bizerte). These talks soon lapsed, however, because President Bourguiba felt they were inopportune in view of Tunisia's difficulties with the UAR and the Algerian rebels.

Both Tunis and Paris now appear genuinely anxious to come to terms on Bizerte. France now recognizes that nothing more extensive than an interim agreement is possible while the Algerian war continues, and it appears willing to accept the Tunisian concept that Bizerte shall be exclusively an air-naval installation. However, the generalized discussions which have taken place so far reveal apparently serious differences between the two governments relative to arrangements for protecting the base—(especially as to the location of antiaircraft defenses).

Tunisia's intention to make a Bizerte agreement dependent on satisfactory settlement of a wide range of outstanding French-Tunisian problems seems certain to complicate and drag out a possible solution on Bizerte. In this connection, the Tunisians are focusing their present efforts and attention on the high-level economic and financial discussions which began in Tunis several weeks ago. After a promising start, these discussions, which were temporarily suspended on 30 May, now may be in jeopardy as a result of Tunisian efforts to broaden them well beyond the scope originally envisaged.

Any serious and highly publicized incident involving Tunisian personnel and French forces based at Bizerte or operating against Algerian rebels along the Algerian-Tunisian frontier would also probably upset the present delicate negotiations.

9 June 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3
