USSR Rebukes Greece for "Hostile" Attitude

Soviet Foreign Trade Minister Patolichev has postponed until July or August the visit to Greece originally scheduled for April. Soviet Ambassador Sergeyev, informing Athens of the delay, stated that the Karamanlis government's unwillingness to put relations on a "friendlier" basis and its "generally hostile attitude" toward the USSR make it difficult to expand economic relations at this time.

Greek Foreign Minister Averoff believes that the USSR has not abandoned its general economic offensive, but merely decided to put off its main trade offers until it can take advantage of a more receptive or a more vulnerable atmosphere in Greece.

Most of the bloc's efforts over the past several months to establish closer political, cultural, and economic ties with Greece have been rebuffed. In February, Sergeyev complained to Foreign Minister Averoff of Athens' indifference to Soviet efforts to achieve an international detente and the refusal of top Greek officials to accept an invitation to visit the USSR. Last fall, Greece refused to expand cultural exchanges and denied the USSR's request for air service routes through Athens. Greece has also been cool to Moscow's attempts to increase trade and has rejected recent overtures by the USSR's Balkan satellites to promote greater regional cooperation in creating an atom-free zone in the Balkans and in convoking a Balkan-Adriatic summit conference.

Soviet leaders may hope that developments at the summit meeting in May will induce Greece to join in the "spirit of detente" and, coupled with favorable offers to absorb surplus Greek commodities, pave the way for a weakening of Athens' firmly pro-Western policies.

The postponing of the visit coincides with the announcement by Athens of a trial of 14 Greek Communists accused of espionage on behalf of the USSR, Bulgaria, Rumania, and Albania. On 4 April the Albanian Government protested to the United Nations about an alleged Greek border violation and complained of Greece's
hostility toward Albanian efforts to improve relations.

6 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
