UN representative operating under the direction of the secretary general would have more authority to investigate incidents and make recommendations than the present Security Council subcommittee.

Ceylon: Governor General Goonetilleke assured the American ambassador on 8 October that Prime Minister Dahanayake is sincere in his private assurances of a firm anti-Communist and pro-Western position. Goonetilleke made a strong appeal for increased US aid. The Governor General stated that if the Dahanayake government failed to survive in Parliament, he would take over the government himself in order to avoid early elections. The opposition parties have decided to introduce a no-confidence motion when Parliament reconvenes on 27 October; they may make only a token effort, however, since many members are reluctant to face elections.
(Page 3)

South Korea: The threatened split in South Korea's only opposition party may have been averted by the decision of Democratic party coleader Cho Pyong-ok to withdraw from the party's presidential race in favor of Vice President Chang Myon. Cho probably estimates that the administration will use all necessary means to prevent a Democratic victory in 1960, and that his candidacy would incur the enmity of President Rhee, with whom he is on good terms. The decision also puts Cho in a good position to capture the party's titular leadership.

Cameroun: Terrorists directed by the Communist-influenced extremist wing of the outlawed nationalist movement, the Union of the Cameroons Population, are reported planning new violence throughout Cameroun culminating in an attempted coup. The campaign will begin with attacks on the British Consulate in Douala--Cameroun's principal port--on 15 October, and on the American Consulate General in the capital city of Yaounde on 19 October. Incidents have occurred in both cities since late June, when terrorist operations were intensified in a last-ditch effort to induce the UN to order new elections before the scheduled independence of the French-administered trust territory on 1 January.

III. THE WEST

Brazil: Brazil's relations with the US are cooling under the pressure of financial difficulties, popular unrest over economic conditions, and exploitation of this situation by demagogic politicians eyeing the 1960 presidential elections. The latest irritant results from attempts by opponents of US investment to blame the present serious meat shortage on the foreign packers and to urge nationalization of their plants. Three US packers and one British firm control some 40 percent of plant capacity.
(Page 4)

British West Indies: The recent constitutional conference of the West Indies Federation has reached an impasse because of Jamaica's unwillingness to compromise its demand for increased representation. Absence of progress toward wider federal powers and early independence may cause Trinidad's anti-American premier, Eric Williams, to use dramatic means to stir up West Indian nationalist sentiment--such as a renewal of his campaign against the US naval base at Chaguaramas.
(Page 5)
