[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 JANUARY 1961

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian President Sukarno appoints high proportion of leftists, including Communist party chairman, to executive bodies in National Front.

Situation in the Congo.

The situation in Laos.

III. THE WEST

Haitian President's efforts to suppress opposition has effect of increasing numbers and effectiveness of those opposed to him.

LATE ITEM

Soviet missile activity.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: President Sukarno has appointed a high proportion of leftists, including the Communist party chairman, to executive bodies in the National Front, which Sukarno heads and which he probably intends to develop as Indonesia's single political party. The army's representation is fairly submerged in the Front hierarchy. Sukarno appears to have shelved temporarily his efforts to include Communists in the cabinet; instead, he is promoting them in other government organizations in the hope of gradually working them into the direct line of government, despite army objections. (Page 1)

Congo: An anti-Mobutu mutiny near Leopoldville apparently has been at least temporarily suppressed. Enlisted personnel in a camp south of the city reportedly were partly mollified after conversations with Mobutu, Kasavubu, and other high officials. However, the basic cause of unrest--a dispute over pay--remains and could lead to further outbreaks. The unreliability of Mobutu's troops in the Leopoldville area will place further strain on the limited military capability of his forces, some of the best of whom have been airlifted to Equateur Province to meet a reported invasion by Gizenga troops.

The Mobutu-Kasavubu government is continuing its efforts to obtain aid abroad. Foreign Minister Bomboko, during a recent trip to Europe, requested military and financial aid
[PAGE 06]
from both Belgium and France to counteract the trend toward Lumumba.

In Katanga Province, Tshombe's forces have engaged in limited aerial harassment of the invading Gizenga troops but have not moved into the "neutral zone" now occupied by the UN and by Gizenga troops. Some clashes between the UN and the invaders have been reported.

In an 11 January cable to the UN Security Council, Victor Lundula, Gizenga's army chief, charged that Belgium is continuing to permit Mobutu's troops to move into Orientale and Kivu provinces through Ruanda-Urundi. Lundula threatened

Laos: The Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces are beginning to exert pressure against the government's build-up area some 40 miles south of Xieng Khouang town in what may be an attempt to break up General Phoumi's planned offensive to recapture the Plaine des Jarres. An advance government command post in this area reportedly has withdrawn southward following an artillery-supported enemy attack. Meanwhile, the government is strengthening Luang Prabang's defenses on the basis of new reports of a threatened Pathet Lao attack from the north.

Airlift operations into Laos by bloc transports continued through 13 January. Five Soviet LI-2 (C-47 type) transports have been scheduled for Peiping from Irkutsk. They are probably destined for use in the Laos airlift.

(Page 2) (Map)

III. THE WEST

Haiti: President Duvalier's roughshod methods against the opposition and the Roman Catholic Church in Haiti appear to be increasing the numbers and effectiveness of those opposed to him. The immediate issue--student resistance to

14 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
government efforts to convert the school system into a political instrument--is now being exploited by factions of the underground opposition, including a group believed to be linked to Haiti's small Communist movement. The expulsion of the two top members of the church hierarchy and a number of priests for alleged support of the student agitators weakens the anti-Communist position. Barring the always possible eruption of mass rioting, however, the regime will probably weather the current crisis, since it still seems to have the support of the army. (Page 4)

LATE ITEM

USSR: At 2019 EST on 13 January 1961 an ICBM test vehicle was launched on the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range, flight to the usual impact area on Kamchatka. The last such test was on 6 June 1960. The SIBIR class instrumentation ships which are in the mid-Pacific were not involved in this operation. These ships, which have been involved in previous extended range missile firings and in some attempted space ventures, apparently have not yet reached their intended stations.

14 Jan 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 09]
Sukarno Appoints High Proportion of Leftists to National Front Executive Bodies

President Sukarno has appointed a high proportion of leftists, including Communist party chairman Aidit, to executive bodies in his new National Front. Contrary to Indonesian Army expectations, army leaders hold no special position in the Front hierarchy. Approximately 32 percent of the 70 members of the Front's central board are members of the Indonesian Communist party or appear susceptible to Communist direction; approximately 20 percent are army oriented. Aidit and Army Chief of Staff General Nasution are two of seven equally ranking vice chairmen; the remaining five are likely to look primarily to Sukarno for guidance. The secretary general of the organization, Sudibjo, is a weak personality who in the past has appeared to be a Communist dupe.

The National Front is intended to function through a multilevel structure ranging from the executive board in Djakarta to village organizations throughout the nation. Its purpose is twofold: to strengthen national unity and to provide mass support for the government, thereby making "guided democracy" work. According to Sukarno's plan, all political parties and functional groups will work through the Front--submerging their identities and interests to do so.

Only the superstructure of the organization has yet been appointed; other levels, however, are likely to reflect the composition of the executive and central boards. Once the organization is activated, it is likely to provide a formidable and protected vehicle for use by the Communists.

Sukarno appears to have bowed temporarily to army opposition and abandoned his efforts to include Communists in the cabinet. Instead, he is promoting them in other government organizations in the apparent hope of gradually working them into the direct line of government despite army objections.

14 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 10]
14 JANUARY 1961

ROAD
TRAIL
0 STATUTE MILES 100

UNCLASSIFIED
31439
[PAGE 11]
Situation in Laos

Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces are beginning to exert pressure against the government's build-up area some 40 miles south of Xieng Khouang town, in what may be an attempt to disrupt General Phoumi's planned offensive against the Plaine des Jarres. According to one report, the government command post at Ban Ta Viang has been abandoned following an artillery-supported enemy attack. Aerial reconnaissance over Ban Ta Viang on 12 January tended to confirm reports of enemy artillery fire.

The government commander at Luang Prabang plans to reinforce the garrison there following receipt of new reports that the Pathet Lao will soon attempt to capture the royal capital. Although a full-scale attack on Luang Prabang is probably not as imminent as these reports suggest, there continue to be indications of a Pathet Lao build-up for an attack. A Soviet IL-14 is reported to have airdropped supplies at Nam Bac, a post about 55 miles northeast of Luang Prabang which the Pathet Lao recently captured. An enemy force with artillery is reported to be north of Muong Sai, due west of Nam Bac, prepared to attack this recently reinforced government post when food supplies become available.

Airlift operations into Laos by bloc transports continued through 13 January. Five Soviet LI-2 (C-47 type) transports have been scheduled for Peiping from Irkutsk, probably for use in the Laos airlift. They may replace some of the IL-14s which

14 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 12]
have been flying almost continuously since 3 December.

Kong Le, in an interview with a French journalist on 13 January, expressed confidence that he would defeat Phoumi's forces. While denying that Chinese Communist or North Vietnamese forces were fighting at his side, Kong Le admitted that "some" North Vietnamese technicians were attached to his paratroopers.

14 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 13]
Haiti Facing New Political Crisis

President Francois Duvalier's roughshod methods against the opposition and the Roman Catholic Church in Haiti appear to be increasing the number and effectiveness of those actively opposed to him. The immediate issue--student resistance to the government's efforts to convert the school system into a political instrument of the regime--is being exploited by factions of the underground opposition, apparently including a group linked to Haiti's small Communist movement.

A rash of opposition mimeographed bulletins that appeared on the streets of the capital on 12 January included strike calls for both high school and university students. The bulletins have a high political content and student grievances are secondary, suggesting that more experienced oppositionists than the students are directing the moves. One leaflet, issued by a group calling itself the Popular Party for National Liberation, calls for the formation of a popular front to oust Duvalier. The only previous public act by this group was last May Day when it issued a Communist-line tract.

Noise bombs were exploded in two schools on 11 January, and attendance at the secondary and elementary schools of the capital, recently reopened after a six-week "vacation period," is reported to have declined. The university, closed by the regime last November, is scheduled to reopen on 16 January, but the majority of the students are expected to respect the strike call.

The position of the Roman Catholic Church, which is not strong in Haiti, has been further weakened by Duvalier's summary expulsion of the archbishop last November and of his successor and a number of other priests this week. They were charged with supporting the student "agitators." The Vatican's 12 January excommunication of all officials responsible for the expulsions will probably lead to further efforts by the President

14 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 14]
to "Haitianize" the church, which has long been under attack for the fact that most priests in Haiti have been foreigners, mainly French.

Barring the always possible eruption of mass violence in Port-au-Prince, the regime will probably survive the current crisis. The Haitian Army, the key to the political situation, still appears to be supporting the President.

14 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
14 January 1961
Copy No. C 75

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
