SOVIET UNION

2. Ambassador Bohlen comments on Malenkov's downfall:

Ambassador Bohlen believes that Malenkov's downfall is the logical climax of a far-reaching split within the top leadership involving two different concepts of the future development of the USSR. Signs of difference between Khrushchev and Malenkov over economic policy first appeared nearly a year ago, but problems of foreign affairs, especially German rearmament, apparently brought these matters to a head in the latter part of December. The ambassador feels that Malenkov's defeat marks a return to the Stalinist outlook and will lead to a hardening all along the line in both foreign and domestic policy.

Bohlen states that, while Khrushchev's victory makes him the most powerful man in the USSR, it would be premature to conclude that the period of collective leadership is drawing to a close. The personal power factor appears to be the result rather than the cause of the policy dispute.

Although Malenkov's fate is uncertain, his demotion appears to follow the traditional path of gradual elimination. The ambassador comments, however, that Malenkov's statement to the Supreme Soviet was unlike the abject groveling of discredited leaders in Stalin's day and contained no specific repudiation of his policies as prime minister except on the issue of heavy industry. In fact, Malenkov's deliberate effort to connect his guilt to Stalinist agricultural policies could be an indirect slap at Khrushchev's agricultural program, which bears more resemblance to Stalinist coercive methods than did the incentives stressed by Malenkov in 1953.

One version of the affair, allegedly emanating from the London Daily Worker correspondent in Moscow, states that Malenkov walked out of the recent central committee debate on economic problems. It was supposedly only after this that it was decided to relieve him as prime minister, it having been planned for him to stay in that post as an expression of party solidarity on the new line. Ambassador Bohlen is especially interested in this unconfirmed version's implication that Malenkov rather than Khrushchev forced the issue of his removal.
