II. ASIA-AFRICA

Republic of the Congo: Premier Lumumba continues to stimulate anti-Belgian sentiment, apparently in order to bolster his position. While the situation in Leopoldville Province appears to be easing, rising unemployment--now totaling 75,000--poses the threat of riots. Moroccan UN troops have taken over the port of Matadi, and Belgium has agreed to pull its troops out of the Leopoldville area and return them to the two Belgian bases in the Congo between 20 and 23 July. At the same time, in the northeastern Congo the situation continues tense. There are likely to be serious international repercussions if Brussels carries out its apparent intention to recognize Katanga's secession. Belgium has previously declared its opposition to formal recognition, but industrial groups and right-wing ministers reportedly have brought increasing pressure on the government. (Page 2)

Iraq: Exports of Iraqi oil through the Persian Gulf may be virtually halted on 23 July unless Prime Minister Qasim revokes a Council of Ministers' decree drastically raising oil loading charges beginning that day. The Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) considers these charges illegal, and most companies within the IPC group will refuse to pay. The company, anticipating a shutdown, already has reduced production in Iraq's southern fields by 40 percent. These fields account for more than 30 percent of the country's total oil exports. Last year the southern fields produced about $70 million in revenues for Iraq. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel Castro's 18 July speech lashing out against "counterrevolutionary activities" by "Falangist" priests indicates the regime's concern over growing church opposition to Cuba's increasing Communist ties. The church hierarchy has thus far vacillated in its public attitude toward the Castro government, but its stand will probably be hardened by the spontaneous anti-Communist demonstrations of churchgoers on 17 and 18 July. US Ambassador Bonsal feels that Soviet Premier Khrushchev's 9 July statement of support for Cuba has been a serious blow to the Castro regime in that, by clarifying any doubt regarding the Communist orientation of the government, it has put Castro on the defensive. (Page 4)

West Germany: Defense Minister Strauss has indicated to the American Embassy in Bonn that he is "dubious" regarding the wisdom of Chancellor Adenauer's position that the federal government must avoid taking any action in Berlin "which would create difficulties for our allies." Strauss feels that if the Bundestag session is not held in Berlin this fall, it probably would not ever be held there again. Another party official explained Adenauer's position on the ground that any action, whether it had precedent or was something new, which would serve as a pretext for a separate treaty between the USSR and East Germany must be avoided. He said it was assumed that the US would not wish to be put in the kind of difficult situation which would result from a separate treaty touched off by holding a Bundestag meeting in Berlin. (Page 5)
