13. French deviationists victims of hooligans:
Darius LeCorre, leader of the "independent" Communist movement in France, was beaten badly by Communist hooligans who broke up a Paris press conference in which he was engaged on 11 May. A LeCorre lieutenant was later assaulted by a gang at Nancy. Meanwhile, LeCorre has emphasized that the domestic policy of the "independents" supports "co-management of enterprises" and its foreign policy supports "general and simultaneous disarmament." He also reiterated that the group will present candidates in 30 departments and stated that the electoral campaign would be spearheaded by the formerly clandestine newspaper "La Lutte."

Comment: These are the first French Communist Party (PCF) attempts to use violence against the new "independent" group, and are indicative of the seriousness with which the PCF regards the group. There is, however, no indication as yet that LeCorre's organization has achieved a wide following.

14. Electoral alliance of neo-Fascists and monarchists in Italy reportedly encountering difficulties:
The press of the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI) is pessimistic regarding the party's prospects in the forthcoming local elections. The alliance on which the MSI and the monarchists have agreed at a national level has fallen through in many important cities. According to the neo-Fascists, this is the result of Christian Democratic pressure on possible financial backers.

Comment: This is the first indication of weakness in the electoral alliance of the MSI and the monarchists. The alliance to be in a position to profit at the elections from the dissatisfaction of conservative groups with the reform program of the Christian Democrats. Steps may have been taken to weaken extreme rightist movements by threatening their actual and potential financial supporters with the loss of government contracts and subsidies. Government officials, including Premier de Gasperi and Interior Minister Scelba, have stated during the current election campaign that not only the Communists, but also the neo-Fascists, are to be regarded as enemies of democracy and peace.
