Student Demonstrations Spread in Turkey

Student rioting spread on 29 April to at least seven other cities after originating in Istanbul on the preceding day. Some of the most serious rioting occurred in the capital, Ankara, where several students were reported killed. Reports in Ankara indicate that Erzurum in eastern Turkey, site of Ataturk University, was also the scene of serious demonstrations. Other cities affected by the student demonstrations against the repressive policies of the Menderes government are Izmir, Adana, Trabzon, Sivas, and Samsun. Martial law, applied in Istanbul and Ankara on 28 April, may soon be imposed on the entire nation. Thus far, there has been no evidence that the riots have assumed an anti-American character.

Reports indicate that the demonstrators have been almost exclusively students, with the general public taking no active part in the rioting. The police have been the special target of the students, while detachments of soldiers sent to assist the police have usually been greeted as potential allies against the government. There have been no reports, however, of troops joining with the students.

Premier Menderes addressed the nation and called for calm on 29 April. He also denounced the "party fanatics" who have instigated the demonstrations--an apparent reference to the leaders of the opposition Republican People's party (RPP). The premier promised swift punishment for those responsible for the riots and stated his government's intention to preserve peace and tranquillity. A Ministry of Interior statement on the same day specifically blamed the RPP for instigating the demonstrations in Istanbul on the 28th.

the situation is critical and believes that the only solution is the resignation of the present government and the appointment of a new cabinet. 70 percent of the military throughout Turkey now is sympathetic to the RPP.

While there is no evidence at this time that Menderes is contemplating resignation, there is known to exist a faction within his

30 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
