[PAGE 01]
20 April 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
20 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. South Vietnam: Further comment on opposition in armed forces to Diem regime. (Page iii)

6. Arab States - UN: US position on recent UN resolutions concerning Israel increases Arab opposition to US on Cuban issue. (Page iv)

7. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page iv)

[PAGE 04]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Arab States - UN: The reaction of the Arab states to the US position regarding two recent Arab resolutions in the UN on matters affecting Israel has been described by the Jordanian foreign minister as one of "extreme irritation." Jordan's UN representative has informed Amman that he and all other Arab delegates have concluded that the Kennedy administration has "definitely" swung to the side of Israel on Arab-Israeli issues and that the Arab states can expect this line to be followed in the future. The Arab delegations in New York have in consequence become more vigorous in opposing the US on the Cuban issue in the UN.

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

A. No change from last week.

B. No change from last week.

C. LAOS: Carried on Page 1 of the Daily Brief.

20 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iv

[PAGE 06]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Arab Resentment Against US Stand in UN

The Arab UN delegations reportedly have decided to oppose the United States on "all" issues, but this unanimity may be broken in at least some instances by certain Arab governments.

Jordanian UN representative Rifai has been a leader of Arab delegates who have been considering sponsoring a resolution on Cuba, contrary to the wishes of the American delegation. Jordan's Foreign Minister Nasir has said that Rifai has been instructed to take no further action on the resolution until he reports fully to Amman. The American ambassador reported that anti-US bitterness in certain circles of the Jordanian Government--normally the most pro-American of the Arabs--nevertheless is very deep because of the US stand on the recent Arab resolutions.

The two resolutions concerned the Palestine refugees and Israel's Independence Day military parade in Jerusalem. The Arab proposal to have the UN General Assembly consider means of safeguarding the property rights in Israel of Palestinian refugees was adopted on 18 April by a vote of 47 to 19 in the Assembly's Special Political Committee, over the opposition of the United States, Britain, and Israel. A two-thirds vote is needed for final adoption by the Assembly. A milder United States proposal on aid to the refugees which made no reference to the disputed property rights provision was defeated--amid Arab applause--by Asian, African, and Communist-bloc votes.

The Arabs also resented the American-proposed amendment to the Security Council's resolution of 11 April, which called on Israel to forego using heavy military equipment, in violation of the Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement, in its Independence Day military parade in Jerusalem on 20 April.

20 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
