[PAGE 01]
30 March 1959
Copy No. C 13

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 14
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2018
AUTH:
DATE:
REVIEWER:

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: Prime Minister Qasim has predicted another "new big revolution" for Iraq in April. His forecasts of "revolutions" in March turned out to be the Soviet-Iraqi economic accord and Iraq's withdrawal from the Baghdad Pact. The next "revolution" could involve a major change in the economic development program or in constitutional arrangements. It might also include some form of nationalization of the oil industry. Meanwhile, London has decided to withdraw all its forces--some 350 men--from Habbaniya airfield in Iraq.

North Africa: The current visit of several top Tunisian officials to Rabat may be an effort to align Moroccan and Tunisian views on the next step regarding Algeria and military base questions. A prominent Algerian nationalist predicts that the Tunisians, with the tacit agreement of the Algerian rebel government, will try to incorporate a North African base settlement in a package offer which would associate an independent North African federation with the French Community. Should the three parties agree to such a package deal, the United States would be subject to increasing pressure to become directly involved in the Algerian problem.

*Ethiopia-USSR: Emperor Haile Selassie will visit the USSR "shortly" in response to an invitation extended and accepted two years ago. The move is an expression of Ethiopia's overt posture of nonalignment. The Ethiopian foreign minister has explained privately that the Emperor feels he cannot indefinitely avoid the trip, for which Moscow has repeatedly asked him to set a date.

III. THE WEST

Portugal: Defense Minister Moniz has told the American naval attache that he may have to advise Premier Salazar to retire. Moniz said he would take over the government. Although

30 Mar 59
DAILY BRIEF
ii

[PAGE 04]
the defense minister said that he realized such conversation could be considered treasonable, he was confident of the full backing of the military high command. Moniz' ambitions could be thwarted by the activities of the former defense minister, Colonel Santos Costa, who is a candidate to succeed Salazar and who retains considerable backing among the junior officers.

30 Mar 59
DAILY BRIEF
iii

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Meeting of Tunisian and Moroccan Officials

Several top Tunisian leaders, including the foreign minister and the influential director of the political bureau of the Neo-Destour party, are visiting the Moroccan capital ostensibly to sign a series of bilateral conventions negotiated since last June. The American ambassador in Tunis, however, believes that the Tunisians will use the occasion to try to align the views of the two states on the next steps regarding both the Algerian and the foreign base questions with an eye to any meeting this spring between President de Gaulle and King Mohamed V of Morocco or Tunisia's President Bourguiba. Bourguiba has already publicly linked the future of the French base at Bizerte with settlement of the Algerian problem by mid-June, and he reportedly is disappointed that Rabat has not done the same with the American, French, and Spanish bases in Morocco.

The "minister of information" of the Algerian provisional government predicts that the Tunisians, apparently with the tacit blessing of the Algerians, will try to present a package offer to France. This would incorporate a North African base settlement, an agreement for the protection of the French minority, and the association of an independent North African federation--including an independent Algeria--with the French Community.

The ambassador feels that if Morocco agrees to this strategy, there would probably be increased pressure on the United States regarding base rights. In addition, the United States would become more directly involved in the settlement of the Algerian problem.

30 Mar 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3

[PAGE 07]
III. THE WEST

Portuguese Defense Minister Feels He May Soon Have
To Take Over Government

Portugal's defense minister, General Botelho Moniz, on 26 March told the American naval attache he felt he would be obliged "within the next 12 months or probably sooner" to advise Premier Salazar to retire. Moniz said he had the power to name Salazar's successor and that there was no one except himself strong enough to hold the country together. The defense minister claimed to have complete support from the military high command for such action. He added, however, that the move might not be necessary at all, since Salazar's poor health may cause his death or voluntary retirement soon.

Moniz regards former Defense Minister Colonel Santos Costa as the only obstacle in his way. He has removed from important posts over 200 key military officers loyal to the colonel but has not succeeded in persuading Salazar to denounce Santos Costa's intrigues for a comeback. Moniz is prepared to advance the date of his own take-over if he thinks an increasing number of junior officers are transferring their loyalty to Santos Costa in the belief he is the stronger man.

30 Mar 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 09]
