Soviet-Japanese Fishery Agreement

After three months of negotiations, the Soviet Union and Japan on 17 May concluded their 1960 fishing agreement. The accord limits the Japanese to a total salmon catch of 67,500 tons--a 30-percent reduction compared with 1959--and enlarges the prohibited zone in an area considered by them vitally important to the success of smaller fishing operations. Since 1957, when the quota was set at 120,000 tons, the figure has been steadily reduced. Japanese fisheries interests have announced their extreme dissatisfaction with the agreement and called for government compensation for fishermen who will thus lose their traditional fishing grounds.

Although the Japanese ambassador to Moscow had earlier reported that the fisheries negotiations were more difficult than ever before, the Japanese were struck by Khrushchev's obvious attempt to avoid provocative statements in a talk they had with him on 10 May. Khrushchev, according to Vice Foreign Minister Yamada, did bring up the subject of US bases in Japan. The Soviet leader also said that it would be impossible to conclude a civil aviation pact with the Japanese allowing them to fly into Moscow, as "he knew the Japanese had four or five U-2 planes and might want to take photographs."

These and similar pressures were brought on the Japanese delegation in order to obtain maximum concessions. The necessity of reaching an agreement in time for the start of the fishing season, however, normally about 15 May, was probably the decisive factor in the Japanese decision to conclude the agreement.

On the same day the agreement was reached, Moscow accused the Japanese Government of violating the fishing convention of 1959. The commentary claimed that this action shows the failure of Japanese Government agencies to honor its international commitments. The timing of this propaganda attack suggests that the USSR, in the wake of the collapse of the summit talks, intends to increase pressure on the Kishi government.

20 May 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2
