[PAGE 01]
23 September 1951
Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Dutch desire full discussion of position of Greece and Turkey in NATO defense (page 3).

USSR
2. Soviet charges of German militarization reach new high (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. New Communist thinking on Korean buffer zone reported (page 4).

NEAR EAST
7. British informing Egyptian King of Allied Middle East defense plan (page 6).

AFRICA
8. South African Defense Minister presses for US jet aircraft for Korea squadron (page 7).

EASTERN EUROPE
9. Poland may obtain large shipment of copper pyrites from Turkey (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Dutch desire full discussion of position of Greece and Turkey in NATO defense:

The Dutch Foreign Minister has urged that the manner in which Greece and Turkey will fit into the NATO command structure be discussed with all NATO countries before the proposed new members are approached on this subject. Otherwise, the chances of ratification of Greek and Turkish admission "might be prejudiced" in some parliaments.

Comment: The smaller NATO nations can be expected to be sensitive on the subject of the conditions under which their forces could be ordered into service in the eastern Mediterranean. The failure of the larger members so far to agree on a command structure embracing Greece and Turkey handicaps the governments of the smaller nations in pressing for ratification. However, defeat of ratification in the parliaments of the smaller nations is not at present indicated.

USSR

2. Soviet charges of German militarization reach new high:

Analysis of recent broadcasts reveals that Soviet propaganda attention to Germany has reached its highest point since the formation of the East German state in October 1949.

Soviet broadcasts center on developments related to German "remilitarization," such as the recent Washington ministerial conferences and the 12 September note to France again charging violation of the Franco-Soviet Treaty of 1944. The note to France received the greatest attention paid by the Russian radio to any Soviet note regarding German militarization during the past year.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: It is apparent that a Soviet diplomatic and propaganda campaign is already underway to counteract the effects of the recent Western decisions on Germany and to impede progress on German rearmament. Concurrently, East German appeals to West Germany for all-German elections and a peace treaty have been renewed, and have received the backing of the Soviet Government.

FAR EAST

3. New Communist thinking on Korean buffer zone reported:

The Chinese Communists are reportedly anxious to bring about a cease-fire in Korea; and, to realize such an aim, their negotiators, at a renewed Kaesong conference, would be empowered to modify their demands to the extent of having a neutral zone, to be jointly controlled by the UN and the Communists, between the present battle line and the 38th parallel. This information was transmitted to US military authorities in Hong Kong on 20 September.

Comment: This unconfirmed offer, while representing a considerable modification of previous Communist demands for a buffer zone extending an equal distance north and south of the 38th parallel, would still give the Communists both military and propaganda advantages in that organized UN forces would be below the 38th parallel.

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST

[PAGE 06]
7. British informing Egyptian King of Allied Middle East defense plan:

The British Ambassador in Cairo has been instructed by Foreign Secretary Morrison to inform King Farouk in general terms of the proposed Allied approach on the Middle East defense problem, and to stress the fact that Turkey has already been consulted on these proposals. A personal message from Morrison to the Prime Minister will urge Egyptian patience in the negotiations and promise new suggestions in regard to the Sudan.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: This is the first official approach to Egypt on the new proposal to replace the Anglo-Egyptian defense treaty of 1936 with an Allied Middle East Command of which Egypt would form a part. The plan agreed to in the recent US-UK talks in Washington called for Turkey's making the original approach to Egypt; but the danger of Egypt's formally denouncing the treaty in the meantime has apparently persuaded the UK to try to strengthen King Farouk's hand in his efforts to prevent any hasty action.

AFRICA

8. South African Defense Minister presses for US jet aircraft for Korea squadron:

South African Defense Minister Erasmus informed the US military and air attaches on 10 September that he was worried over his failure so far to purchase US jet aircraft for the South African Air Force's Korea squadron, which has recently suffered mounting casualties. He fears political attacks from the opposition unless he can give assurances that the aircraft have been obtained. He has "money in hand," and hinted that if jet planes are not available, the squadron may be grounded.

Comment: The South African Air Force fighter squadron sent to Korea last September had no equipment; it has been using US-owned F-51 Mustangs, meanwhile pressing its government for jet planes because of the markedly lower casualty rate among their pilots. In recent months the problem of obtaining replacements for the squadron has become increasingly acute, owing mainly to the bad effects on Air Force morale of Erasmus' political meddling.

When severely criticized by the opposition in the last parliamentary session for the Armed Forces' unpreparedness, Erasmus used as one argument in his defense the fact that he was negotiating for the purchase of jet aircraft to equip the squadron in Korea. The minister thus has strong personal reasons for wishing to arrange this purchase as quickly as possible.

[PAGE 08]
EASTERN EUROPE

9. Poland may obtain large shipment of copper pyrites from Turkey:

The Austrian Foreign Office reports a pending three-way deal whereby Turkey will supply from 20, 000 to 60, 000 tons of copper pyrites to Poland through an Austro-Turkish clearing arrangement. Poland in turn will deliver an equivalent value of coal to Austria, and Austria will pay Turkey for the pyrites in various goods.

The Turkish Government has stated that it will not deliver the pyrites directly to Poland, but is willing to deliver them through Austria.

As the US Minister in Vienna points out, Satellite efforts to procure pyrites are on a priority basis, and almost any amount of Polish coal would be useful to Austria.

Comment: Turkey produced over two million tons of copper pyrites during 1950. It is clear that, should this three-way deal be completed, Poland would obtain a significant amount of copper and also sulphur, which is found in pyrite ores and which is in critically short supply in the world.

Austrian efforts to obtain Polish coal have heretofore snagged on Polish demands for Austrian ball bearings in exchange for the coal. Current Austrian receipts of Polish coal are regarded as only temporarily guaranteed, pending Polish objections to anticipated Austrian default on ball bearing deliveries.
