Sumatra to attack rebel forces regrouping in the neutral Tapanuli area, together with the announced arrest of 60 Masjumi party leaders in Medan, may further embitter political relationships in Djakarta.
fighting was taking place somewhere in North Celebes, and that government forces were in "difficulty." (Page 3) (Map)

Israel-Syria border tension: Resumption of Israeli drainage operations south of Lake Hula on 30 March resulted in an exchange of machine gun, tank, and heavy mortar fire between Syrian and Israeli troops in the heaviest fighting in over a year. Both sides suffered casualties before a UN cease--fire was imposed. Further serious incidents are likely to continue in this disputed area, where the Syrians have long opposed Israeli cultivation of land.

Saudi Arabia - Egypt: The Egyptian press and radio continue to propagate rumors about developments within Saudi Arabia, which appear inspired principally to continue the denigration of King Saud. Saud's reported effort to retain secret and private contacts with the governments of Turkey, Iraq, and Jordan suggest that an unstable and dangerous period of maneuvering between Saud and Faysal may now ensue. Meanwhile, the Saudis have requested assistance from the United States in combating rising food prices and have made inquiries about the availability of surplus food. The Saudis in seeking this help are specifically interested in forestalling further adverse propaganda against the government during the anticipated influx of Moslem pilgrims during June and July. (Page 4)

Anglo-Saudi relations: Britain appears increasingly eager to resume diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia and is now exploring the possibilities with a Saudi diplomat in Geneva. London's interest derives from its fear that Faysal will use his new powers against British interests in the Arabian peninsula, and that his return to office may dim the prospects for using the Iraqi-Jordanian Federation as a counter to Nasir's United Arab Republic. (Page 5)

31 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF ii
