6. French commander describes assault on Dien Bien Phu:

General Navarre told the governor of Tonkin that the Viet Minh attack on Dien Bien Phu which began on 14 March was of "unprecedented fury." He said that one Viet Minh division lost 40 percent of its effectives.

Navarre said he "hoped" the French forces at Dien Bien Phu would be able to hold. He added that if they were able to resist such onslaughts as the first, "the Viet Minh battle force will have been broken."

Comment: The American army attaché on 14 March reported that the Viet Minh's initial series of attacks had succeeded in overrunning one of the more lightly defended French positions, wiping out the defending force of one Foreign Legion battalion. Two other strong points had repulsed the attacks and had inflicted heavy enemy casualties.

Since then, the French have flown in one paratroop battalion, which roughly replaces their losses. Though heavily outnumbered, the French retain the advantage of greater firepower.

7. Burma refuses to change present cease-fire plan:

Acting Foreign Minister Kyaw Nyein told Ambassador Sebald in Rangoon on 14 March that his government "found it impossible" to accede to the American request for a revision of the present cease-fire plan for the evacuation of Chinese Nationalist forces. Sebald believes Rangoon's decision on the matter is final.

Comment: As of 15 March the cease-fire area was to be restricted to a small assembly area near the Thai border. To date, 4,700 Chinese have been withdrawn, and plans had been under discussion to bring out an additional 2,500 troops. Burma's attitude appears virtually to end all hopes that this latter group will come out.

Rangoon's decision appears to reflect its confidence that the Burmese armed forces can bring under control the estimated 7,000 Chinese troops remaining in Burma. Burmese forces could achieve this objective, however, only at the cost of lessened military pressure on domestic Communists and other insurgent forces.

- 7 -

16 Mar 54
