I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Strong Bloc Reaction to "Captive Nations Week"

The Congressional resolution and the President's proclamation on "Captive Nations Week"--a week of prayer for the enslaved peoples of Eastern Europe--was condemned throughout the Communist bloc as "foul slander" against Soviet policy and "blatant and arrogant interference" in the internal affairs of free and sovereign states. The bloc reaction reflects Moscow's extreme sensitivity to any official Western reference to the subjugation of the peoples of the Communist nations.

Khrushchev set the tone for this reaction in his speech on his return from Poland in which he termed the US action "direct interference" in Soviet internal affairs and an "infamous slander." Khrushchev then questioned why "the Americans are sending us US governors and vice presidents opening exhibitions and at the same time are talking about enslaved nations." His description of the US action--during a 24 June pre-opening tour of the US exhibit--as a "black cat that Congress let run across the road" sparked a sharp exchange between the vice president and the Soviet premier in which Khrushchev declared that the USSR would not "budge one inch" at Geneva. The Soviet leaders may view the US action at this time as an indication of a firm stand to be taken by the vice president during his visit--which they had hoped would reveal weaknesses in the US position at Geneva and open the way for an early summit conference.

The Czech Government has officially protested this "new American provocation" and expressed "amazement" that the US President had approved and announced this "hostile act." The Czech deputy foreign minister said he would not comment on the numerous historical, geographical, and ethnographical inaccuracies and misrepresentations in the resolution, but that Czechoslovakia found it strange to be listed with Cossackia and Idel-Ural, "whatever that was." He added he was at a loss to understand how the United States could hope to continue to recognize and maintain official relations with socialist governments while officially characterizing them as captive.

The Polish press expressed regret that circles attempting to sharpen the cold war have drawn the President into this affair.

25 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
