Situation in Laos

A further strain has been placed on Laotian-French relations by the Boun Oum government's notice to French Ambassador Falaize on 29 January that Lao army units would shortly take over "required" portions of the French base at Seno, including the airstrip and related facilities. The note stated that Seno henceforth would be considered a Laotian base, although French troops might still be stationed there. The French, who had parried earlier Laotian notes on Seno by assuring that the matter was under consideration in Paris, have been taken aback by the abruptness of the Boun Oum government's action. The French counselor in Vientiane has claimed that the move is a violation of the 1954 Geneva agreement on Laos--which specified Seno as a French base--and has speculated that France might call for reconvening the Geneva conference in protest.

The Seno military base, located a few miles outside Savannakhet in south central Laos, has the best airfield in Laos in addition to important ground installations. The 1954 Geneva agreement authorized the French to maintain garrison forces totaling 3,500 troops to be stationed at Seno and at another base which never was activated. An additional 1,500 French troops were authorized in Laos for training purposes. Although France has never maintained Seno at much more than caretaker strength--the present garrison numbers about 300--retention of this base under French authority is of potential strategic value to SEATO. The various governments in Vientiane, however, have regarded French control of the base an affront to Lao sovereignty, and the present Laotian administration seems convinced that the French, far from providing protection for Laos, are in open sympathy with the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces.

The IL-14 drops at Phou Khoun stated that the cargo appeared to be heavy and that a large number of open parachutes were discernible on the ground. the concentration as the heaviest observed since the Soviet air drops in support of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao takeover of the Plaine des Jarres on 1 January. This report would seem to bear out the expectations of

31 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
