Laotian military officials that the enemy would make a strong stand at the crossroads. A government column of approximately 1,300 men coming from the north is said to be within about ten miles of Phou Khoun. To the south, the government force proceeding from Muong Kass is apparently cautiously making its way toward the junction.

The second of the two Soviet AN-12s which arrived at Canton on 28 January flew to Haiphong and returned to Canton on the morning of 30 January. It appears that in large measure the ability of the pro-Communist forces to maintain the initiative in ground operations has been the result of airlift operations. Although North Vietnamese and, indirectly, Chinese Communist transports have been involved on a relatively small scale, the airlift has been primarily directed, supported, and carried out by the USSR.

The USSR began the airlift in early December at the request of Souvanna Phouma, then premier of the Laotian Government. Between 4 and 13 December, five Soviet IL-14 transports flew 69 sorties to Vientiane, delivering gasoline and oil and foodstuffs, and--beginning about 10 December--105-mm. howitzers, 120-mm. mortars, and other unidentified cargo. Recently the airlift capability has been substantially augmented by the introduction of eighteen Soviet LI-2 transports and at least nine Soviet helicopters--five MI-4s and four MI-7s. In addition, Soviet AN-12 heavy four-engined turboprop transports have made 12 flights to South China and North Vietnam from the USSR in three separate operations--the most recent of which is still in progress.

The ten Soviet IL-14's have been flying most of the sorties into Laos, a large share of which have been airdrop missions. The Soviet MI-4 medium cargo helicopters apparently have operated principally within North Vietnam and in short-haul small cargo resupply missions in the Laotian border area. The eighteen LI-2s which arrived in North Vietnam in mid-January have been engaged in shuttle flights between Hanoi and Haiphong and may be flying into Laos, although this is unconfirmed.

The tonnage of supplies estimated to have been airlifted to the pro-Communists in Laos during the past six weeks

31 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
