Cyprus Faces Economic and Political Problems

The Cyprus government, under the leadership of Greek Cypriot President Makarios and Turkish Cypriot Vice President Fazil Kuchuk, continues to look to the West for friendship and guidance, but growing problems appear to be undermining its popular support.

The recent arrival of the first relief shipment of some 50,000 tons of wheat and barley from the US, supplied under Title II of PL-480, received favorable publicity but is recognized locally as only a stopgap measure in alleviating shortages caused by the prolonged drought. The government, unable to find markets for Cypriot raisins in the West, concluded a barter agreement with the USSR in early December under which the Soviet Union will take 8,000 tons of raisins in exchange for cement, lumber, and other products. Tourism--which was anticipated before independence as a source of foreign exchange--has not come up to expectations.

In the Greek Cypriot community, Makarios retains much of his great popularity, but his own political party, the Patriotic Front, suffers from a dearth of second-echelon leaders. The well-organized Communist-dominated Regenerative Party of the Working People (AKEL), which probably can count on the support of 35 percent of the electorate, continues to gain followers. At present, its leaders appear content to follow a program of "peaceful coexistence" with the Patriotic Front while developing new support from the government's inevitable errors. The Communists have been further strengthened by the recent arrival of the first Soviet ambassador to Cyprus, who is in a position to give guidance to local party leaders.

The situation in organized labor is deteriorating. The Communist-led pan-Cyprian Federation of Labor (PEO) is growing more powerful, while the anti-Communist federation--never a real competitor to PEO--apparently is on the verge of dissolution. Unless action is taken soon to reorganize the right-wing union, the Communists will dominate the entire Greek Cypriot labor movement.

Makarios also faces increasing competition from a group of former members of EOKA, the underground organization

31 Jan 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
