Soviet agreement to a joint appeal by the Geneva co-chairmen for a de facto cease-fire, recent bloc propaganda on this issue suggests an intention to evade any firm commitments on the timing of a formal cessation of hostilities prior to an international conference, on the grounds that this is a matter for the conference itself to decide.

The Pathet Lao radio on 28 March broadcast an interview with Prince Souphannouvong in which the Pathet Lao leader accused the US of intensifying "its interference and aggression" in Laos. Souphannouvong charged that the US was forced by world criticism to accept the British proposal for a cease-fire, but called it a US scheme to halt the war "in order to have enough time to save the Phoumi - Boun Oum clique from total collapse, build up the rebels' strength, and hinder forever the conference of 14 nations." Souphannouvong warned that if the US continues to "create complications to a peaceful solution to the Laotian problem, the forces and people of Laos" will appeal to peace-loving countries for military help. This threat had first been broadcast on 23 March by the Pathet Lao radio, and subsequently repeated by the bloc.

Charging that "the Kennedy administration . . . is more frenzied and more aggressive" than its predecessor, Peiping, in a broadcast on 27 March, accused the US of planning to crush the "national liberation movements" with armed force. The following day Peiping broadcast a highly edited version of the 27 March Pravda "Observer" article, choosing to emphasize that portion of the article which implied the use of force to counter any SEATO intervention.

Nehru apparently feels continued efforts toward reconciling Laotian political elements are needed as urgently as a cease-fire and an end to foreign intervention in Laos. New Delhi has generally taken the position that any national government formed without Pathet Lao participation would be neither effective nor acceptable as a basis for international agreement. Nehru continues to urge in his public statements, as he has privately to Khrushchev, that the British- and US-backed proposals be accepted as a "good way" to solve the crisis.

Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces are continuing to maintain their positions north of the junction of Routes 7 and 13; south

29 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
