there are only 164 troops in Manono to resist the attack. Gizenga's forces are likely to be supported by Baluba irregulars, however. Nigerian UN units in the area probably will try to interpose themselves between Tshombé's forces and Manono, and the Swedish UN commander in Elisabethville has said he would try to arrest the South Africans as violators of the Security Council resolution against foreign military intervention.

Commenting on his most recent trip to Stanleyville, an official of the American Embassy in Leopoldville reports that public order in Orientale Province continues to improve. The official believes that although the main leaders in Stanleyville are still preoccupied with their own claims to legitimacy, Stanleyville representatives might now be willing to attend a conference of Congolese leaders on some neutral ground if their security were assured by the UN. (Backup, Page 5) (Map)

South Vietnam: Growing discontent is reported among middle- and junior-grade officers of the South Vietnamese armed forces over the government's failure to check Communist guerrilla successes and to rally popular support; in addition, the officers are fearful that the Communists themselves might initiate an ostensibly non-Communist coup.

discontent in the officer corps is greater than at any time since last November's attempted coup d'etat against President Diem. A restraining factor, however, is the realization that, without effective alternative leadership, any effort to replace Diem could lead to a Communist takeover. (Backup, Page 6)

Iraq: The anti-regime demonstrations in Baghdad continued on 28 March despite troops firing on demonstrators late Monday. Baghdad University is closed and its students have joined the strike. A large part of the population is actively in sympathy with the strikers. Military Governor Abdi has cordoned off the nationalist quarter of Baghdad with troops and ordered a curfew. Troops have been ordered to shoot on sight anyone entering the quarter. (Backup, Page 7) (Map)

29 Mar 61
DAILY BRIEF ii
