[PAGE 01]
2 May 1954

Copy No.
76

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 45
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 2/16/79  REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

State Dept. review completed

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. Bao Dai gives police control to Saigon underworld group (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Tension continues between General Nagib and Egyptian military regime (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. French delay on EDC seen further slowing ratification in Italy (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
4. Bao Dai gives police control to Saigon underworld group:

Bao Dai's decree granting control of the Vietnamese sureté to the Binh Xuyen organization as of 1 May puts civil law enforcement in the hands of "scarcely disguised gangsters," the American chargé in Saigon reports. The move was probably made to implement Bao Dai's recent decision to integrate paramilitary groups, including the Binh Xuyen, into the national army. A French official points out, however, that the resulting clamor from other groups for political prizes will only aggravate disunity.

The French believe that police efficiency in dealing with the Viet Minh will not be impaired, since the Binh Xuyen finds anti-Communism profitable.

Comment: The award of highly important functions on the national level to such a group is certain to cause dismay among respectable non-Communist Vietnamese and to accentuate bitterness toward Bao Dai's one-man rule.

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Tension continues between General Nagib and Egyptian military regime:

Nagib is under virtual house arrest. He is now permitted visitors only in the presence of a guard who reports to Wing Commander Ibrahim, a member of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council and newly created minister for presidential affairs.

Comment: Friction between General Nagib and the Revolutionary Command Council will probably continue despite the council's present dominant position.

Nagib still commands considerable popular support and remains a potential rallying point for the many elements favoring restoration of parliamentary government. The council, however, is expected to continue using strong pressure to neutralize Nagib's influence.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. French delay on EDC seen further slowing ratification in Italy:

Representatives of the Italian Foreign Ministry have returned from the North Atlantic Council meeting in Paris "most pessimistic" about the possibilities of French ratification of EDC, and correspondingly doubtful about the course of Italian ratification. These officials believe that no Italian government would risk a major battle on EDC while estimating that the French would not ratify, but that signs of early action in Paris would make procedural short cuts possible in Rome.

The American embassy, reporting recent procedural delays, estimates that at the present rate the foreign affairs commission of the Italian Chamber of Deputies should terminate its work on the EDC draft treaty by the end of June.

Comment: A contributory factor deterring the Scelba government from giving parliamentary battle on EDC at this time is the current maneuvering of the Monarchists to bring down the government on any pretext. The Monarchists are at present reported negotiating to this end with right-wing elements in Premier Scelba's Christian Democratic Party.
