Portuguese Defense Minister Demanding Changes
In Lisbon's African Policy

Defense Minister Moniz and his staff reportedly believe that Lisbon must choose between two courses of action in Africa: (1) either trying to hold on to Angola by military force and having it eventually turn into another Congo, or (2) improving living and working conditions sufficiently that the African provinces will be willing to remain with Portugal in a voluntary political relationship. They are demanding that Salazar cancel all industrial monopolies in Angola and issue orders providing social benefits, minimum wages, and similar reforms, in return for which Moniz is said to have assured Salazar the complete support of the Defense Ministry.

The defense minister expects further difficulties in Africa soon, and reportedly is putting into effect a 13 February order giving his ministry control over the security forces in Angola. Portuguese military leaders are said to be more concerned over the "extremely serious" situation in the Angolan district of Malange than they are over the recent Luanda disturbances. The powerful industrial combines are exploiting native labor in Malange under conditions of virtual slavery. Military authorities report difficulties with their white troops, who observe the way the colony is run and realize government propaganda is false.

The chief non-Communist Angolan nationalist organization, the Union of the Angolan People (UPA), which has its headquarters at Leopoldville in the Congo, apparently is concerned that a majority of Angolan youths are becoming pro-Communist. Its leaders believe it must launch a terrorist campaign to spearhead the struggle for independence, but it is hampered by a shortage of funds and limited military equipment. The UPA allegedly has some 100 rifles and a small number of submachine guns, hand grenades, and land mines. Because of the recent disorders in Luanda and pressure from adherents in Angola, the UPA reportedly now is reversing the policy of restraint it has followed heretofore, and about 15 March will start a campaign of attacks on white-owned plantations and other civil disturbances in an area between Luanda and the Congo border.

23 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
