III. THE WEST

Attempt Against Fidel Castro Regime May Occur Soon

an active conspiracy exists against the government of Cuban
Prime Minister Castro. The coup effort, which most sources
indicate will be launched in the near future, would include at-
tempts to assassinate Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, chief
of the armed forces. A revolt of a portion of the armed forces
would be coordinated with landings of armed groups from the
Dominican Republic.

A key figure in the conspiracy is William Alexander Morgan,
renegade American and former second in command of a guerrilla
band that fought independently of the Castro forces during the
revolution against the Batista regime. Morgan, now a major in
the Cuban Army, is reported to have agreed to defect, taking
numerous army colleagues with him. Past reports of Morgan's
anti-Castro plotting, his known hostility to "Che" Guevara, an
officer close to Castro, and the disillusionment of Morgan and
his associates, who expected more influential positions in the
Castro regime, suggest that Morgan may well defect. It is
very doubtful, however, that he could count on a sufficiently
large segment of the military to threaten the regime seriously.

Although Dominican dictator Trujillo is known to be sup-
porting an irregular armed force in the Dominican Republic for
use against Castro if he considers it necessary, he is not likely
to unleash it prior to the inter-American meeting of foreign min-
isters scheduled to begin on 12 August. If, however, the San-
tiago meeting does not produce what Trujillo considers adequate
protection against further Cuban-backed rebel incursions into
the Dominican Republic, Trujillo may again consider defensive
action against Cuba.

Discontent has increased in Cuba, but is not believed to have
reached the point where it seriously endangers the regime, and
Castro has demonstrated that he still retains the ardent support
of the Cuban masses. The American Embassy believes the
reported conspiracy would almost certainly fail, but would "add
further to the weight of bloodshed and tragedy which Cuba now

1 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
