[PAGE 01]
1 September 1951

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s)
completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

2. Attitudes of Latin American delegations to the Japanese treaty conference
(page 3).

USSR

3. East-West trade meeting concludes with few prospects (page 4).

FAR EAST

4. Japan reluctant to discuss bilateral treaty with Chinese Nationalists
(page 5).

NEAR EAST

6. Iranian army morale may face test (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Italy objects to conditions for postponement of Trieste elections (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

2. Attitudes of Latin American delegations to the Japanese treaty conference:

Each of the twenty Latin American republics
plans to send a delegation to sign the Japanese treaty at San Francisco, ac-
cording to Department of State cables. Each supports the US in principle
although some, particularly Peru and Venezuela, have expressed concern
that the wording of the treaty does not make absolutely clear their right to
retain Japanese property which was seized during World War II.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
Following the Department of State's assurances
that all points raised are covered by the treaty, the Peruvian Foreign Minis-
ter told the US Ambassador in Lima that he had instructed the Peruvian
delegate to sign "with no reservations." The US Embassy in Caracas re-
ports that the Venezuelan Foreign Office seems satisfied with the
Department's comments, although the possibility of a declaration of inter-
pretation at the conference still exists. Until specific assurance to the
contrary is received, it must be considered that Peru also might make such
a declaration.

USSR

3. East-West trade meeting concludes with few prospects:

According to US observers at the recent East-
West trade meetings in Geneva, Western Euro-
pean delegations did not receive any firm indi-
cation of a Soviet desire to trade on a mutually
advantageous basis. Consequently, no Western delegation would agree to
another multilateral meeting. None is optimistic about future bilateral
talks with the Soviet Orbit, with the exception of the UK, which is currently
negotiating a new bilateral agreement.

In the opinion of the Western European dele-
gations, the motivations of the USSR were both commercial and propagan-
distic. Many delegations believe that the USSR is seriously interested in
promoting increased trade or at least in maintaining the present level, which
is already jeopardized by the general rearmament program and Western
trade controls. Soviet participation also obviously bolstered the current
peaceful coexistence line and may generate pressure against East-West
trade controls. At no point did the Communist representatives launch into
the usual diatribe against Western European trade restrictions or the US.

A US observer concluded that the Soviet dele-
gation had instructions to press for a broader trade meeting. The Soviet
delegation, however, would not specify any details or indicate willingness
to reach ultimate agreement on increased East-West trade.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The USSR has not reduced its de-
mands for strategic materials in exchange for Orbit grain, timber or coal,
in order to obtain new trade arrangements. The Soviet delegation has, how-
ever, obtained information about Western European needs which may im-
prove the USSR's bargaining position in future bilateral talks.

FAR EAST

Japan reluctant to discuss bilateral treaty with Chinese Nationalists:

The Department of State considers it highly
desirable that Isao Kawada, prewar Japanese
Minister of Finance, or some other suitable
person proceed to Formosa for exploratory
talks with the Chinese Nationalists regarding
a bilateral treaty of peace.

When approached on this matter, a Japanese
Foreign Office official told the US Political Adviser in Tokyo that the Japa-
nese Government would not be willing to entrust discussions of a possible
bilateral treaty to Kawada, who has been invited by the Nationalist Govern-
ment to become its financial adviser. The Political Adviser comments that
it is apparent the Japanese Government is intent on postponing any action
toward a bilateral treaty until after the signing of the multilateral treaty at
San Francisco.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST

6. Iranian army morale may face test:

An Iranian
spokesman has
told the US Military Attache in Tehran that while
the Iranian Army is still being paid promptly,
there is a possibility that pay may have to be sus-
pended if Iran's critical financial condition does not improve. The spokesman
believes that such a suspension would impair the army's morale and efficiency,
but not to the point where mutiny or other disloyal activities would be likely.

Comment: Although Iran's financial situation is
serious, current estimates indicate that the government will be able to main-
tain its current rate of expenditures for several months.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

Italy objects to conditions for postponement of Trieste elections:

Italy objects to making the two-month postpone-
ment of the Trieste elections conditional on the
assurance that Italy will take the initiative with
Yugoslavia regarding the disposition of the Free
Territory. This objection was voiced by the
Italian Charge in Washington in response to the
US and UK decision to permit the postponement
until December. Italy feels that such a provi-
sion constitutes pressure on Italy with no equivalent pressure on Yugoslavia.
Previously the British had urged even stronger measures, i.e., that postpone-
ment be permitted only after assurance that the Italian and Yugoslav Govern-
ments had already agreed to resume negotiations.

Comment: The Italians feel their bargaining
position vis-a-vis Yugoslavia is deteriorating in the face of Yugoslavia's
increased strategic importance to the Western powers. There has been a
recent rise in the ever present anti-British feeling in Italy due to the impres-
sion that the UK is championing Tito at Italy's expense.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
