South Korean Ruling Party Being Reorganized

The ruling Democratic party has substituted a single executive for the collective leadership system in operation since the party was founded in 1955. Prime Minister Chang Myon has been named party president, subject to ratification by the Democratic National Convention. The concentration of power in a single executive offers the opportunity for more vigorous leadership but is less suited to the reconciliation of party conflicts.

The present intraparty struggle is over the post of secretary general. Leaders of the group of younger party members fear that if the post goes to Chang's chief political lieutenant, minister without portfolio O Wi-yong, they will be deprived of all influence by the "old guard." Two other likely candidates, former Home Minister Yi Sang-chol and Representative Hong Ik-pyo, while considered members of the elder group, might be acceptable to "young faction" leader Yi Chol-sung. Yi is believed to have some control over about 30 assemblymen, enough to threaten the administration's 129-seat majority in the lower house, which has a membership of 233.

The pending cabinet reorganization--the third since Chang took office last August--is a continuation of a January shake-up in which the "young faction" and some lesser groups were brought into the government. Completion of the cabinet reorganization is being delayed until the administration's supplemental budget bill passes the legislature. It appears likely that additional changes will be limited to only a few ministerial posts and some vice-ministerial positions. Prime Minister Chang expects to replace the ministers of education, transportation, and home affairs. All three incumbents can be dismissed without political repercussions. At least one of the vacated ministerial slots probably will go to the "young faction." If Chang is successful in establishing his control of the government party, he would be in a stronger position to carry out some of the needed reforms supported by the United States.

2 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
