[PAGE 01]
7 February 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

1.

USSR

2. Comment on Soviet press treatment of Malik war statement (page 3).

FAR EAST

5. French review recent Viet Minh operations (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. American officials report on Sudan question (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
USSR

2. Comment on Soviet press treatment of Malik war statement:

Soviet press accounts of Malik's speech before the United Nations on 2 February omitted his extemporaneous statement that "World War III has already begun." Pravda used only a Paris TASS account that the result of the discussion was the "conclusive proof" that the United States plans a third world war. Radio Moscow broadcast this account to foreign but not to internal audiences.

The careful handling of this statement indicates that Moscow still does not wish seriously to alarm the Soviet people.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
5. French review recent Viet Minh operations:

in a review of Viet Minh operations since 1 December, report that the enemy is maintaining good morale despite heavy casualties and a high disease rate. They emphasize the improvement in Viet Minh staff work and estimate that a new system of rotation of front line units will enable the insurgents to maintain their current pressure on the French defense perimeter in Tonkin until the end of February. At that time, they believe, the enemy's front line ammunition will be exhausted.

Meanwhile, there is continuing heavy infiltration of the northern and southern zones of the delta by enemy units not engaged in the frontal operations.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. American officials report on Sudan question:

Two American diplomatic observers, who recently returned to Cairo from Khartoum, state that unification of the Sudan under the "symbolic crown" of Egypt would be unpopular in certain areas of the Sudan and would probably cause disturbances in the main Sudanese towns. The intensity of any reaction would depend largely on the attitude taken by the British-controlled government in Khartoum. They point out that the police and defense forces in the Sudan are well organized and seem capable, if given the proper orders, of controlling such outbreaks.

The two observers believe that a symbolic union under the Egyptian crown would be more palatable to the Sudanese if a definite date were set for an internationally supervised plebiscite.

The American Ambassador in Cairo states that, on the basis of the observers' report and the moderate attitude of the Egyptian Prime Minister, it is "important to push ahead" a solution of the Sudan question.
[PAGE 06]
