I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Central Committee Meeting Scheduled

Moscow announced on 9 May that a plenum of the Soviet Communist party central committee is scheduled to begin on 24 June. The plenum will discuss implementation of directives laid down at the party congress in January on the extension of mechanization and automation in Soviet industry.

For various reasons--preoccupation with maximum output at the expense of efficiency being one of the more important--the level of Soviet technology varies both between and within the several sectors of the economy. Under the theme of "catching up with the West," the gap between "average" and "best" practices in Soviet production is to be narrowed considerably by 1965; the agenda for the June meeting suggests that such improvements are to receive immediate impetus.

The plenum will also review the first year of the program to expand the Soviet chemical industry by an outlay of between 15 and 20 billion dollars. This program, outlined by Khrushchev at a May 1958 plenum, appears to be in jeopardy unless increased amounts of chemical equipment can be procured from the West.

Before last December's central committee meeting, which the Soviet press reported on a day-to-day basis, public announcement of plenums had always been withheld until their conclusion. The advance notification of the June meeting and of its principal agenda topics may be a further step in stripping the secrecy from central committee sessions in cases where this secrecy is self-defeating. In the present instance, fuller publicity for the central committee proceedings will help goad economic officials toward maximum performance and will indicate that the party intends to maintain constant pressure for fulfillment of the Seven-Year Plan goals.

Although the central committee has little or no substantive role in the formulation of foreign policy, the timing of the plenum would permit the Soviet leadership to review the results of the Geneva conference and the USSR's pre-summit position for the benefit of top party officials.
