3. KHRUSHCHEV'S "THESES" ON ECONOMIC REORGANIZATION PUBLISHED "FOR DISCUSSION"

The 30 March publication of Khrushchev's "theses" on reorganization of the administration of Soviet industry provides guidelines for a nationwide discussion on how to implement the decisions of the February central committee meeting. The discussion is intended to publicize the forthcoming governmental reorganization and enlist popular support for it.

Khrushchev's outline is an expansion and reaffirmation of information published in the Soviet press and given to US columnist Alsop by Khrushchev and chief long range planner Baibakov. New information on the direction and scope of this most sweeping decentralization since national five-year plans began in 1928 includes transfer of operational authority to regional administrative units. One of Khrushchev's recommendations calls for abolition of the State Committee for Current Planning, headed since last December by presidium member M. G. Pervukhin. He also advocated that all planning and coordinating functions of the central government except major policy matters be concentrated in Gosplan, now responsible for long-range planning. In such an event, Pervukhin and the other top level administrators assigned last December to the State Economic Commission might be transferred to Gosplan. Failure to assign Pervukhin as head of Gosplan or give him another important post would suggest dissatisfaction with his performance in the preparation of the 1957 plan.

Khrushchev also put unusually strong emphasis on the continued primacy of heavy over light industry, and stated that the nation's future growth would suffer "if we yield to an incorrect, false interpretation" that light industry should have priority. This suggests that the issue may have been the subject of recent debate. Khrushchev said heavy industry will continue to receive the lion's share of investment, thus destroying any illusions that the increased priority of housing in 1957 foreshadows substantial concessions to consumers in the final version of the Sixth Five-Year Plan.
