[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

19 January 1957

Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SINO-SOVIET COMMUNIQUE

4. THE POLISH ELECTION OUTLOOK

7. RIGHTISTS POSE THREAT TO FRENCH REGIME
(page 10).

9. BURMESE-SOVIET ECONOMIC AID AGREEMENT
(page 12).

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. THE SINO-SOVIET COMMUNIQUE

The Sino-Soviet communiqué of 18 Janu-
ary, signed by Bulganin and Chou En-lai,
is largely devoted to a summary of inter-
national questions on which Moscow and Peiping are said to
have "perfectly identical" views.

The communiqué states that the USSR and
China "are prepared to continue to give necessary support"
Middle Eastern states against "aggression and interference."
This is a noncommittal reply to the American offer of troops
if a Middle East state should request them to oppose Commu-
nist aggression. An implication in the Sino-Soviet text that
support will be given against aggression from any source is
probably meant to please the Arabs, who have criticized Amer-
ican proposals as opposing only Communist aggression.

The principal significance of the commu-
niqué lies in its reflection of the main lines of Sino-Soviet
strategy to prevent a further deterioration in intra-Orbit rela-
tions. The statement emphasizes the need for bloc unity a-
gainst the West, while asserting that past "mistakes" in
relations among bloc members are being corrected.

The communiqué provides further evidence
that Chou's mission in Moscow and Eastern Europe was that of
a moderator, primarily between the Soviet Union and Poland.
It reflects previous Chinese admonitions to the USSR to avoid
"chauvinism" and to the Eastern European states to suppress
"narrow nationalist feelings." It repeats the recent Chinese
formula for "unity" to be achieved by genuine consultation a-
mong bloc states, and avoids the usual citation of the USSR
as head of the bloc.

The Chinese had previously made clear that
their support for Gomulka's freedom from Soviet control was

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]
contingent on his willingness to follow in general the Soviet
model in his internal program and the Sino-Soviet line in
foreign affairs. These conditions are glossed over in the
current communiqué, as they were in the Sino-Polish com-
muniqué of 16 January. The latest statement does in-
clude, however, an indirect warning that the Soviet Union
and China would stand together in military action to pre-
vent any Communist state--in Europe or Asia--from leav-
ing the bloc.

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
4. THE POLISH ELECTION OUTLOOK

On the eve of the 20 January parliamen-
tary elections, strong appeals by the
Catholic hierarchy to support the regime-
favored candidates may prove decisive
for regime candidates in many areas.
Gomulka's rapport with the Catholic Church
has been one of his greatest political assets.

Last-minute reflection by voters that pru-
dence dictates support for Gomulka may also counteract in
part the vigorous campaign of Gomulka's opponents to sabo-
tage the elections. An opinion poll taken by a regime-sponsored
youth journal states that "over half" of those questioned said
they would vote for the regime-supported candidates, while
30 percent intend to reject some regime candidates on their
ballot.

Of the candidates, about 50 percent are
members of the Communist Party, 25 percent are United Peas-
ant Party members, 10 percent are Democratic Party mem-
bers, and 15 percent are nonparty Catholics. Although collab-
orating with the National Front, the United Peasant Party has
reportedly conducted a vigorous campaign in the countryside,
and is expected to register gains over Communist candidates
in rural areas.

Whatever the result, the composition of
the new Sejm will be considerably different from that of the
present parliament, since only about 10 percent of the candi-
dates are now Sejm members. The number of top government
and party officials who are candidates has been greatly reduced.
For example, only half of the present council of ministers are
candidates, whereas, in the last Sejm, all ministers ran and
were elected.

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
7. RIGHTISTS POSE THREAT TO FRENCH REGIME

American officials in Paris believe
that right-wing groups might attempt
to overthrow the Fourth Republic if the
Algerian situation "goes very sour."

General Charles de Gaulle is extremely
active politically and there are indications he has even less
concern for constitutional legality than heretofore. In a
10 January talk with Ambassador Dillon, he talked freely
of a change toward an authoritarian non-Communist govern-
ment. He appears to foresee financial difficulties rather
than Algeria as provoking the end of the present regime.

If a really difficult crisis should arise,
President Coty would call on de Gaulle to form a govern-
ment, according to Coty's military adviser.

Comment
Speculation regarding De Gaulle's return
has increased markedly during the last
four months. De Gaulle is unlikely to be seriously consid-
ered unless France's internal situation becomes chaotic. The
threat of violence by the more than 1,000,000 Europeans in
Algeria, however, raises serious concern over the possible
ramifications in Paris.

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
9. BURMESE-SOVIET ECONOMIC AID AGREEMENT

An economic agreement signed on 17 Jan-
uary in Rangoon completes the negotiations
for Soviet construction and equipment as
"gifts to the Burmese people" of a tech-
nological institute, a hospital, theater,
hotel and a "cultural and sports center" which will include a
stadium. The first Soviet offers were made during the Bul-
ganin-Khrushchev visit to Rangoon in December 1955.

Moscow, according to a TASS dispatch, will
provide engineers and technicians and also will bring Burmese
to the Soviet Union for training on the projects, which are to
be completed in 1963. In return, the agreement states, Burma
"will present as a gift to the Soviet people a corresponding quan-
tity of rice and other Burmese goods."

Burma, which has had difficulty in procur-
ing suitable imports from the Soviet Union, may use some of
its current $10,000,000 credit with the USSR to pay for this
equipment and technical assistance. Reduction of credits in
this manner may help dispel some of Burma's recent disillu-
sionment with barter trade. The projects themselves are of
a type most likely to make a favorable impression on the Bur-
mese public.

19 Jan 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12

[PAGE 12]
