[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

12 August 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTH ASIA

3. Comment on Indian Communists' policy of violent action (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tanker reportedly arrives at Iranian port (page 4).
5. Point IV Program under attack in Iran (page 5).
6. Comment on the removal of King Talal of Jordan (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on Soviet tactics in Berlin access dispute (page 6).
8. French seen more flexible on Saar question (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
Page Denied

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH ASIA

3. Comment on Indian Communists' policy of violent action:

During an 8 August debate in the upper house of the Indian Parliament, Communist deputy Sundarayya indicated that the Indian Communist Party has not abandoned violence as an instrument of policy. In the first statement of such strength on the floor of parliament, he declared that the Communists possess arms which they will surrender only if the government promises them amnesty. He asserted that it is the inherent right of the people to revolt against a tyrannical government and that those refusing to surrender arms under duress are patriots.

This statement lends credibility to a June report that the Indian Communist Party had received instructions to resume violent activity concurrently with peaceful united front tactics.

When the preventive detention bill now being debated becomes law, as it undoubtedly will, the Indian Government will be in a better position to suppress Communist activities.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tanker reportedly arrives at Iranian port:

A 10,000-ton tanker, believed to be American, arrived at Bandar Mashur on 9 August,

The National Iranian Oil Company has been expecting a tanker of this size, and International Enterprises, a firm which has been trying to promote various oil deals, is expecting three American-flag tankers in August.

Comment: Iranian press reports at the end of July that several tankers had arrived at Iranian ports have not been confirmed, although the British Embassy believed on 31 July that one or more had put in at Bandar Mashur, a loading point for crude oil.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
The National Iranian Oil Company has been expecting a tanker of this size, and International Enterprises, a firm which has been trying to promote various oil deals, is expecting three American-flag tankers in August.

Comment: Iranian press reports at the end of July that several tankers had arrived at Iranian ports have not been confirmed, although the British Embassy believed on 31 July that one or more had put in at Bandar Mashur, a loading point for crude oil.

[PAGE 06]
6. Comment on the removal of King Talal of Jordan:

The removal of King Talal by the Jordanian Parliament on 11 August and the proclamation of Crown Prince Hussein as king marks the end of the 12-month period of uncertainty which followed King Abdullah's assassination in 1951.

The ouster of the king may cause demonstrations similar to that which took place in Amman on 8 August protesting his rumored replacement. Political factions may attempt to capitalize on any unrest. The government's competent security forces, however, can be expected to suppress any disorders.

Jordan's neighbors have tried during the past year to take advantage of unsettled conditions in the country. Iraq in particular has tried to promote an Iraqi-Jordanian union. With the removal of Talal, the newly-established Regency Council should effectively protect Jordan's interests.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Comment on Soviet tactics in Berlin access dispute:

The Russians may now be trying to set a precedent for East German "autonomy" in dealing with West Germany and the Western powers. Soviet General Dengin's recent reply that Allied requests for more daily trains to West Berlin would be "referred to the East German authorities" appears to be evidence of this trend.

Allied officials in Berlin advised the Russians that they assumed that the Soviet Control Commission had "issued the necessary instructions" to the East Germans. American observers in Frankfurt, however, believe that the Russians may be trying to force the West into giving de facto recognition to the East German Government.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
With this interpretation, the Soviet move tends to corroborate earlier reports that the East Germans expect to receive increased jurisdiction over matters previously subject to four-power control and agreement. Although such authority will hardly be granted prior to ratification of the West German contractual agreement, further Soviet moves to establish the appearance of East German sovereignty are probable.

8. French seen more flexible on Saar question:

Chancellor Adenauer's letter of 4 August has led the French Foreign Office to question German sincerity regarding Europeanization of the Saar. There is every indication, however, that the French want to reach agreement in the current negotiations.

The American Embassy in Paris believes that when talks are resumed on 13 August, Schuman will be willing to discuss a surrender of certain French privileges, and perhaps a grant of certain advantages to the Germans, but that he will refuse to consider termination of the French-Saar conventions. The Embassy further believes that the question of free elections in the Saar is not an insuperable obstacle, but would be the subject of the "very last concession made by the French."

Comment: The stumbling blocks in the current negotiations are the questions of electoral freedom in the Saar, France's special economic privileges, and the cession of a small portion of French territory to the Saar as a gesture to save face for the Germans.

- 7 -
