[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

27 August 1960

Copy No. C 71

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

27 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan - South Korea: Japanese Foreign Minister Kosaka's scheduled visit to South Korea starting on 6 September is intended to serve as a demonstration of the desire of both Tokyo and Seoul to improve relations now that both countries have new governments. The repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to North Korea continues to be the immediate obstacle to the settlement of outstanding differences between the Japanese and South Koreans, and Kosaka probably will try to work out some agreement on this issue.

Turkey: The dismissal on 25 August of ten members of the 18-man Turkish provisional cabinet appears primarily part of the effort by the National Unity Committee (NUC) to replace technicians in the cabinet with men who have demonstrated leadership

[PAGE 04]
and who are reform-minded. Cabinet changes had been expected for some time, and the dismissals are not regarded as representing any split or new uneasiness on the part of the NUC, which remains the real government. Although Foreign Minister Sarper was not among those relieved on 25 August, his ministry has come under press attack and he also may be relieved.

Mali Federation: Mali Premier Modibo Keita--who is also premier of Soudan--apparently believes his chances of nullifying Senegal's 20 August "secession" from the federation are diminishing. He is accusing France of supporting Senegal, and is moving to improve relations with the neighboring Ivory Coast, toward which Soudanese nationalists have recently been cool. Keita has also now publicized a threat to support the Algerian rebels as well as his request for a UN Security Council meeting and the dispatch of troops by the UN. Secretary General Hammarskjold, however, hopes the situation will cool off without UN action, and plans for the time being to take no formal action with reference either to Keita's request or to Senegal's earlier plea for UN membership.

Republic of the Congo: Lumumba's 26 August demand that the UN withdraw from the Congo "as soon as the Belgians have withdrawn" may reflect the view that he would have a freer hand in dealing with his opponents if the UN presence were withdrawn. Like other Lumumba statements, however, it may have been made primarily for effect. Brussels has stated that, except for technicians at its air bases, all Belgian troops will be withdrawn by 30 August. It appears doubtful, however, that this date will be met.
The agreement between Katanga President Tshombé and Kasai rebel leader Kalonji to "federate" their two dissident provinces continues recent efforts to coordinate action by Lumumba's opponents. Tshombé's reported offer to send "a few" companies of Katanga soldiers to Kasai increases the possibility of clashes in the area, Lumumba having airlifted between 600 and 1,000 soldiers to southern Kasai on 23-24 August.

[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Dominican Republic: The longer Trujillo remains in power, the greater will be the chances of his being succeeded by an anti-US, pro-Castro regime. The US Embassy in Ciudad Trujillo fears Trujillo will liquidate the leadership of the moderate and democratically inclined opposition, use government-sponsored pro-Cuban and pro-USSR propaganda to stimulate the pro-Castro sentiment already evident among youths and students, and leave a heritage of financial ruin for any incoming government. Trujillo's official press announced on 25 August that negotiations were under way with the New China News Agency so that "the impartial information supplied by the Chinese press organization" will keep readers "better informed." This follows the contract by Radio Caribe with TASS to begin supplying "news" beginning 29 August.

LATE ITEM

*Laos: Some obstacles to implementation of the 23 August agreement between premier-designate Souvanna Phouma and General Phoumi appear to have been removed. While a full settlement between the contending regimes at Vientiane and Savannakhet is still far from assured, both sides have become sufficiently encouraged to schedule an early meeting of the National Assembly--reportedly for 29 August--at the royal capital of Luang Prabang. Scheduling of an assembly session to thrash out their political differences is presumably based on their supposition--possibly over optimistic--that in the interim Captain Kong Le will have been brought under adequate control in Vientiane.

[PAGE 06]
Japanese Foreign Minister to Visit South Korea

The principal purpose of Japanese Foreign Minister Kosaka's good-will mission to South Korea set for 6 September will be to demonstrate the desire of both Japan and South Korea to improve relations, now that both have new governments. Prime Minister Chang Myon in Seoul has expressed optimism that outstanding differences can be solved and hopes negotiations for the normalization of relations will soon be resumed. Seoul's new leaders generally are committed to reversing former President Rhee's intransigent policy toward Japan.

The Japanese Government, trying to increase its public support before the election this fall, hopes the mission will pave the way for negotiations leading to normal relations. Kosaka would like to set the stage for talks on a fisheries conservation agreement to replace the controversial "Rhee line"; there was a public outcry in Japan following recent seizures of Japanese fishing boats within the line by the South Korean Coast Guard. The new Ikeda cabinet has publicly suggested a program of economic assistance to South Korea.

A primary obstacle to a settlement of differences has been the Japanese program for the voluntary repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea, under which about 35,000 have already been resettled. Chang Myon has expressed strong objection to talks which began in Niigata on 26 August between officials of the Japanese and North Korean Red Cross to determine conditions for extension of the repatriation agreement, which expires on 12 November. Kosaka will probably try to convince the South Korean Government to accept some repatriates and may offer some resettlement assistance as an inducement, in the hope that an understanding on repatriation will open the way for resolving the "Rhee line" issue.

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Situation in Mali

Modibo Keita, premier of the Mali Federation as well as the Soudan, is adopting a more extremist line, apparently in the belief that his chances of forcing Senegal's return to the federation are diminishing. His latest actions are likely to provoke tension with France. He has accused Paris of refusing to honor the French-Mali agreements and to respect the territorial integrity of the federation, and now claims that "French military activists" are responsible for the situation. Furthermore, he has threatened to support the Algerian rebels--an action without precedent among the French Community states.

Keita stated on 25 August that he would discuss the situation with De Gaulle when emotions in the Soudan have calmed down. Premier Dia of Senegal has already returned to Dakar from talking with De Gaulle and has expressed satisfaction with the discussions. However, French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville is pessimistic about any reconciliation of Senegal and Soudan and doubts that Keita will visit Paris.

Meanwhile, Keita is improving his relations with the neighboring Ivory Coast in order to assure the landlocked Soudan of port facilities at Abidjan. For some time, the nationalist extremists of Soudan have mistrusted the pro-French attitude of Ivory Coast leader Houphouet-Boigny, but they now may be willing to try for Ivory Coast support by playing upon the bitter political rivalry between Houphouet-Boigny and Senegal leader Leopold Senghor. The Ivory Coast leaders have adopted a "wait and see" attitude publicly while planning to send unofficial emissaries secretly to Bamako in an effort to forestall the danger of a Soudanese turn to Guinea and the Sino-Soviet bloc. So far, there has been no public official reaction in Guinea to the Mali breakup.

Keita on 25 August publicized his efforts to obtain UN intervention. Earlier he had made indirect appeals for a meeting of

[PAGE 09]
the Security Council and the dispatch of troops. Secretary General Hammarskjold, however, hopes that the situation will cool off before the UN becomes involved, and he does not now plan to take any formal action on either Keita's request or Senegal's earlier plea for UN membership, although he has circulated both among UN members. The secretary general can on his own initiative call a Security Council meeting if he considers that a threat to world peace exists--as charged by Keita. Otherwise, he acts in response to a request of a member nation of the United Nations.

[PAGE 10]
The Situation in the Congo

Lumumba's 26 August demand that the UN pull out of the Congo "as soon as the Belgians have withdrawn" may reflect the view that he would have a freer hand in dealing with his opponents if the UN presence were removed. Like other Lumumba statements, however, it may have been made largely for effect. To date the UN command has avoided becoming involved in "internal" Congo affairs such as Lumumba's feud with Katanga President Tshombé.

Nonetheless, Lumumba's threat raises the possibility of a new showdown with the UN, and may inspire Brussels to procrastinate further in its troop withdrawal from the Congo. In requesting American assistance in the airlifting of its troops from the Congo, Brussels has implied that it may not be able to meet its announced 30 August date for the evacuation of all except air base technicians.

The agreement between Tshombé and rebel leader Kalonji of Kasai Province to "federate" their two provinces continues recent efforts by Lumumba's opponents to coordinate action. They probably feel that such action will lend substance to their espousal of a Congo confederation; the new alliance may be joined by elements of the Abako party, representatives of which met with Tshombé in Elisabethville over the week end of 20 August.

Tshombé's offer to send "a few" companies of Katanga soldiers to Kasai increases the possibility of clashes in the area, Lumumba having airlifted between 600 and 1,000 men into southern Kasai on 23 and 24 August. Kalonji stated to the press that his relations with UN troops in the area were "good but indifferent," adding, "They don't leave the airfield and are getting fat."

Tension continues high in Leopoldville as the foreign ministers' conference met for the second day. Ambassador Timberlake reported on 24 August that he expected the security situation in Leopoldville to worsen, as a result of both the UN

[PAGE 11]
Command's failure to take over responsibility for security and Lumumba's provocative use of Congolese troops in harassing his political opponents. The American army attaché reports that, except for scattered Moroccan units, only the Irish UN contingent in Kivu Province has established effective control in its area.

Soviet officials are providing funds for the permanent housing of the Congolese UN delegation in New York. This is in line with previous information on private assistance--for example, the USSR paid Lumumba's hotel bill during his early August stopover in New York--which in addition to overt announced aid indicates a Soviet effort to involve Congolese leaders in a personal obligation toward Moscow.

[PAGE 12]
Situation in Laos

General Phoumi, leader of the countercoup forces in Savannakhet, reached agreement on 26 August by telephone with General Ouane in Vientiane over the procedures to be applied in the dispensation of pay and rice to the Laotian Armed Forces. Under this agreement, pay for troops loyal to Phoumi--in effect all except those in the Vientiane area--will be channeled through Phoumi's headquarters after release from the treasury in Vientiane. To gain this concession, of considerable importance in terms of prestige, Phoumi abandoned his previously adamant objection to the proposed use of Vientiane-controlled Air Laos planes to transport rice to his troops.

Agreement on these points has removed the initial stumbling block to implementation of the Souvanna-Phoumi understanding of 23 August. While a final solution is still far from assured, both sides have become sufficiently encouraged to schedule an early session of the National Assembly--reportedly for 29 August--at the royal capital of Luang Prabang. The most likely upshot of such a session would be the formation of a new government fusing both the Souvanna and the Phoumi groups. In scheduling the session, both sides are apparently proceeding on the assumption that in the interim Captain Kong Le will have been brought under adequate control in Vientiane.

Ouane admitted to the American army attaché on 25 August that in carrying out his responsibility for establishing the defense of Vientiane under the Souvanna-Phoumi agreement his big problem was Kong Le. Ouane said that Kong Le trusts nobody and that he has had to use extreme care and move slowly in his dealings with him. Ouane is expecting momentarily the arrival of Colonel Sourith, Kong Le's nominal chief as commander of Laos' airborne forces. Sourith will attempt to reestablish his personal control over Kong Le's paratroopers.

[PAGE 13]
Prince Souphannouvong, titular leader of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat, has broadcast another attack over the Pathet Lao clandestine radio against the Souvanna-Phoumi accord and branded the Phoumi "clique" as "US reactionary lackeys" who must be opposed by the Laotian people. He warned the troops in Vientiane, singling out Kong Le's paratroopers for special attention, that they must be prepared to fight for the fruits of their coup--a new government which would "follow the path of genuine peace and neutrality, end the civil war, and promote national concord."

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 15]
