[PAGE 01]
15 April 1956

BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. USSR OFFERS ARMS TO LEBANON (page 5).

3. INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT SOVIET AID (page 6).

4. SUBMARINE CONSTRUCTION AT SHANGHAI (page 7).

5. CAPTURE OF HOA HAO DISSIDENT LEADER BA CUT (page 8).

6. SOVIET OFFICERS INSPECT AFGHAN INSTALLATIONS ON PAKISTANI BORDER (page 9).

* * *
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
2. USSR OFFERS ARMS TO LEBANON

The Soviet military attaché in Beirut offered in early April to supply Lebanon with antitank weapons, tanks and planes, according to General Chehab, Lebanese chief of staff. Chehab stated he had declined the offer by saying that Lebanon did not have funds for this purpose.

On 13 April, Chehab informed the American military attaché that Lebanon urgently needed 24 recoilless 105 or 106-mm. antitank guns and 50 to 100 rounds of ammunition per gun. He indicated that price was no object as the Lebanese military budget for this year had just been increased by 7 million Lebanese pounds to permit additional procurement.

Comment
The Soviet offer of military assistance to the Lebanese was probably made in an attempt to encourage Lebanon to identify itself more closely with the Egyptian-Saudi-Syrian bloc, which is now receiving arms from the Soviet bloc. The USSR may have estimated that the new Lebanese cabinet headed by Prime Minister Yafi, who is known for his anti-Western sentiments, would be more open to Soviet offers than previous governments.
[PAGE 07]
3. INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT SOVIET AID

Indonesian foreign minister Abdulgani told the press on 12 April that Indonesia had agreed in principle to accept a recent Soviet offer to extend economic and technical aid. Abdulgani said the proposal had not yet been studied in detail so that the amount involved, and whether it would be a grant or a loan, were not yet clear.

Comment
Presumably negotiations to define the offer are in progress. The Soviet ambassador said on 10 April that the aid might be applied to any fields including agriculture and industry.

Previous Soviet offers have been ignored by the Indonesian government. Its present receptiveness has probably been influenced by recent examples of Burma and India in accepting Soviet aid.

(Concurred in by ORR)
[PAGE 08]
4. SUBMARINE CONSTRUCTION AT SHANGHAI

A major expansion of Chinese Communist capabilities in submarine construction over the past year is indicated.

The Kiangnan shipyard at Shanghai was largely occupied with submarine construction. By contrast, in April 1955 the yard did not then have the many shops and heavy equipment needed to build submarines.

Approximately 150 Soviet specialists are at the yard supervising the construction of ten large coastal submarines of Soviet design. "Top priority" has been assigned to submarine building, since such craft would be the "backbone of China's coastal defense."

Information constitutes the first evidence that the Chinese may be constructing their own submarine hulls rather than merely assembling hull sections prefabricated in the USSR. The submarine hull plates were rolled at China's largest steel mill at Anshan in Manchuria. The Anshan plant is known to be capable of such production.

(Prepared jointly with ORR)
[PAGE 09]
5. CAPTURE OF HOA HAO DISSIDENT LEADER BA CUT

The capture of Hoa Hao leader Ba Cut by the Vietnamese army on 13 April is an important victory for President Diem in his long campaign against warlordism in South Vietnam.

Since the surrender of Hoa Hao rebel Tran Van Soai in February, Ba Cut had been the last prominent figure in militant opposition to the government. Recent efforts to obtain his surrender had failed despite heavy military pressure against him.

Ba Cut's followers were recently estimated at up to 3,000, about a third of whom were armed and active. The Viet Minh, having infiltrated the rebels, has been using Ba Cut's dissidence as a cover for its own activities and as an auxiliary arm of its clandestine organization in the south.

Although Ba Cut's capture removes an important asset to the Viet Minh's subversive apparatus, the Communists will attempt to retain control over those Hoa Hao elements remaining at large.
[PAGE 10]
6. SOVIET OFFICERS INSPECT AFGHAN INSTALLATIONS ON PAKISTANI BORDER

A party of Soviet officers and enlisted men inspected Afghan army posts in the Baroghil area along Pakistan's northern frontier in the latter part of March. One Soviet officer who made two trips to the area was accompanied on his second visit by a newly assigned Afghan officer who was placed in charge of the area.

Comment
Baroghil is situated on Pakistan's extreme northern border in a mountainous area where Pakistan is separated from the USSR by less than 50 miles of Afghan territory. Traditional caravan routes from Pakistan to China and Russia, now closed, ran through the Baroghil Pass.

The presence of Soviet military personnel in this area which the Afghans have always treated as highly restricted suggests that Kabul is now giving the Russians a much freer hand within Afghanistan than in the past.

The Russian visit was probably primarily for routine military intelligence.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 15 April)

Information had been received that Israeli army officers were saying Israel would make a "sudden attack on Egypt and Jordan after Hammarskjold had finished his visit." While the UN secretary general presumably will return to New York sometime late this week, there is no fixed date for the end of his mission. He is expected to visit Israel and Egypt again following talks with his staff this week end in Beirut.

The arrival of an Egyptian force at the Syrian port of Latakia. The force, whose size and purpose are unknown, had come on the Egyptian yacht Mahroussa, which has previously carried personnel between Egypt and Yugoslavia. The force was expected to arrive in Damascus at 2230 hours the same day. This is the first time that what purports to be an Egyptian military force, as distinct from advisers or headquarters parties, has been despatched to another Arab state.

The Israeli mobilization activity which began in Tel Aviv on 12 April continued on 13 April with about 100 taxis picking up call-ups in Ramat Gan motor park. One unit called up has been identified as a heavy mortar battalion; another is an antiaircraft/antitank unit.

On 12 April, a single Israeli transport aircraft was observed making practice paratroop drops of single sticks of 20 men each.

The director general of the Israeli Defense Ministry left Israel on an overseas mission, country unknown, on 13 April.
[PAGE 12]
A French Foreign Ministry official has told the American embassy in Paris that France is not contemplating further deliveries of Mystere jet fighters to Israel "at least not before the Pineau-Dulles meeting."
