[PAGE 01]
16 September 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

2. British see Peiping statement on Korea conference as propaganda (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

3. Moscow ministerial reorganization designed to raise Soviet living standards (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. French Communists seen improving their position (page 4).

* * * *

- 2 -

16 Sept 53

[PAGE 03]
2. British see Peiping statement on Korea conference as propaganda:

The British Foreign Office regards Chinese Communist premier Chou En-lai's 13 September broadcast on the Korean political conference wholly as a propaganda effort to encourage Western dissension. The British hope that UN General Assembly discussion of the statement can be avoided.

Comment: It is unlikely that the General Assembly can avoid discussion of Chou En-lai's proposal of 13 September that the Soviet Union and four Asian neutrals be included in a round-table political conference.

- 3 -

16 Sept 53

[PAGE 04]
London apparently appreciates that the maintenance of a common Anglo-American front is essential to prevent Assembly acquiescence in the proposal.

SOVIET UNION

3. Moscow ministerial reorganization designed to raise Soviet living standards:

Division of the three economic ministries previously concerned with agriculture, trade and the production of food and consumer goods into six ministries is a definitive government action aimed at carrying out the promise of the Malenkov regime to improve the material well-being of the Soviet citizen.

A. I. Mikoyan, a member of the party presidium and fourth-ranking man in the governmental hierarchy, has been named minister of internal trade, thereby focusing the attention of the USSR's top expert in foreign and domestic trade on internal problems alone. For the first time a Ministry of the Consumer Goods Industry has been established and a former politburo member, A. N. Kosygin, named as head.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. French Communists seen improving their position:

The French government may be preparing to abandon its anti-Communist program. Left-wing leaders of the Christian Workers Confederation have implied to American embassy officials that the recent release of imprisoned Communist leaders resulted from a deal between the government and the Communist Party.

The embassy believes that the progress made by the Communist-led General Labor Confederation in its unity-of-action program during the August strikes has strengthened the position of the French Communist Party.

- 4 -

16 Sept 53

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The government's anti-Communist campaign showed signs of bogging down last spring, and the recent release of Communist leaders by grand jury action may be a means of extricating the government from an awkward situation.

- 5 -

16 Sept 53
