III. THE WEST

Reaction to De Gaulle's Proposals on Algeria

Favorable official reaction to French President de Gaulle's proposals of 17 September for an Algerian solution has thus far been confined mostly to France's NATO allies, who in varying degrees have welcomed it as a "step in the right direction" which will facilitate their support of France in the United Nations debate on Algeria.

(A British Foreign Office spokesman left the impression with US representatives that the United Kingdom is prepared to support De Gaulle's proposals and is hopeful of a UN resolution on Algeria favorable to France. Canadian representatives in London share this view, a Greek representative in London thought that the proposals would "ease" Greece's position in the United Nations, although the opposition in Athens is said to be taking advantage of the proposals to taunt the Greek Government for having accepted an "unsatisfactory" Cyprus settlement.

West German Chancellor Adenauer characterized De Gaulle's speech as "wonderful," though the official press comment was considerably more restrained. The Italian Foreign Ministry has reportedly recommended that Foreign Minister Pella accept the speech as evidence of a progressive policy justifying continued Italian support of France. The American Embassy in Rome expects, however, that there will be "sniping" from center-left elements, including oil magnate Enrico Mattei, who are "interested in influencing Arabs and of avoiding the colonialist label." Most other official comment in Western Europe is privately favorable, but officially restrained.

In Latin America, where Paris had particularly hoped to retain support in the UN or to win over several countries--such as Cuba, Chile, Uruguay, and Venezuela--which have indicated they would probably vote against France this year, the impact of De Gaulle's proposals was considerably diminished by preoccupation with Khrushchev's visit to the United States. There are few indications of official thinking. The acting foreign minister of Uruguay

21 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
