[PAGE 01]
22 June 1959
SC No. 03287/59
Copy No. C 62

THIS DOCUMENT CONTAINS CODE WORD MATERIAL
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including
COMINT.

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication represent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modification in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING
This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.

THIS DOCUMENT MUST BE KEPT IN COMMUNICATIONS
INTELLIGENCE CHANNELS AT ALL TIMES

It is to be seen only by US personnel especially indoctrinated
and authorized to receive COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE
information; its security must be maintained in accordance with COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE REGULATIONS.

No action is to be taken on any COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE which may be contained herein, regardless of the advantages
to be gained, unless such action is first approved by the Director
of Central Intelligence.
[PAGE 03]
22 JUNE 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet - East German communique reiterates refusal to sanction "occupation regime" in West Berlin.
New Yugoslav oil field may make Belgrade self-sufficient in crude oil and eliminate one source of Soviet pressure.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Tension remains high over UAR refusal to permit Israeli ships to use canal.
Indonesia--US Embassy sees political deadlock contributing to economic deterioration and growth of Communism.
Malaya--Pro West ruling party suffers surprise defeat in state assembly election.
Japan apparently determined to carry out repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea.

III. THE WEST
Cuba--Drastic purge of air force officers follows army command shake up. Opposition to regime apparently increasing.
Dominican Republic considering "defensive military action" against Cuba or any other nation aiding rebels. Haiti fears involvement.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - East Germany: The communique signed on 20 June at the conclusion of the East German party-government delegation's visit to the USSR reiterated the major points made by Khrushchev in his Kremlin speech on 19 June. Expressing regret that the Western powers had thus far rejected Soviet proposals on Berlin, the communique warned that the USSR and East Germany "will not sanction the preservation of the occupation regime indefinitely" and are determined to take "all necessary measures for an earliest elimination of the abnormal situation in West Berlin." At the same time, however, it stated that the time limit on the

Yugoslavia: The recent completion of a series of oil wells in Croatia, which has resulted in proved reserves capable of producing a total of at least 15,000 barrels per day, will have important implications for the Yugoslav economy. The field, the largest in Western Europe, "closely resembles the great fields of California and Venezuela,"

When in operation, the 20 wells already drilled could make Yugoslavia self-sufficient in crude oil production. Yugoslavia imported approximately 60 percent of its total crude oil requirements in 1957. Since three fourths of these imports came from the Soviet bloc, this discovery will eliminate one source of economic pressure which the Kremlin has used on Tito.

(Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Israel: Tensions continue over UAR actions to deny the use of the Suez Canal to Israeli-owned or -chartered merchant ships. The UAR is still holding the Israeli-chartered freighter Inge Toft and its cargo. On 17 June, UAR authorities detained for 24 hours a Panamanian freighter--bound from Antwerp to Japan--on suspicion that it was carrying Israeli cargo.

Two other ships of non-Israeli registry are now reported to be loading in Haifa and may attempt to transit the canal. Israel may respond to any UAR action against these freighters by direct interference with UAR shipping between Egypt, Syria, and Lebanon. The UAR Government, concerned over the possibility of such retaliation, is reported to have ordered that only ships of foreign registry be used for such voyages.

Indonesia: The political deadlock in Djakarta is accelerating the deterioration of the Indonesian economy, with accompanying benefits for the Communist party,

Inflationary shortages are "beginning an ominous pinch" on urban workers and armed forces personnel, and this is increasing the following of the Communists in these influential circles. There appears to be little prospect of effective government action, even when President Sukarno returns from his foreign travels.

(Page 2)

Malaya: The first major defeat to be suffered by the moderate Alliance, Malay's pro-Western ruling party, has threatening implications for future stability there. The Alliance was defeated in a state assembly election on 20 June by the narrow, racially oriented Pan-Malayan Islamic party, thus raising the possibility of a break in Malay support for the Alliance concept of multiracial cooperation. Such cooperation is essential to the maintenance of peaceful relations between the Malay and Chinese communities. Recent reports state that the Islamic party may be receiving support from Indonesian Communist sources.

(Page 3)
[PAGE 06]
Japan-Korea: Japanese determination to carry out the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea is reflected by the ambassador to Switzerland is instructed to go to Geneva to seek quick approval by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) of the repatriation agreement "before there is meddlesome interference." The ambassador was also directed to request ICRC assistance for the release of some 150 Japanese fishermen held by South Korea--a more serious and urgent matter from a "domestic viewpoint" than the repatriation issue.

(Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: The drastic purge of air force officers carried out during the past week apparently was instigated by Raul Castro, the extremist young armed forces chief and brother of the prime minister. The affected officers, including most of Cuba's rated pilots, were known to be seriously concerned over Communist penetration of the armed forces. The purge follows an important shake-up in army commands and reports of the discharge of army officers in various parts of the country. Meanwhile, rising opposition to the regime among other groups resulted during the week in the first wave of antigovernment terrorism since the fall of Batista.

(Page 5)

Dominican Republic: As many as 100 of the estimated 150 insurgents may have survived the initial landings on the north coast made at dawn on 20 June. The Dominican Government has evidence that the attackers came from Cuba, and it expects further landings by insurgents coming from Cuba and Venezuela. Meanwhile, Dominican troops apparently have not liquidated the small rebel force that landed by plane on 14 June in a mountainous area of the interior.

20 June that his government is seriously considering "defensive
[PAGE 07]
I probably include an attack by Cuban exiles who with Dominican support are preparing for action against the Castro regime in Cuba.

(Page 6)

military action" against Cuba and any other nation aiding the rebels. While he did not specify the nature of such action, it would probably

The Haitian government has been informed by the Dominican Republic that additional forces from Cuba will land in Haiti shortly to establish a "second front" for the invasion of the Dominican Republic. Haiti, which fears opposition groups abroad may join the invaders, is urgently seeking help from the United States and the Organization of the American States.
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Significant Oil Field Discovered in Yugoslavia

The Yugoslavs have recently completed exploration of an oil field in Croatia which is the largest in Western Europe, now has 20 wells and is capable of producing 15,000 barrels per day, which would raise Yugoslav production 166 percent. Exploitation of this field can begin after the construction of tanks and pipelines. If the field is exploited in the proper manner and the wells produce at their maximum efficient rate, Yugoslavia will be at least the second largest crude oil producer in Western Europe by 1963, according to the source.

This discovery will have sizable implications for the Yugoslav economy, as the 20 wells can make Yugoslavia self-sufficient in crude oil production and enable it to conserve--perhaps even earn--badly needed foreign exchange. In 1957 the country imported approximately 60 percent of its total crude oil requirements, with three fourths coming from the Soviet bloc; the withholding of crude oil shipments has been one of the bloc's principal means of putting economic pressure on Yugoslavia.
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

The inability or unwillingness of Indonesian Government and Army leaders to take effective action to break the political deadlock over constitutional reform in President Sukarno's absence is contributing to a continued and accelerated decline in Indonesia's economy. The economic decline in turn is further strengthening the Communist party of Indonesia (PKI), on which Sukarno is already dependent for his constitutional reforms.

The current economic crisis is beginning to cause an "ominous pinch" among urban laborers, white-collar workers, and members of the armed forces, although it has not yet affected the bulk of the population. The pinch, however, is building up PKI following among the influential groups from which the Communists must draw strength for their ultimate revolutionary goals.

Illustrating Djakarta's economic plight, prices on essential commodities have doubled in the past year while wages have remained relatively constant; major imports, handled by inexperienced army officers through government monopolies, have fallen off to the point where, because of shortages of raw materials, factories are operating at only 50 percent of capacity; and government employees are ignoring their official functions in order to take outside jobs to supplement their incomes. Labor discontent, bottled up by government prohibition of strikes, is increasing, and owners of capital are attempting to exchange their money for hard currencies and gold. In the past two weeks the rupiah has declined one third on the free market.

There is no assurance that President Sukarno will take effective action after his return to Djakarta on 29 June, even though he might achieve his aim of a reversion to the 1945 constitution. Previous economic crises have found Sukarno quite unconcerned, and it seems unlikely he will resolve the political conflicts wracking the country.
[PAGE 10]
Ruling Party in Malaya Receives Sharp Setback in State Election

The ruling Alliance party of Malaya suffered its first major defeat on 20 June when it won only seven of 24 seats in the Trengganu state assembly election. The narrow, racially oriented Pan-Malayan Islamic party (PMIP) won a clear majority of 13 seats, and the equally narrow Negara party won four. This is the first time since Malaya achieved independence nearly two years ago that the politically predominent Malays have failed to give a large majority to the United Malay National Organization (UMNO), the Malay organ and leading component of the Alliance; the development represents a serious threat to the Alliance concept of multiracial cooperation which is essential to stability in Malaya, where half the population is non-Malay. Chinese comprise about 37 percent and Indians 11 percent of the total population.

While the Alliance has swept eight previous state elections in the past month, there has been a definite increase in Malay support for the PMIP in most states. Federation officials have recently expressed considerable concern over the apparently large resources of the PMIP and reportedly have good evidence that Indonesian Communists are extending considerable financial support. The PMIP is headed by a political opportunist who apparently is willing to accept support from any source.

The victory in Trengganu can be expected to improve the PMIP's chances in the last two state elections in neighboring Kelantan and Pahang and may significantly reduce Alliance prospects of winning an overwhelming majority in the national elections in August.
[PAGE 11]
Japanese - South Korean Disputes

Tokyo's determination to carry out the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea is suggested which the Japanese ambassador to Switzerland is instructed to go to Geneva and seek quick approval by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) of the repatriation agreement "before there is meddlesome interference." He is also to ask for greater efforts by the ICRC to obtain the release of the 150 Japanese fishermen detained in South Korea.

Japan apparently considers the problem of the detention of the fishermen more serious and urgent than that of repatriation. The question of what Tokyo has done so far and what actions are contemplated to obtain their release is certain to plague Prime Minister Kishi's new cabinet at the special Diet session which opens on 22 June. Foreign Minister Fujiyama said the government would "go ahead and take every conceivable measure" to secure the release of these men.

Tokyo is attempting to provide greater protection to Japanese fishing vessels operating near the "Rhee line" by increasing the number of patrol craft and fitting them with armor plate. Despite growing pressure, however, Kishi is unlikely to use force to protect the boats--except as a last resort--but he could be forced to take the matter to the United Nations.

South Korea refuses to discuss the release of the fishermen until Japan suspends negotiations with North Korea. Seoul has broken trade relations with Japan; a complete break in diplomatic relations may follow if the agreement is consummated. Popular and official feeling is high in South Korea, and President Rhee may resort to additional action--such as seizure of Japanese shipping--as a means of rallying support for his administration.
[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Cuban Air Force Purge Coincides With Rising Opposition
To Regime

Major Raul Castro, brother of the prime minister and chief of the Cuban armed forces, was responsible for the drastic air force purge which resulted in the dismissal of most of the force's rated pilots. The purge, which became public knowledge on 18 June, also resulted in the replacement of Major Pedro Diaz Lanz as air force chief.

Diaz Lanz, who was prominent among those officers seriously preoccupied with Communist penetration of the armed forces, is believed to have been particularly worried about the Communist influence in the recently established schools that have been giving six-week courses in political indoctrination to many Cuban military personnel. Diaz Lanz' half brother approached the US Embassy on 1 June for an opinion as to whether anti-Communist Cuban officers should go into exile or remain to resist Raul Castro's policies favoring the Communists.

The air force purge follows an important shake-up in army commands and reports of the discharge of army officers in several parts of the country. These moves reflect the regime's efforts to remove potential dissidents from the military.

Rising opposition to the regime among other groups led during the week to the first significant wave of antigovernment terrorism since the fall of Batista last January and to increasing evidence of government fear of an imminent counterrevolutionary effort.

The American army attache in Cuba believes Raul Castro's frequent trips to eastern Cuba during the week may be related to fear of an attack from the Dominican Republic in retaliation for probable Cuban support of the 14 June rebel landings in that country. A knowledgeable Cuban exile in the Dominican Republic told an American Embassy officer in that country on 18 June that an armed Cuban exile force there was nearly ready to attack Cuba, but that he believes the attempt will probably
[PAGE 13]
Dominican Republic Considers Attack on Cuba After New Insurgent Landings

Dominican authorities claim that about 50 of the estimated 150 insurgents who landed on the north coast of the Dominican Republic at dawn on 20 June have been killed or captured.
The landings were undetected until after the insurgents had moved inland.

The landings were made about 75 miles from the mountainous area in the interior where a small group of rebels landed by plane from Cuba on 14 June. The latter group, with whom local civilians apparently collaborated, had inflicted "substantial losses" on the Dominican Army.
operations were proceeding successfully against this group, but by 20 June fighting was apparently still in progress in this area.

The Dominican Government has confirmed that the air and sea incursions were made from Cuba; it expects further landings by insurgents coming from Venezuela, as well as by two other groups from Cuba which intend to invade via Haiti.

The Dominican foreign minister told that his government is seriously considering "defensive military action" against Cuba or any other nation aiding the rebels. Such action will become imperative, he said, if there are further landings. He indicated that his government has little confidence that an appeal to the OAS would result in effective assistance, but added that if assured that the US would take "a definite stand" in that body, the Dominican Government might consider an appeal prior to taking military action.

Dominican action against Cuba would probably include the mounting of an invasion by Cuban exiles now in the Dominican Republic. These exiles were preparing for imminent action on 20 June.
Batista, also in exile there, is disinclined to support such a move, however.
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 15]
