CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
28 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet leadership: Khrushchev now holds the top positions in both party and government as Stalin did. Although he does not yet dominate the Soviet scene to the same degree, he has reached the pinnacle more rapidly than Stalin. As in Stalin's day, Soviet policy will reflect to a great extent the personality of the leader.
(Page 1)

Soviet submarines for Egypt: Three Soviet W-class long-range submarines and one mine sweeper, which left the Baltic on 18 March, probably entered the Mediterranean through the Straits of Gibraltar on 27 March. If, as expected, the submarines are to be turned over to the United Arab Republic, they could arrive in Alexandria on about 4 April.
(Page 1)

Watch Committee conclusion - Indonesia: The general Indonesian situation increasingly favors the local Communist position and provides expanding opportunities for exploitation by the Sino-Soviet bloc through aid and propaganda, although there is no evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily involved. The Djakarta government has had considerable military success on Sumatra against the dissidents, but a resolution of the basic issues is not an early prospect.

Saudi Arabia: The situation resulting from Saud's grant of broad powers to Crown Prince Faysal is still far from clear even to officials of the Saudi Foreign Ministry. However, the Foreign Ministry has issued instructions from King Saud that all communications from Saudi diplomats abroad must be sent through Faysal.
(Page 3)

Watch Committee conclusion - Middle East: A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered unlikely in the near future. Serious incidents could arise, however, from continuing tensions in the area.

West Germany: Christian Democratic party unity and self-confidence appear to have been in large part restored by the recent Bundestag debate on foreign policy. The Socialist opposition displayed more internal differences than did the government, particularly on the question of dealing with the East German regime.
(Page 6)
