I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Possible Visit of Chinese Communist Leader to Khrushchev

Premier Chou En-lai or a party leader of "equal rank" would fly to the USSR to discuss with Khrushchev his forthcoming talks with President Eisenhower.
a proposal to this effect was made at the recently concluded central committee plenum. The Chinese Communists are "not enthusiastic" about the Eisenhower-Khrushchev exchange, and are trying to ensure that their interests will be protected. Peiping "will do nothing," however, to impede the visits.

While a recent press report that Mao Tse-tung has gone to the USSR is unconfirmed, the whereabouts of Mao and 11 other politburo members is still unknown.

the Chinese are apprehensive that friendlier US-USSR relations will prove detrimental to their interests, which they view as inconsistent with the maintenance of the status quo in the Far East. On the Taiwan and Laotian issues, the Chinese have directed their principal invective against the US as the "aggressor." They have asked foreign visitors to take a tough line against the "US imperialists" when they return home.

The Chinese Communist leaders have been less than enthusiastic about the implications the Eisenhower-Khrushchev talks could have for their general policy of maintaining a degree of tension with the US. At a time when bloc commentary--despite probable reservations among certain satellite leaders--was praising the forthcoming visits without significant qualification, Foreign Minister Chen Yi on 15 August called on the bloc to "carry on an unremitting struggle" to defeat the policy of "war and aggression by imperialism."

In reprinting Chen's statement, Pravda omitted these hostile remarks, leaving Chen's endorsement of the Eisenhower-Khrushchev visits more in line with Soviet comment. Peiping probably now feels the need to avoid further public statements which might significantly differ from the tone of bloc commentary and thereby suggest a lack of Sino-Soviet unity on a major international development. Therefore, any announcement of a visit by a top Chinese leader would portray it as another gesture of Sino-Soviet solidarity.
