[PAGE 01]
18 October 1957

Copy No. 138

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. USSR ANNOUNCES ATOMIC ICEBREAKER WILL BE
LAUNCHED SOON

6. BURMESE DEPUTY PREMIER REPORTEDLY TO DISCUSS
ARMS PURCHASES WITH CZECHS DURING BLOC TOUR

7. SITUATION IN LAOS

8. NEW GOVERNMENT COALITION IN PAKISTAN
(page 10).

9. BRITISH MARKING TIME ON CYPRUS PROBLEM

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. USSR ANNOUNCES ATOMIC ICEBREAKER WILL BE
LAUNCHED SOON

Launching of the Soviet atomic icebreaker
Lenin, to be proclaimed as the first atomic-
powered surface vessel in the world, will
evidently be treated as part of the 40th an-
niversary program culminating on 7 November. The Soviet
news agency TASS announced that the Lenin, which was be-
gun in the spring of 1956, would be launched "soon" from the
Leningrad yards. Judging from the extent of the construction
as shown in a June photograph of the vessel, the hull could
probably be launched at any time. It probably would be some
time--perhaps as long as 18 months--before the vessel could
be fitted out with the reactor installation.

Soviet propaganda, in addition to claiming
another "first," will contrast the peaceful purposes of the Lenin
with alleged US emphasis on building atomic submarines.

The 16,000-ton, 400-foot vessel, which will
probably be added to the icebreaker fleet operating on the North-
ern Sea Route, will need refueling only about once a year and
will be able to travel at speeds of up to 18 knots in open water.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. BURMESE DEPUTY PREMIER REPORTEDLY TO DISCUSS
ARMS PURCHASES WITH CZECHS DURING BLOC TOUR

Deputy Prime Minister Kyaw Nyein will
negotiate for the purchase of arms during
his forthcoming visit to Czechoslovakia,

During a two-month tour scheduled to begin
on 21 October, Kyaw Nyein will also visit the USSR, Poland,
and Communist China. This trip will be essentially a good-will
tour highlighted by attendance at Moscow's 7 November celebra-
tion.

Burma seeks substantial quantities of arms
to re-equip its army, now in the initial phases of a reorganiza-
tion, to enable the Burmese to patrol their borders. New arms
are also needed for the police, who are being prepared to assume
primary responsibility for suppressing the Communist and Karen
insurrections. In answering a reporter's question stimulated by
earlier rumors of Czech arms offers, Prime Minister U Nu stated
on 30 July that it was the policy of his government to purchase
arms from any source without regard to "ideological considera-
tion," provided it is within Burma's means to do so.

The Burmese have been promised $10,000,000
worth of American military equipment at favorable prices and an
American survey team is being sent to Burma in the near future
to study the requirements of the police.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. SITUATION IN LAOS

Expansion of Laos' six-man "emer-
gency" cabinet is expected shortly
and there are indications that Prime
Minister Souvanna Phouma and other
proponents of an early settlement
with the Pathet Lao will seize this op-
portunity to press for a coalition cabi-
net which would include Pathet Lao
representatives.

Souvanna told an American embassy of-
ficial on 16 October that his brother, Pathet chief Souphan-
nouvong, is prepared to sign a joint communique embodying
all guarantees and concessions demanded by the royal gov-
ernment. He said this communique would guide the mixed
negotiating commissions in working out the final details of
a settlement, which would then be submitted to the national
assembly. Acceptance would clear the way for formation
of a coalition government.

Conflict of interest involved in the jockey-
ing for cabinet portfolios is seriously straining the alliance be-
tween the conservative leaders, Foreign Minister Phoui Sanani-
kone and Interior Minister Katay Sasorith, who have previously
served to check Souvanna's drift toward a relatively unguarded
settlement with the Pathets. There are indications that Souvanna
is exploiting the rift.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
8. NEW GOVERNMENT COALITION IN PAKISTAN

The new government coalition in
Pakistan, expected to take office on
18 October with Moslem League leader
I. I. Chundrigar as prime minister,
may bring only a limited period of sta-
bility. The exclusion of former prime
minister Suhrawardy's Awami League
and the domination of the coalition by
West Pakistani elements probably will
result in a considerable increase of opposition sentiment
in East Pakistan.

Chundrigar told the press that the coali-
tion would include his own party and the Republican party,
two of Pakistan's major groups, as well as two smaller East
Pakistani political factions. He was to have been sworn in
on 17 October, but the ceremony has been postponed for one
day, possibly indicating a hitch in the naming of his cabinet.

Sixty-year-old Chundrigar has served in
several high government positions, but has little political fol-
lowing and lacks the qualities of a dynamic and popular leader.
The Moslem League recently called for an "independent" for-
eign policy, but Chundrigar indicated to the press on 17 Octo-
ber that his government would not make any significant changes
in Pakistan's present pro-Western policies.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]
9. BRITISH MARKING TIME ON CYPRUS PROBLEM

The British government has evidently
concluded that no new moves to nego-
tiate a settlement of the Cyprus prob-
lem would be profitable at the present
time. The Foreign Office is discouraged about the prospects
of persuading Greece even to discuss the British plan for a
British-Turkish-Greek condominium. It believes the Greek
and Cypriot assessment of the British Labor party's recent en-
dorsement of self-determination for Cyprus will cause Athens
to stall in the expectation that a future Labor government would
grant its aspirations. Greek opinion assumes that Labor will
win the next general election, which must be held by May 1960
at the latest.

In the meantime, the British intend to
weaken the EOKA underground by such tactics as their recent
announcement that they possess an EOKA list of 200 Greek
Cypriots scheduled for extermination. EOKA is nevertheless
likely to resume violence if it believes the UN General Assem-
bly debate, expected in November, does not advance the cause
of union with Greece. A resumption of terrorism might impel
London to resume efforts to negotiate a settlement.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11
[PAGE 13]
ANNEX

Watch Report 376, 17 October 1957
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the
Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostil-
ities against the continental US or its possessions in
the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostil-
ities against US forces abroad, US allies or areas
peripheral to the orbit in the immediate future.

C. Unstable conditions and tensions stemming from devel-
opments concerning Syria continue to create possibilities
for conflict in the Middle East. The continued deployment
of major Turkish forces on the Syrian frontier, the pub-
licized presence of Egyptian forces in Syria, and Soviet
pressure moves combine to make this situation particularly
tense. On balance, the initiation of hostilities by Turkey
against Syria is considered unlikely in the immediate future.

18 Oct 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
