instructed Ambassador Masud-Ansari to offer "in your meeting" with Premier Khrushchev to return to Tehran and propose, as the ambassador's "own views," the joint confirmation of the 1927 Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Guarantee and Neutrality with certain changes previously proposed by the Iranians. (Page 3)

UAR: President Nasir is reported to have discussed with other UAR officials the possibility of again obtaining arms from the West, since he believes that the UAR should have an arms source other than the Soviet Union. Some of these officials subsequently made tentative approaches to American representatives in Cairo. There have been previous reports that the UAR was seeking to develop spare parts sources outside the Soviet bloc, and exploration of the possibility of obtaining some Western arms conforms with Nasir's current objective of balancing the UAR's commitments among the great powers.

India: Violent rioting which began in Calcutta on 31 August in protest against high food prices continued until 3 September when the previously planned general strike went into effect. Indian Army troops called in on 3 September are expected quickly to restore conditions to normal. There is no indication that the vandalism--for which Calcutta is renowned--has spread to other parts of West Bengal State.

Belgian Congo: The resignation on 3 September of the Belgian minister of the Congo, Maurice Van Hemelrijck, may make more difficult the orderly political evolution of the Congo, where African political agitation is increasing. He had pushed for the formation of a provisional Congolese government in 1960 and had inspired general African confidence, while being subjected to criticism by conservative interests in Brussels and among the European settlers in the Congo. Van Hemelrijck's resignation, apparently because of cabinet opposition to a speed-up in the Congo's progress toward independence, will probably arouse growing African distrust of Brussels and could lead to the downfall of the Belgian cabinet. (Page 4)

4 Sept 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
