Sihanouk Calls for Referendum to Clarify Cambodian Situation

Cambodian leader Sihanouk has called for a referendum on 5 June to disprove to the world the propaganda charges by "traitors and their imperialist masters" that his neutralist policy is opposed by the masses. Prince Sihanouk charges that this propaganda provides a pretext for interference or intervention in Cambodian affairs and poses a grave danger to the nation.

Sihanouk--who resigned from the premiership last month but still runs the country with solid popular backing--recently has become increasingly agitated over South Vietnamese and Thai hostility toward his regime. South Vietnam's recent claim to several islands in the Gulf of Siam considered Cambodian territory by Phnom Penh apparently forms the basis of Sihanouk's accusations, but there are other factors. These include persistent reports of South Vietnamese and Thai support of dissident Cambodian bands, the recent reactivation of a clandestine anti-Sihanouk radio, and large-scale incidents along the Cambodian - South Vietnamese border in recent months.

Sihanouk last October proposed a referendum to choose between his leadership and that of dissident leaders Sam Sary and Son Ngoc Thanh, but no date was ever set and the project was quietly shelved. His intention this time seems firmer, and the announcement that foreign observers and "particularly journalists" are to be invited suggests a full-scale propaganda effort.

In a recent editorial, Sihanouk pointed a finger at "increased" American military aid to South Vietnam and Thailand as making possible their "aggressive designs." Asserting that Cambodia must act quickly to defend itself against an "imperialist encirclement," he stated that Cambodia has some "big friends" who will supply arms--now provided solely by the United States. Sihanouk previously has hinted that he could get military aid if he asked from Communist China, and he apparently looks on Chou En-lai's statements of support for Cambodia, made during Chou's visit earlier this month, as a guarantee of Cambodian national integrity.

20 May 60     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
