[PAGE 01]
17 October 1954

Copy No. 90

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Viet Minh cadres reported remaining in Cambodia (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE
3. Comment on release of purged Hungarian Communists (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Comment on the London strike situation (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Viet Minh cadres reported remaining in Cambodia:

The chief of the French military mission in Cambodia believes that the Viet Minh is leaving large numbers of troops in
[PAGE 04]
Cambodia to serve as cadres among the populace. He has told the American ambassador that the number of troops being evacuated is falling far below the official Viet Minh estimates, and that the evacuees are poorly armed.

According to reports reaching the American army attache in Phnom Penh, the total number evacuated by the deadline of 20 October may turn out to be less than 3,000, in contrast to a generally anticipated figure of 5,000 or more.

Comment: At the time of the cease-fire, approximately 8,000 regular and irregular Viet Minh troops were disposed in small units throughout central and southern Cambodia. The new reports further substantiate earlier indications that the Viet Minh intends to retain its military nucleus in Cambodia by concealing arms and leaving underground cadres.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. Comment on release of purged Hungarian Communists:

Istvan Kovacs, first secretary of the Budapest committee of the Communist Party, announced on 13 October that the party has been reinstating members who were "falsely" imprisoned by former leaders of the Hungarian security police. This confirms earlier reports that the regime is releasing former officials purged on grounds of "national deviation."

The Hungarian press announced recently the return to public office of ex-politburo member and minister of
[PAGE 05]
interior Kadar, and there have been reports that former foreign minister Kallai and other officials purged in 1950 and 1951 have been released from prison.

This apparent reversal of policy toward "national deviationists" is an attempt to obtain greater popular and party support for the regime's current policies, by creating the impression that Hungarian national interests are being given priority over the interests of the USSR.

Kovac's charge that the Hungarian security forces were responsible for these "false" arrests bears a marked resemblance to the reversal of the doctors' plot in the USSR last year, and is no doubt designed to give the public a greater sense of security from arbitrary arrest.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on the London strike situation:

Complete paralysis of the port of London and indications that the unofficial strike may spread to other British ports has led the government to intervene in order to maintain essential supplies and services. If the strike is not settled by 19 October when Parliament opens, Minister of Labor Monckton will announce that troops will be brought in on 21 October to unload ships.

There is growing evidence that the work stoppage is directed by the same political agitators and Communist elements which have been able to exploit legitimate economic grievances for political purposes several times since the war. Arthur Deakin, head of the Transport and General Workers' union, to which most of the dock and bus strikers belong, believes that the wildcat strike is in retaliation for his support of German rearmament at the recent Labor Party conference, and that it is a general effort to stir up trouble over the nine-power agreements on West Germany.
[PAGE 06]
The Conservative government had previously avoided intervention on the advice of Deakin who hoped that the strike would peter out. Monckton conveyed the government's plans to Alfred Robens, Minister of Labor in the Attlee government, who offered no objections.
