[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

15 May 1959

Copy No. C 62

DOS and DIA review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
15 May 1959
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - East Europe: The eleventh plenum of the bloc Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA) opened in Tirana on 12 May. The USSR delegation is led by A. N. Kosygin, chairman of the Soviet State Planning Committee. This session will be concerned with coordinating bloc economic plans of the member countries for the period 1961-65. Particular emphasis will be given production of coking coal, ferrous, and nonferrous metals, and the unification of electrical power systems. An "exchange of opinions" on a Bulgarian proposal to create a Sino-Soviet international bank also is on the agenda.

Bloc-Iraq: The Soviet bloc is apparently succeeding in its efforts to obtain civil air rights in Iraq. The USSR, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary have been negotiating for a route to Baghdad, presumably via Cairo. Iraqi Airways is reported to be preparing a new schedule which would include the USSR and East Europe as well as Asian and African countries now served. Moscow reportedly has offered to re-equip the Iraqi civil air fleet.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

India-USSR: The high-level Indian economic delegation which left New Delhi on 14 May for a two-week visit to Moscow will seek Soviet aid for India's Third Five-Year Plan (1961-66). The total foreign exchange cost of the dozen projects India wants to discuss is $735,000,000. India now is drawing up the third plan, which is likely to have a foreign exchange gap of at least $5 billion, and any offers of aid for particular projects would be of considerable assistance to Indian officials in formulating the plan.

15 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Laos: The house arrest of the leaders of the Communist Neo Lao Hak Zat party apparently is intended to cut communications between them and the two former dissident Communist battalions which have refused to be integrated with the Laotian Army. These incidents will be used by the Communist bloc to support the campaign for the return of the International Control Commission to Laos.

Algeria: The provisional government of the hard-pressed Algerian rebels is attempting to induce the US to bring pressure to bear on France. A rebel spokesman at the UN has hinted that unless the West can soften the French attitude toward the provisional government, the rebels in desperation may take "spectacular military action"--possibly even an attempted air attack on Metropolitan France--to dramatize their determination to continue the war.

15 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bloc-Iraqi Civil Air Negotiations

The bloc drive to establish civil air links with Iraq apparently has met with success. Baghdad announced on 13 May that a new air schedule linking Iraq with a number of countries, particularly those of the Communist bloc, Asia, and Africa, will soon be put into operation.

The Iraqi Government paved the way for expanding civil air cooperation with bloc countries when, in late April, it "retired" the pro-Western director and deputy director of the Iraqi Airways. Major American commercial airlines, faced with continuing harassment of their operations and personnel, have ceased all but token services to Iraq.

Talks between Soviet Embassy officials and Iraqi officials over the establishment of an air route were held in Baghdad in March. The discussions may have included a preliminary Soviet offer to provide the Iraqi airline with modern Soviet civil aircraft. Furthermore, in March Iraqi officials reportedly were studying drafts of proposed civil air agreements which had been submitted by Czechoslovakia and Hungary. Bloc civil air traffic to Baghdad probably will be routed via Cairo, by extending the present bloc flight routes now terminating there.

Increased bloc political and economic activity in the Middle East since 1955 has included attempts to establish direct air connections with the Middle East capitals which lie on major air routes between Europe and Asia. The only routes established thus far connect Moscow and Prague with Cairo. The Soviet ambassador in Beirut again approached the Lebanese Government on 8 May on the question of a Soviet-Lebanese air agreement.
[PAGE 08]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Indian Delegation Visiting Moscow to Discuss Additional Soviet Aid

The Indian delegation which left New Delhi on 14 May for a two-week visit to Moscow will seek Soviet aid for India's Third Five-Year Plan (1961-66). The delegation--which includes the minister of steel, mines, and fuel and the minister of industry as well as high-level civil servants--is also planning to discuss projects the USSR has already agreed to finance, such as pharmaceutical plants and a petroleum refinery. The total foreign exchange costs of these projects is $735,000,000.

India now is drawing up its Third Five-Year Plan, which is likely to have a foreign-exchange gap of at least five billion dollars. Therefore, any specific offers of aid the delegation can obtain from Moscow would be of considerable assistance to Indian officials in formulating the third plan. The projects India wants to discuss include expansion of the Bhilai steel mill being constructed with Soviet aid, construction of a heavy electrical equipment plant, expansion of Soviet assistance for India's petroleum exploration program, and the establishment of a watch-making factory.

Soviet bloc aid provided to India to date totals about $304,000,000--about 10 percent of free-world aid--and will increase by about $80,000,000 if India accepts the pharmaceutical and refinery offers as it reportedly intends to do.

15 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 14]
