[PAGE 01]
7 May 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. JORDAN MAY SEEK ENTRY OF IRAQI TROOPS (page 3).

2. COLOMBIAN POLITICAL CRISIS (page 4).

3. SERIOUS FIGHTING STILL POSSIBLE DESPITE HONDURAN-NICARAGUAN CEASE-FIRE (page 5).

4. JAPAN TO DEMAND COMPLETE ABOLITION OF CHINA DIFFERENTIAL TRADE EMBARGO (page 6).

5. SOVIET OFFICER STATES USSR HAS EXPERIMENTAL ATOMIC SUBMARINE (page 7).

6. SOVIET MERCHANT SHIP MONITORING US NAVY ELECTRONIC SIGNALS (page 8).

7. SOVIET EXPERTS ARRIVING IN YEMEN (page 9).

8. LAOTIAN PARTY LEADER SAYS POLITICAL SITUATION DETERIORATING (page 10).

9. CHINESE RIOTING IN SAIGON INTENSIFIES (page 11).

10. RIOT INVOLVING POLISH TROOPS REPORTED (page 12).

11. SOVIET-EGYPTIAN CO-OPERATION TO "REBUT THE EISENHOWER PLAN" (page 13).
[PAGE 04]
1. JORDAN MAY SEEK ENTRY OF IRAQI TROOPS

Reference:

Jordan's Deputy Prime Minister Rifai desires to put pressure on Syria to withdraw its troops from Jordan by requesting entry of Iraqi troops in accordance with the Iraqi-Jordanian treaty of 1947. Rifai told Ambassador Mallory that removal of the Syrian force would be one of the first steps to break up Syrian intrigue in Jordan. The Iraqis would be stationed at Mafraq near the Syrian brigade. Rifai wishes to bring the Iraqis in prior to the British evacuation of Mafraq air base scheduled for the end of May. As a further step, Rifai plans to install an Iraqi representative on the joint command in Jordan.

Rifai asserted that his government is unable to maintain its present position, much less take an active role in the Arab world, without outside help. He said Jordan needed assistance most urgently in obtaining funds to meet the $1,800,000 installment now due to Britain on 1 June for military equipment and transferred fixed installations.

In addition, Rifai stressed the importance of aiding the army, rewarding its loyalty, and restoring its position to that which prevailed before pay and allowance cuts by former chief of staff Nuwar. Rifai, according to the American army attache in Amman, has submitted a request for equipment for an infantry division, an armored division together with corps artillery, 84 aircraft including 40 jets, and 12 motor torpedo boats. Rifai informed Ambassador Mallory that, having decided on an anti-Communist line, Jordan was prepared to take necessary steps, including acceptance of training missions, to qualify for American aid.
[PAGE 05]
2. COLOMBIAN POLITICAL CRISIS

Comment on:

Widespread student protests against President Rojas' regime and a police attack which damaged a Bogota church on 5 May have maintained the political tension in Colombia. Although opposition presidential candidate Guillermo Valencia was released on 3 May from house arrest--the occasion for the student demonstrations--students and other opposition elements may attempt to call a general strike on or before 8 May, the latest scheduled date for Rojas' "re-election" by his rump National Constituent Assembly. The American embassy believes the odds favor Rojas' replacement shortly, probably by a military junta.

Rojas' re-election plans for the 1958-1962 term have provoked increasing opposition from the two major political parties, the Catholic Church, and business elements. The serious discontent reportedly has spread to the military, Rojas' principal remaining support. This probably caused postponement of his legislative re-election originally set for 1 May.

Rojas has indicated he may resign after his "re-election" in favor of a substitute acceptable to the armed forces, according to the Colombian government press. Such a declaration may be mere temporizing by Rojas to gain time to rebuild support, but in any case would probably not satisfy the opposition at this point in its campaign to oust him.
[PAGE 06]
3. SERIOUS FIGHTING STILL POSSIBLE DESPITE HONDURAN-NICARAGUAN CEASE-FIRE

Reference:

Public opinion is highly inflamed in both Honduras and Nicaragua, and some hotheaded action by one of the disputants might result in serious fighting at any moment. This opinion was expressed by Ambassador Dreier, American member of the five-nation special committee of the Organization of American States set up to investigate and help settle the border dispute, shortly after a temporary cease-fire had been negotiated by the committee. The cease-fire agreement, which became effective late on 5 May, gives the committee the difficult task of working out within four days a mutually acceptable plan for the withdrawal of troops of both sides from a zone in the disputed border area.

The committee was favorably impressed with the attitude of Nicaraguan officials who, it feels, recognize the futility of the drift toward war and appear to be exercising a restraining influence on the public. The Honduran government also seems to Ambassador Dreier to be desirous of avoiding war. The ambassador feels, however, that the Honduran government has created a situation over which it could lose control.
[PAGE 07]
4. JAPAN TO DEMAND COMPLETE ABOLITION OF CHINA DIFFERENTIAL TRADE EMBARGO

the Japanese delegate to the China Committee deliberations beginning on 7 May to give full support to the French proposal for elimination of the China differential trade controls.

Japan is prepared to follow France, Great Britain and other countries in declaring that they will take appropriate measures of their own if the "unreasonable China differential is going to be continued."

Comment

Japan has rejected recent American proposals for revision of the China differential on the grounds that they strengthen rather than relax controls in the areas where Sino-Japanese trade thus far has proved most lucrative. The French proposals call for a phased reduction leading to complete abolition of the differential within one year.
[PAGE 08]
5. SOVIET OFFICER STATES USSR HAS EXPERIMENTAL ATOMIC SUBMARINE

The Soviet assistant army attache in Stockholm recently informed the American naval attache there that the USSR has one experimental atomic-powered submarine, built between one and two years ago, which is operating with the Northern Fleet.

Comment

The existence of a Soviet nuclear-powered submarine has not been verified. Intelligence concerning the development of the USSR's nuclear energy program has indicated that such a submarine would not be in operation until late 1958 or 1959.

The Soviet Union's first identified nuclear-powered ship is the widely publicized icebreaker Lenin, scheduled to be launched in Leningrad by 7 November.

Because Northern and Pacific Fleet bases afford unrestricted access to the open seas, it is likely that the USSR would test its first nuclear submarine in one of these areas.
[PAGE 09]
6. SOVIET MERCHANT SHIP MONITORING US NAVY ELECTRONIC SIGNALS

American naval sources reported on 3 May that the Soviet merchant ship Kolkhoznik, equipped with an unusual number and variety of radio antennae for a merchant vessel, had obviously delayed departure from the vicinity of the major US naval base at Guantanamo, in southeast Cuba, for the purpose of monitoring electronic emissions. The Kolkhoznik entered the port of Boqueron on 19 April to load sugar and had been scheduled to depart on 30 April.

The ship's antenna array includes one ultra-high or very-high-frequency antenna, two very-high-frequency dipoles, five medium-high and high-frequency antennae, one high-frequency sleeve antenna, three horizontal wire antennae, and a radio direction-finder loop.

Comment

The USSR has never before attempted in such an open manner to collect communications and electronic intelligence on US naval operations and equipment.

naval officers are placed on merchant vessels solely for the purpose of collecting intelligence.
[PAGE 10]
7. SOVIET EXPERTS ARRIVING IN YEMEN

A Soviet ship en route to South Asia was scheduled to call in Yemen on 5 or 6 May with "experts to prepare the port for what has been requested."

These technicians may be involved in preparing the port to receive two shiploads of "heavy arms" which the Soviet bloc agreed in January to send following the reopening of the Suez Canal.

Soviet assistance to Yemen is intended to increase pressure on the British position in Aden. Moscow is presently urging a four-power declaration against arms shipments to, and foreign military bases in, the Middle East.
[PAGE 11]
8. LAOTIAN PARTY LEADER SAYS POLITICAL SITUATION DETERIORATING

Phoui Sananikone, head of the second largest party in the National Assembly, reportedly believes the political situation in Laos has deteriorated to such an extent that remedial action must be taken immediately. He charges that dissension and lack of authority impede the functioning of the government and that the country is further weakened by the unhindered subversive maneuvering of the Pathet Lao. Phoui recommends that an extensive social welfare and economic development program be launched to improve conditions at the village level. Without such action, he believes Laos will be "eaten away" and sooner or later "absorbed by Communist brigands."

Comment

Phoui would be a leading contender for the prime ministership, if, as recent reports indicate, Souvanna Phouma should resign or be overthrown after the National Assembly opens on 11 May. This report presumably reflects the program that Phoui would present to the assembly if called on to form a new government.

Phoui's concern with Pathet Lao subversion may also indicate a shift in the prevailing sentiment among Laotian politicians, who generally held six months ago that the Pathets were simply "misguided" nationalists.
[PAGE 12]
9. CHINESE RIOTING IN SAIGON INTENSIFIES

Comment on:

Rioting by Chinese in Saigon has intensified in protest against Taipei's inability to protect them from the mandatory naturalization decreed by the Vietnamese government. On 6 May, following two violent demonstrations at the Chinese Nationalist legation during the preceding week, some 300 Chinese broke through police lines to seize the building, and are now threatening a sitdown hunger strike.

President Ngo Dinh Diem has attributed the demonstrations to a small minority of Communists among the nearly 1,000,000 Overseas Chinese in South Vietnam. The American embassy in Saigon, which has warned of the danger of Communist exploitation of the citizenship issue, also reports certain aspects that suggest Communist involvement. In particular, the embassy notes that the crowd-handling techniques of leaders of these purportedly spontaneous demonstrations appear to be of the "Communist-cadre variety."

In Taipei, Chiang Kai-shek has called a meeting of top government leaders at which a decision may be made to break off relations with Saigon. The Nationalists have offered to aid those Overseas Chinese subject to Vietnamese naturalization who desire to come to Taiwan, and, on 1 May, Chiang informed Ambassador Rankin that the next step "might well be" to withdraw representation from Saigon.
[PAGE 13]
10. RIOT INVOLVING POLISH TROOPS REPORTED

A Warsaw newspaper report suggests that the recent riot at Jaroslaw, an agricultural community in southeastern Poland, when the populace and some troops intervened to halt the arrest by police of a young soldier, is one of the most serious of recent outbursts against Communist state authority. The rioters were dispersed only after more than 1,000 police and troops intervened and drove off the demonstrators with tear gas. A military investigation has reportedly been launched to determine responsibility for the incident.

Comment

Although no other riots have been reported involving Polish troops, a number of minor strikes and demonstrations have recently occurred throughout the country. Most of these disturbances have taken place in industrial towns where some worker-management friction has existed.

Official concern over such incidents, reflected in government and party statements, doubtless stems in part from the realization that failure to maintain public order might furnish Moscow with a pretext to intervene more directly in Polish affairs.
[PAGE 14]
11. SOVIET-EGYPTIAN CO-OPERATION TO "REBUT THE EISENHOWER PLAN"

Comment on:

Soviet Communist Party secretary Shepilov promised the Egyptian ambassador full Soviet support to "undermine the aims of the Westerners," He warned that America seeks to isolate Egypt. "The decisive, important factor," according to Shepilov, "is the firmness of Egypt and its unity with Syria."

Shepilov charged that Saud sought an understanding with Washington because of the dependence of the Saudi economy on "American capital," an oblique caution to Egypt against similar dependence.

Shepilov's commentary was related to a request, presumably from Nasr's political aide, Ali Sabri, for a Soviet "rebuttal to the Eisenhower plan." The Soviet Foreign Ministry statement on 29 April censuring the United States for Jordanian "intrigues" was evidently in answer to this request.
[PAGE 15]
