The Situation in Laos

An apparently rancorous exchange between Premier Souvanna Phouma and Captain Kong Le in two separate press conferences indicates that a showdown between the Vientiane government and the paratrooper may be imminent. Kong Le announced that he would continue his offensive against the Phoumi forces east of Paksane despite the cease-fire reached at Luang Prabang and accused Souvanna of being "very soft." He warned that the "people" would have to remove Souvanna if he did not "lead his country in the right direction." He also made slurring remarks about General Ouane, the armed forces commander and his ostensible chief. Souvanna subsequently retorted that Kong Le "was making up stories. Do not talk about him. That will be decided by army headquarters."

It is problematical whether Souvanna's top commanders--General Ouane and General Amkha, the Vientiane garrison commander--could win in any test of strength with Kong Le. Although the bulk of Kong Le's 2nd Paratroop Battalion is now outside of Vientiane, he probably can count on the support of the numerous irregulars he armed in the period immediately after his 9 August coup d'etat. He is also believed to have generated considerable popular support in the capital. In earlier phases of the crisis, moreover, neither Ouane nor Amkha showed much appetite for action against Kong Le. The scales might be tipped decisively against Kong Le, however, were Phoumi's forces east of Paksane to unite with Amkha's units in Vientiane.

Phoumi's Radio Savannakhet, meanwhile, has issued an appeal "to our foreign friends" for help in the face of the alleged presence in Laos of three North Vietnamese units. Such statements, whether true or not, would be calculated to excite Thai Premier Sarit and would possibly be used by him to justify increased support. The Thai general staff is reported to have a plan for direct Thai intervention if its becomes clear that the Communists have taken over Vientiane.

British Ambassador Addis in Vientiane reports being informed by Souvanna that the USSR has accepted Laos' proposal
1 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
