Chinese Continue Attacks on Khrushchev's Foreign Policy

Liu Chang-sheng, member of the central committee of the Chinese Communist party and a vice president of the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), told the WFTU general council on 8 June that it is "inconceivable" that there could be general disarmament until "the socialist revolution is victorious throughout the world." The day before, Liu Ning-i, president of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, had stated, "No talks can take the place of struggle." These statements and a recent People's Daily editorial are the most outspoken public criticism yet made by the Chinese of policies with which Khrushchev personally is associated.

Liu Chang-sheng gave cursory support to the Soviet disarmament proposal of 2 June and then described it merely as a means "to arouse the people. . . to unmask the aggressive nature of imperialism." He denied that the Soviet proposal could be realized. Paraphrasing earlier comments by Khrushchev that disarmament would mean both East and West could give more financial aid to underdeveloped countries, Liu said that to attribute any such intention to the West was a "downright whitewash of imperialism." Liu Ning-i, who spoke in a similar vein on 7 June, said any implication that "peaceful coexistence" could be stretched to include "genuine cooperation" is a "lie to deceive the people."

Such statements as these before an international gathering of Communists make it clear that Peiping intends to encourage bloc dissent from Moscow's views on East-West relations and solicit support openly for Communist China's own hard line toward the United States. The Chinese leaders probably believe that Soviet diplomatic maneuvering may, again require a "thaw" in Soviet-American relations. They also may feel that undisguised polemics now are justified in a situation where, since the U-2 incident and collapse of the summit meeting, Khrushchev possibly finds it more difficult to ignore those elements in the bloc which oppose any return to detente tactics.

10 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
