Foreign Ministry official stated on 14 September that negotiations are expected to be reopened soon. Soviet Ambassador Pegov, who left Iran about six months ago, is now en route by train from Moscow and is scheduled to arrive in Tehran on 16 September. In any new talks, the Soviet Union would probably press for a pledge against "foreign bases" in Iran, while Iran would insist on an end to Soviet propaganda attacks on the Shah, and possibly consider accepting Soviet economic aid.
(Page 2)

Pakistan-Nepal: Nepalese Prime Minister Koirala's announcement on 12 September that Pakistan and Nepal were negotiating the establishment of diplomatic relations is likely to cause concern in New Delhi. The Indian Government is deeply disturbed by its border dispute with Communist China and may fear diplomatic activities by its rival, Pakistan, in sensitive border regions India claims as its own special sphere of influence. New Delhi would almost certainly see a connection between Pakistani-Nepalese negotiations on diplomatic relations and President Ayub's campaign favoring joint Indo-Pakistani defense of the subcontinent against Communist China. India would find it difficult effectively to protest the establishment of diplomatic relations, however, in view of Nepal's recent expansion of relations with a number of other countries and the proximity of Pakistan.
(Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Raul Castro in a strongly anti-US speech on 11 September endorsed the calling of a Latin American people's congress. This may be the congress planned in Moscow at a special conference of delegates of the 18 Latin American Communist parties attending the 21st congress of the Communist party of the Soviet Union last February. Identification with the Castro revolution rather than with a local Communist party would make the congress more attractive than otherwise to certain non-Communists and provide opportunities for Communist penetration of future hemispheric activities.
(Page 5)

16 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
