The Situation in the Congo

The arrival at Port Francqui of a Congolese provincial official from Luluabourg to investigate the increasing tension between members of the Lulua and Baluba tribesmen apparently instigated the attack by the Congolese Army on the UN units. The Congolese apparently believed the UN was either behind the inspection or would protect the official in his probe. At least three of a 60-man Ghanaian unit were killed and the remainder captured by the numerically superior Congolese unit. The incident is indicative of Congolese sensitivity to what they feel is UN interference in their affairs.

In Leopoldville, relations between the UN and the Kasavubu government are expected to worsen after the return of UN representative Dayal. The government has indicated that when Dayal returns, it intends to issue a release labeling him an "uninvited foreigner" and strongly implying that it may call for popular demonstrations "to dissipate any doubt which might remain in Mr. Dayal's mind concerning the usefulness of his presence in Leopoldville, which can only obstruct the success of UN operations in the Congo."

In Katanga, anti-Belgian sentiment is reported to be growing within the Katanga Government. Interior Minister Munongo is reported to have joined a pro-French clique of Katangan ministers. The Belgians in Katanga apparently believe that if Munongo should attain power, he would replace Belgian advisers with French or other foreign technicians proposed by the UN.

The US consul in Elisabethville reported on 29 April that official and public reaction to the news of Tshombé's detention had been slight. The Katangan Council of Ministers had been meeting three times daily, but the only important decision was the proclamation of a limited state of emergency--a move apparently aimed at preventing the movement of Balubas and other Africans hostile to the government and the mass exodus of Belgians. Munongo and

1 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
