Soviet Good-Will Mission Planned for Latin America

The planned mission is part of the bloc's program to expand its influence in the area. It is probably designed to exploit not only what the Soviet Union considers to be a sharp decline in US prestige in Latin America after the recent Cuban developments but also to take advantage of the more favorable attitudes by some regimes toward relations with the bloc.

The success of the bloc's effort is demonstrated in part by the expansion of its diplomatic relations there since Castro came to power in January 1959. Cuba has diplomatic relations with all bloc countries except East Germany; Brazil has established relations with Bulgaria, Rumania, Hungary, and Albania this year; Caracas agreed in 1960 to accept a Polish embassy; and Ecuador re-established relations with Czechoslovakia late last year. Ecuadorean President Velasco told US Ambassador Bernbaum at that time that he had no objection to relations with the USSR but would take no initiative himself to establish them.

The Soviet delegation will probably be received by Uruguay and Argentina, the only countries in South America with resident Soviet missions, and by Brazil, Bolivia, and Ecuador. Chile, which recently received a Polish trade mission, and Venezuela may also grant the delegation visas. Other countries, however, are likely to be more cautious. Haiti, Panama, and Paraguay recently refused to respond to--and Colombia denied--the visa requests of Soviet Ambassador to Mexico Bazyk-in, who then had to limit his planned tour of the area last month to unofficial visits to Ecuador and Venezuela.

Similar activities in Latin America are also being projected by other bloc countries. North Vietnam had proposed the visit of a cultural delegation to Brazil, Mexico, and Ecuador. Brazilian President Quadros on 24 April authorized an invitation to visit Brazil for a Chinese Communist trade delegation now in Cuba--an invitation which apparently was solicited by the Chinese. Moreover, a high-level Chilean Foreign

1 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10
