[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

7 June 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
Page Denied
[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

3. SOUTH KOREAN OFFICIALS EXPRESS CONCERN OVER
   ARMY MORALE (page 5).

5. CABINET CRISIS IN SYRIA (page 7).

8. TURKS GIVE "QUALIFIED NEGATIVE" TO LATEST COMMU-
   NIST ECONOMIC OFFER (page 10).

9. LAOTIAN CROWN PRINCE ARGUES FOR WESTERN MILITARY
   GUARANTEE (page 11).

10. ARGENTINE CABINET RESIGNS (page 12).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 13)

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
Page Denied
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. SOUTH KOREAN OFFICIALS EXPRESS CONCERN OVER
ARMY MORALE

Former defense minister Son Won-il
and Assistant Vice Minister of Defense
Kang Yung-hun have expressed concern
over lowered army morale. They said
that during the recent elections soldiers
resented orders to vote for the government party and sus-
pected tampering with their ballots. Reservists reportedly
resent call-ups to active duty which coincide with the plant-
ing season. Both Son and Kang observed that defections have
increased since the May elections.

Comment
Pyongyang radio reports that 20 South
Korean officers and men have defected
to North Korea since the election. This would represent a
defection rate approximately four times that of the last few
months.

The morale problem confronting the army
reflects prevailing dissatisfaction in South Korea. The Eighth
Army observes that military and popu-
lar resentment over the handling of the May elections, and
cite the uncertainty of government and military officials as
to Rhee's postelection plans.

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

SECRET
[PAGE 07]
Page Denied
[PAGE 08]
5. CABINET CRISIS IN SYRIA

Comment on:

The resignation of the Ghazzi government
in Syria on 2 June is another evidence of
the continuing struggle among conserva-
tives, independents and leftists over the
form of the "national" cabinet which has been under discussion
for the past three months. Personal and interparty rivalries,
plus the necessity of securing army approval, have so far pre-
vented agreement, and initial talks after Ghazzi tendered his
resignation suggest that there will be considerable fumbling be-
fore a new cabinet is formed. While there is a danger that the
army will be tempted to intervene directly in this situation,
the chances are that a new cabinet will emerge which will,
like its predecessors, be a weak coalition amenable to anti-
Western leftist and army pressures.

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

CONFIDENTIAL
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
Page Denied
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
8. TURKS GIVE "QUALIFIED NEGATIVE" TO LATEST
COMMUNIST ECONOMIC OFFER

The Turkish Foreign Ministry informed
American chargé Kohler on 4 June that
it had replied with a "qualified negative"
to a Communist Chinese offer to pur-
chase 5,000 tons of Turkish cotton with "free dollars." The
offer was transmitted last week through the Hungarian min-
ister in Ankara.

Comment
Ankara regards all such Soviet bloc tac-
tics as designed to disrupt Turkish ties
with the West. While this trade offer, involving about
$5,000,000, is attractive to Ankara, basic Turkish suspi-
cions of Communist intentions preclude any immediate change
in attitude toward economic approaches with political over-
tones. Nevertheless, if the offer is made public in Turkey,
it will add to the difficulties of the Menderes regime.

Communist China's current cotton require-
ments have been more than met by purchases from Egypt and
Pakistan. Since the fall of 1955 the Chinese have been trying
to build prestige and establish contacts in the Near and Middle
East. (Concurred in by ORR)

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10

SECRET
[PAGE 13]
9. LAOTIAN CROWN PRINCE ARGUES FOR WESTERN
MILITARY GUARANTEE

In a meeting with the American chargé
in Vientiane on 4 June, Laotian crown
prince Savang stressed the need for
specific assurances of Western military
assistance to Laos in case of emergency. He indicated he
was thinking in terms of a mutual defense agreement with
Thailand, backed by the United States.

Savang said that in the absence of some
such arrangement, the high-level Laotian delegation which
will probably be visiting Peiping later this year would be
"defenseless" against Chinese Communist efforts to promote
Laos' neutrality. He further warned that the government's
guerrilla warfare against the Pathet Lao would also suffer
unless there were assurances of adequate "backstopping."

Comment
Prince Savang, who has considerable in-
fluence in the formulation of Laotian poli-
cies, has frequently expressed the view that firm Western
military guarantees of Laos' independence are the only sure
means of preventing the country from drifting into neutralism.
Premier Souvanna Phouma has already indicated he is inclined
to favor a negotiated settlement of the Pathet Lao problem and
to follow a policy of "peaceful coexistence" outside of SEATO.

The Thai, on their part, have shown great
reluctance to engage in any serious military talks with the
Laotians.

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 14]
10. ARGENTINE CABINET RESIGNS

The resignation of the Argentine cabinet
on 6 June probably is linked to conflict
within the army, which is the strongest
of the military forces on which the re-
gime depends.

Various junior officers have been demand-
ing the forced retirement of a larger num-
ber of generals, in line with the "de-Peronization" program
and probably with an eye to promotion possibilities. This view
is strongly endorsed by the navy, which would like to reduce
the power of the old generals. Many of the generals, however,
believe that a more conciliatory policy toward the mass of dis-
contented Peronistas is now required to achieve political sta-
bility.

While American officials in Buenos Aires
believe the regime has a better-than-even chance of surviving
the present crisis, further retirements would increase the al-
ready large number of discontented military personnel. More-
over, strong accent on the "de-Peronization" program has fos-
tered an atmosphere of plotting and unrest which is being ex-
ploited by the Communists and other opposition.

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12

SECRET
[PAGE 15]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 6 June)

An Israeli army spokesman charged that
70 infiltrators from Syria set fire to fields of a settlement in
upper Galilee. The spokesman also charged that Jordanian sol-
diers penetrated Israeli territory.

The UN Truce Supervisory Organization
announced on 5 June that six new observation posts had been com-
pleted on each side of the Gaza strip border.

A semiofficial Egyptian newspaper announced
on 6 June that the Soviet Union had sold Egypt two Soviet destroy-
ers and that they were now en route to Alexandria.

Syrian prime minister Ghazzi told Ambassa-
dor Moose on 4 June that the recent Syrian-Jordanian military
agreement does not provide for a joint command and is not "as
tight" as the Syrian-Egyptian agreement because Jordan has treat-
ies with both Iraq and Britain which make a tight agreement impos-
sible. Ghazzi added that Syria was still unable to persuade Lebanon
to agree to a joint defense pact.

7 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 13

SECRET
