France May Use Cuban Issue in UN to Press US

France has continually opposed what it considers the United States' indiscriminate efforts to win the political support of the Afro-Asian states in the UN. Paris is motivated partly by fear of establishing precedents which will pave the way for increased UN activity in Africa to the detriment of French interests, particularly in Algeria. Principally, however, De Gaulle views the UN as a heterogeneous mixture numerically dominated by new states, fundamentally incapable of action but increasingly tending to assume the responsibility of the large powers for the maintenance of peace.

The US vote in the Security Council on 15 March in favor of the Liberian resolution calling for UN consideration of the Angolan question probably was the immediate occasion for the French suggestion to the Portuguese. Various French political commentators have recently berated the US for failure to "stand with its allies." The influential and usually pro-American Raymond Aron said in an article on 22 March in Le Figaro that the US "double standard" will backfire when the Marxists train their guns on US "imperialism" in Latin America. Paris can be expected to continue to urge the other colonial powers to utilize the Cuban resolution or any similar resolutions, particularly those critical of US policy in Latin America, as an opportunity to make this point forcefully.

Lisbon's sharply hostile reaction to the recent US vote suggests that it will give serious consideration to the French tactic. Portuguese officials believe the US position has encouraged Afro-Asian attacks on the colonial powers, and Lisbon has been seeking ways to induce the US to change its African policies. The vitriolic anti-American press campaign and demonstrations in Portugal have linked the US stand with that of the Soviet Union and have singled out Ambassador Stevenson as the chief villain. A leading editorial on 29 March in the government-controlled newspaper Diario de Noticias stressed that the US bases in the Azores had been granted with the understanding that Portuguese sovereignty would be respected in all of the Portuguese colonies, that Portugal had
4 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
