Growing Danger of Afghan-Pakistani Border Clashes

Since 1947, when Pakistan received its independence, Afghanistan has demanded that the Pushtoon tribes living on the Pakistani side of the border be given the right of self-determination. The Pakistani Government, however, has rejected these demands as interference in its internal affairs, and the resultant Pushtoonistan dispute has been the chief cause of the bad relations that exist between the two countries.

Both Kabul and Rawalpindi are trying to improve their positions in anticipation of the increased friction that usually accompanies the seasonal tribal migrations. The Afghans feel compelled to recoup some of the prestige they lost last September when their tribal irregulars were driven back from Pakistani tribal territory. They probably feel that their position in the Pushtoonistan dispute has been further weakened as a result of the recent improvement in Pakistan's relations with the USSR and consider it all the more necessary to make a show of strength and determination. Kabul apparently calculates that it can encourage tribal unrest across the border and prepare for possible Pakistani retaliation by building up its regular and irregular forces along the border. Pakistani leaders have threatened that if they are forced to take major countermeasures, they may send regular forces into Afghan territory.

The Afghans, who have long objected to American military assistance to Pakistan, have complained bitterly about Pakistan's recent use of US-supplied aircraft. Legally, Pakistan is entitled to use such weapons to maintain internal security. Radio Kabul attacks the United States as giving "hollow assurances that arms aid which was being given to Pakistan would not be used against anybody else except against the enemies of America in case of a world war. . . . The US rulers are also responsible for the annihilation of Pushtoonistan and martyrdom of the Pushtoons."

10 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
