Communists Threaten to Bloc West German Trade With Berlin

East Germany has threatened to interfere with traffic between West Berlin and West Germany unless Bonn agrees to renew the interzonal trade agreement for 1961. The threat was attributed to a medium-level official of the Ministry for Foreign and Internal German Trade in an article in the official party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, on 15 October, although the term "blockade" was not used. He asserted that the West German abrogation of the interzonal trade agreement affected not only the movement of goods between the Federal Republic and West Berlin but also agreements between the railway systems of the two parts of Germany and for deliveries of electricity, gas, and water to West Berlin.

Some West German officials are fearful that any new trade negotiations with the East Germans will inevitably be held on a ministerial level and imply recognition of the Ulbricht regime. East German officials were said to be willing to conclude agreements on all matters at issue "if appropriate official offers or negotiations are submitted to them." The East Germans are reported by a high East German trade official to be confident that Bonn will seek a resumption of interzonal trade as soon as West Berlin begins to feel the pinch caused by the loss of certain East German exports to West Berlin, particularly coal.

The East German threat appears designed also to test Western reaction. In a discussion of the Berlin problem on 5 October, a Soviet Foreign Ministry official asked an American Embassy officer what solutions the West envisaged. Denying that there was no alternative to the Soviet proposal to make West Berlin a free city, he asked for Western reaction to including East Berlin in a free city, to be established within the framework of a German confederation, with each part of the city retaining a large measure of autonomy.

The USSR has officially rejected suggestions along this line on the grounds that East Berlin is the capital of East Germany. Moscow, however, would probably hope to represent any such Western offer as a retreat from the fundamental position that Western occupation rights are based on Germany's unconditional surrender and cannot be the subject of bargaining apart from an agreement on German unification.

18 Oct 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
