[PAGE 01]
11 June 1960

Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 JUNE 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese National Police chief says charged atmosphere has aggravated security problems related to President's visit; he believes extremists might subject President to indignities despite security precautions.

Lebanese Army chief disturbed by reports that army interfering in elections set for tomorrow.

Ivory Coast and three other French-West African Community states ask independence without commitments as to ties with France.

III. THE WEST

French disarmament delegate believes Soviet disarmament proposals generally acceptable for further negotiation.

British-Cyprus negotiations still stalled over questions regarding British bases.

Finland's failure to form broad-based government probably eliminates prospects for early Finnish association with European Free Trade Association.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: Leftist-led demonstrations in opposition to Prime Minister Kishi and the US-Japan security treaty have created an emotionally charged atmosphere which the director general of the Japanese National Police said on 8 June has seriously aggravated security problems related to the President's visit. He believes that the less extreme elements have lost their control of the opposition movement, which now has come to tolerate violence. While the great majority of the Japanese people welcome the President's visit, the director general believes there is a real possibility that extremists, despite security precautions, may subject the President to indignities.
(Page 1)

Lebanon: The commander in chief of the Lebanese Army is disturbed at reports of army interference in the elections set for 12 June. He fears that if this is taking place extensively it will cause the army to split along religious lines, impairing its effectiveness and ability to maintain order. Disorders are expected during the elections.
the chief of Lebanese military intelligence is working directly with the UAR ambassador in Beirut to enhance the prospects of pro-UAR candidates.
(Page 2)
[PAGE 05]
French-African Community: The bid by Ivory Coast and three other West African Community states for independence within the Community without prior commitments as to future ties with France poses a major challenge to this institution, which embraces ten states in Africa and the Malagasy Republic (Madagascar). There are signs that De Gaulle will accede to the bid; This would almost certainly hasten the Community's evolution toward a still looser association. Should De Gaulle reject the bid, the four states have threatened to become independent outside the Community, as did Guinea in 1958. However, none of the territories concerned could afford a complete rupture with France on the Guinea model, and none desires it.
(Page 3)

III. THE WEST

France: Jules Moch, France's delegate at the ten-nation disarmament talks, has described the new Soviet disarmament plan as essentially a good one which he hopes to accept for further negotiation if the "little bad in it" can be removed. Moch admitted that there was disagreement between President de Gaulle and the French Foreign Ministry on disarmament policy, and his statements imply that De Gaulle's views are close to his own. Moch, who has often acted in a freewheeling manner on disarmament matters over Foreign Ministry objections, will leave for Paris this week end in an effort to sell his views to the Foreign Ministry.
(Page 5)

Cyprus: Negotiations continue to be stalled over questions regarding British bases on the island. Archbishop Makarios insists that Britain specifically agree that bases be transferred to Cyprus if the British abandon them. Britain has refused, fearing that the Cypriots would begin early attempts to force the British out. The impasse could delay the formal grant of independence for Cyprus this summer. The British Parliament, which must pass independence-enabling legislation, is scheduled to recess at the end of July. The new regime in Turkey has announced it will abide by all agreements reached thus far and is seeking a formula to break the present deadlock.
(Page 6)

11 June 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
Finland: The failure of President Kekkonen last week to replace the minority Agrarian cabinet with an Agrarian-led majority coalition probably eliminates the prospects for any early Finnish affiliation with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). The USSR had hinted to the Finns that it would agree to Finland's affiliating with the EFTA if, in return, the USSR could get a commitment from a broadly based Finnish government that would assure Finnish trade ties with the USSR for a longer period than the present five-year pact. Kekkonen is reported to have said that Khrushchev, under present circumstances, would not hesitate to denounce any Finnish politicians who might try to associate Finland with EFTA.
(Page 7)

11 June 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
Japanese Police Director Concerned Over Security Problems
During the President's Visit

The director general of the Japanese National Police stated on 8 June that snowballing emotionalism among those opposed to Kishi and the security treaty is aggravating the problem of providing security for the President. He feels the more moderate elements have lost control to radical extremists and that the leadership of the opposition movement now has accepted violence as a means of expression. He fears that the police may not be able to prevent the fanatical, left-wing extremists from acts of violence such as throwing stones and other objects at the presidential car on the route from the Tokyo airport.

The police director believes the Japanese Communists will attempt to provoke incidents during the President's visit for which they will avoid blame because of the general confusion resulting from the demonstrations. He also feels planned demonstrations at the American Embassy will increase the problem of preventing troublemakers from slipping into the embassy area and creating incidents.

The police director, who would naturally be inclined to cautiousness, apparently hopes the visit will not take place at this time. He was aware his views would reach the US Government and he may accordingly have intended to promote a postponement of the visit. He stated that it was difficult for Japanese government officials to take the initiative in asking for such a postponement, as the "face" of many leaders was involved.

The pro-Communist General Federation of Koreans in Japan (Chosen Soren) decided on 7 June to mobilize Koreans in Japan in an effort to block forcibly President Eisenhower's departure for South Korea on 22 June. A Chosen Soren leader is maintaining close liaison with the Japanese Communist party to coordinate opposition to the President's visit both to Japan and South Korea.
[PAGE 08]
The Lebanese Election Situation

General Adil Shihab, commander in chief of the Lebanese Army and a cousin of President Shihab, was said to be "aghast" on his return from a two-week trip abroad at reports of army involvement in the forthcoming parliamentary elections. He feels that such action has set a dangerous precedent and that it threatens to split the army along religious lines and thus seriously impair its ability to maintain order. The threat of such a split was the major reason the army was not fully committed during the 1958 rebellion. The commander in chief has told the President of his concern over the army's extensive manipulation and has threatened to resign unless the army returns to its traditional policy of abstention from politics.

The chief of Lebanese army intelligence, Col. Antun Saad, is actively working with the UAR ambassador in Beirut to further the prospects of pro-UAR candidates. Saad has suggested that Armenian religious dignitaries from Syria be sent into Lebanon to influence Armenian voters. The UAR ambassador has requested further instructions regarding payments to Lebanese politicians and the influencing of voting in Beirut, southern Lebanon, and Mount Lebanon.

Druze leader Kamal Jumblatt had suggested to the ambassador that UAR support should be given to Pierre Jumayyil, leader of the Maronite Phalange and a rival of former President Chamoun, in order to split the Christian vote. Jumblatt declared that at the same time the UAR should secretly work against Jumayyil. Should Jumayyil learn of this duplicity, he might join forces with Chamoun against pro-UAR candidates. UAR propaganda is emphasizing the theme of Lebanese independence in order to lessen Christian opposition to pro-UAR candidates and split the Christian ranks. Many Lebanese politicians apparently are too cowed by army pressure to register open protests at interference against them.
[PAGE 09]
France's Community Concept Challenged

Four West African states of the French Community which follow the leadership of Ivory Coast Premier Houphouet-Boigny have posed a major challenge to France's concept of this institution. The four--Ivory Coast, Upper Volta, Niger, and Dahomey--have requested immediate independence within the Community without prior commitments on their part as to future ties with France.

As originally launched last year, the Community was a close-knit association linking under one sovereignty France and 12 autonomous Black African states. Its constitution has just been revised to permit the African states formal independence without sacrificing their membership in the Community. Paris has insisted, however, that negotiations for independence be accompanied by the simultaneous negotiation of wide-ranging bilateral "cooperation accords" designed to preserve intimate links between France and the African members.

Mali and the Malagasy Republic--the first two Community states to invoke the new option--initialed such accords in early April and have been expected to complete action on them immediately after becoming independent this summer. Houphouet's four-state group, in contrast has indicated it will discuss such accords only after its members have obtained their independence and been admitted, separately, into the UN. They have threatened, should this procedure be denied them, to become independent outside the Community, as did Guinea in 1958. However, none of the territories involved desires a rupture with France on the Guinea model.

The American Embassy in Paris believes the group's move was prompted by Houphouet's inability to secure from De Gaulle assurances that the four states--which have been the most loyal to France--would have a preferred status within the "renovated" Community. Houphouet's chief lieutenant in Abidjan, however, claims that the move was motivated by a restrictive French
[PAGE 10]
interpretation of the legal competence of independent African members of the Community to enter into direct economic relationships with other countries. He cited as a further reason Houphouet's desire to facilitate Guinea's reassociation with the other states of the old federation of French West Africa. There have recently been indications of a possible rapprochement between Houphouet and Guinea's President Sekou Touré.

Indications that De Gaulle may accede to Houphouet's demands suggest a further rapid evolution of the Community toward a still looser association. The four Equatorial African states, which are about to claim their independence, now may insist on following Houphouet's lead. Mali and the Malagasy Republic might then have second thoughts about their own arrangements with France.
[PAGE 11]
France May Press for New Western Disarmament Proposal

The US disarmament delegate at Geneva credits as accurate a report that French delegate Jules Moch said the new Soviet disarmament plan is acceptable as the basis for further negotiation if the "little bad in it" can be eliminated. Moch reportedly stated that he intends to use every device at his command to prevent the US from "torpedoing" the Soviet plan. He urged that if the short period left before US national elections prohibited the US from being a party to a new Western proposal, either the other four Western powers should frame a new plan without US participation or the Soviet plan should be accepted with modifications.

Admitting that President de Gaulle and the Foreign Ministry disagree on disarmament policy, Moch implied that his views were close to those of De Gaulle and said he was going to Paris this week end to sell his views to the Foreign Ministry. He plans to return to Geneva and speak at the ten-nation meeting on Monday.

Moch has been France's chief disarmament negotiator since 1952 and, in his desire to bridge Western and Soviet positions, has often acted without reference either to Allied or Foreign Ministry positions. Nevertheless, his general views on disarmament, especially his interest in control and elimination of vehicles capable of carrying nuclear weapons, have apparently been accepted by De Gaulle, who publicly expressed similar views on 31 May. In view of De Gaulle's tendency to overrule Foreign Ministry advice, the ministry may be able only to delay temporarily an official French proposal at Geneva for a new Western initiative on disarmament along the lines of the latest Soviet plan.
[PAGE 12]
Cyprus Negotiations Continue Stalled Over Future of
British Bases

Negotiations between Archbishop Makarios and the British are again deadlocked, this time by Makarios' insistence that Britain's bases on the island be transferred to Cyprus if Britain ever withdraws from them. The archbishop has the support of the Greek Government on this issue. The British are refusing to make such an agreement formally, fearing that the Cypriot Government would begin early attempts to force them out. Furthermore, the British suspect that once they concede on this issue Makarios will raise another one, insisting, as he has with this one, that the entire future of the agreements hinges on the new point. Other unsettled matters are the wording of the British statement regarding the administration of the bases, their exact boundaries, and the amount of British financial aid.

Both Britain and Turkey believe that if an agreement on all issues is not reached soon, the British Parliament's recess at the end of July will end the chances for independence this summer. Parliament must pass enabling legislation before independence is final. Makarios appears to be unconcerned over this deadline.

Cypriot Vice President Kuchuk and President of the Federation of Turkish Associations Denktash recently went to Ankara to consult with the new Turkish regime regarding the Cyprus situation. Ankara has agreed to respect all agreements reached thus far and is seeking a formula to break the present impasse.

Turkey, according to a report from the US Embassy, accepts the necessity of the transfer of the bases to Cypriot sovereignty should Britain abandon them, but will propose, after approval by the provisional cabinet at Ankara, that actual transfer must be effected by agreement of all signatories of the Zurich-London agreements on Cypriot independence. Turkey hopes to persuade Athens and London to accept this formula and then to bring Makarios "to reason" in time to achieve independence this summer.
[PAGE 13]
Finnish Affiliation With European Free Trade Association Now Unlikely

President Kekkonen's failure last week to replace Finland's minority Agrarian government with an Agrarian-led majority coalition probably makes it impossible for Finland to join the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) at any early date. Kekkonen is reported to have told a small group of leading Finnish industrialists that prospects for such affiliation are very dim in view of current world conditions and the continuation of the minority government, which controls only 47 of the 200 votes in parliament.

According to Conservative party chairman Hetemaki, who was involved in the attempt to form a coalition government, "the Russians wanted a broader based government" in order to nail down Finnish commitments under a possible new trade agreement. Moscow had hinted to the Finns that it would agree to Finland's affiliating with the EFTA if, in return, Finland would accept a trade agreement for a longer period than the present five-year pact. In 1959 the USSR accounted for approximately 18 percent of Finland's foreign trade.

Kekkonen feels that joining EFTA at this time might arouse Khrushchev's animosity and that the Soviet leaders would not hesitate to assail any Finnish politicians promoting such an affiliation.
[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 15]
