Situation in Laos

Arrangements for the designation of an acting premier under Souvanna Phouma were presumably made during the course of a recent visit to Phnom Penh by Phoumi Vongvichit, an influential Pathet Lao leader. Conflicting versions between the Pathet Lao leader and Souvanna have been received. Souvanna agreed to return shortly to rebel-held territory in Laos. His return would considerably buttress claims by Communist countries that they are supporting the legal government of Laos, as well as improve this "government's" competitive position for equal status with the Boun Oum government in any negotiations which might take place on the Laotian crisis.

Meanwhile, the arrival of Khamsouk and Sisoumang in Xieng Khouang will give greater substance to the hitherto rather shadowy "lawful government of Laos," for which Quinim had been the sole spokesman. Khamsouk, the new "acting premier," had been minister of health in the Souvanna government, and was identified with Quinim's left-wing faction in the cabinet. He is 52 years old and is a locally trained doctor, the equivalent of a medical technician. In early December, Khamsouk fled to Rangoon at the same time Souvanna took refuge in Phnom Penh. He and his party returned to Xieng Khouang by way of Kunming and Hanoi. Sisoumang was a secretary of state in the Souvanna cabinet and was also identified with the Quinim faction. Sisoumang is a nephew of Souvanna and a son of the elder brother of the late King Sisavang Vong. He fought against the Viet Minh in their 1953-54 invasions of Laos and was captured by the Pathet Lao in 1954, remaining with them until the unification agreements of November 1957. Quinim will serve in the Xieng Khouang "government" as minister of defense, foreign affairs, and finance; and Sisoumang as minister of social affairs, economy and interior.

Without encouraging any Laotian appeal for Chinese "volunteers," Communist China's Foreign Minister Chen Yi nevertheless has implied that the Chinese are prepared to step up

3 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
