in nearly three years. Tunisian participation in the meetings, ending the boycott imposed by Bourguiba in 1958, appears to be part of an effort by Tunisia, Iraq, and Jordan to make the league more effective and less of an exclusive instrument of UAR President Nasir's policies. Nasir, however, holds important advantages in any contest for influence in the league. His more strident anti-Western propaganda has greater popular appeal in the other Arab states, while the league's secretariat is located in Cairo, subject to all the direct and indirect influences the UAR leader can bring to bear. Most other Arab leaders will almost certainly feel compelled to echo Nasir's strong propaganda attacks on Western policies, especially concerning Algeria, Congo, and Israel, regardless of their differences with Nasir and their real attitudes on these questions.
(Backup, Page 7)

Ethiopia: The political situation in Ethiopia appears to be deteriorating further as Emperor Haile Selassie continues to delay naming a new government. The Emperor, preoccupied with security matters in the seven weeks following the abortive coup, has concerned himself more with pressing charges against those who participated in or sympathized with the revolt than in reconstructing the government or in attempting to alleviate the conditions which caused the uprising. The American ambassador believes new disorders could break out in Addis Ababa if the military tribunal, which is reported ready to begin proceedings against the popular rebel leader Menghistu Neway, imposes the death sentence.
(Backup, Page 8)

Bolivia: President Paz Estenssoro believes that acceptance of Soviet bloc economic aid will not endanger the US grant-aid program which makes up a substantial part of Bolivia's domestic budget, according to American Ambassador Strom. Strom states that although Paz is aware the bloc may score politically in Latin America through contributing "show" projects for Bolivia, Paz feels no obligation to impede such a development. A Bolivian economic mission will probably leave for the Soviet bloc on 1 March to explore a Soviet offer of a $150,000,000 credit.
(Backup, Page 9)

Venezuela: Army units along the Colombian frontier have been alerted against action by Venezuelan exiles--who are known to be rightist plotters--in the border area. The Venezuelan Government has confirmed reports of a "coup d'etat, which can occur any time from today onward." President Betancourt has been concerned since November with evidence of plotting by rightists who apparently have the support of Dominican dictator Trujillo.
(Backup, Page 10)

SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS
AND ESTIMATES
(Available During the Preceding Week)

Ethiopian Prospects After the Abortive Coup of December 1960. SNIE 76.1-61. 24 January 1961.
Supplements NIE 76-60.
