[PAGE 01]
3 March 1961

Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. France-Algeria: Bourguiba reportedly convinced Abbas should respond to De Gaulle's overtures; some rebel leaders still distrustful of negotiations with France. (Page 1)

4. Laos. (Page 1)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]
France-Algeria: Tunisian President Bourguiba now seems convinced that De Gaulle has decided the aspects of colonialism must disappear from Algeria, even to the point of full independence. Bourguiba reportedly went from Paris to Rabat determined to induce rebel premier Ferhat Abbas to respond to De Gaulle's overtures. Bourguiba is presumably aware that some rebel leaders are distrustful of negotiations with France.

Previous reports have raised the question whether all rebel military commanders would comply with orders to end the fighting, should such orders be given by the provisional Algerian government in the course of negotiations with De Gaulle. The 1 March joint communiqué issued by Abbas, Bourguiba, and King Hassan of Morocco declaring that the way is now open to direct negotiations for Algerian independence in a North African framework suggests that Tunisia and Morocco desire to have some role in French-rebel negotiations.
(Backup, Page 3)

*Laos: Souvanna Phouma, who returned to Phnom Penh on 1 March after a week in northern Laos, is reported to have reached a decision with his supporters in Pathet Lao - held territory that a 14-power conference is the only means to a peaceful solution of the Laotian crisis.

3 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
the Laotian crisis.

General Phoumi, meanwhile, says he still hopes to confer with Souvanna, but is proceeding with separate plans to revamp the Boun Oum government regardless of Souvanna's attitude toward accepting a post.

Souvanna is reported to have found the Kong Le - Pathet Lao troops "extremely well organized," with high morale, and actively recruiting new personnel. The Plaine des Jarres area held by these troops is said to have been completely brought under the Communist way of life; Communist slogans and leftist youth groups are prominent throughout the area.

REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US Courses of Action With Respect to Laos. U. S. I. B. SNIE 58-61.21
February 1961. 0036778.

Prospects for Iran: Stability of the Shah's Regime, the Role of the Military, the Economy, and Foreign Policy Toward US and USSR. U. S. I. B. NIE 34-61. 28 February 1961.

Comparison of Capital Investment in the US and the USSR, 1950-59. Bibliography, graphs, tables. O. R. R. CIA/RR ER 61-7. 57pp. February 1961.

3 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]
De Gaulle - Bourguiba Talks

(One of De Gaulle's major objectives in inviting Bourguiba to visit Paris was to convince the Tunisian President of his willingness to negotiate a settlement of the Algerian war and to have this impression conveyed to the leaders of the provisional Algerian government. De Gaulle probably hoped thereby to strengthen the moderate wing of the rebel movement and encourage steps toward negotiations on terms acceptable to France. De Gaulle has in the past indicated that he will insist on guarantees for the Europeans in Algeria and for certain French economic interests and military base rights.)

Following his Paris conversation with De Gaulle, Bourguiba told Ambassador Averill Harriman in Rabat he believed there was no longer any real difficulty on the French side. He said De Gaulle understood the necessity of preventing a recurrence of the stalemate last June when preliminary talks failed to settle even matters of protocol. Bourguiba is optimistic that De Gaulle will free rebel leader Ben Bella and give sympathetic consideration to the release of political prisoners detained by the French in Algeria.

(In an effort to move the rebels to negotiations, Bourguiba has broadcast to the Algerians in Tunisia stressing his conviction of the genuineness of De Gaulle's intentions. Bourguiba apparently has in mind, however, that negotiations could fail because of the inability of the moderate leaders to control all factions of the rebel movement. Some 15,000 to 20,000 rebel fighters operate in Algeria with only a minimum of coordination and control by the rebel government in Tunis. If these forces object to a moderate settlement and continue military and terrorist activities, De Gaulle might halt political negotiations.)

(In another report on the Bourguiba - De Gaulle conversation, Habib Bourguiba, Jr., recently nominated as Tunisian ambassador to the US, said that De Gaulle "silenced" French Premier Debré, whose statements had nearly prevented the Bourguiba - De Gaulle meeting. Debré, while on a visit to the Sahara, said in a public statement that France intended to remain there.)

3 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 11]
According to Bourguiba, Jr., Debré also made difficulties during Tunisian Secretary of State for Information Masmoudi's earlier trips to Paris to arrange the Bourguiba - De Gaulle meeting.

3 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
