[PAGE 01]
20 July 1952
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Soviet authorities in Berlin embarrassed by Linse kidnapping (page 3).
2. Soviet High Commissioner in Vienna protests air corridor "violations" (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

3. Soviet Far Eastern air defense strengthened (page 4).
4. Aviation gasoline shipped to Kamchatka. (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Communists may convert to quasi-military status (page 5).
6. Postponement of Saar elections favored by West German Social Democrats (page 5).
7. Austria considering trade negotiations with Soviet Union (page 6).
8. Italy's support EDC conditioned on early federation of Europe (page 6).
9. Moderate French labor leader may be new Communist dupe (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Soviet authorities in Berlin embarrassed by Linse kidnapping:

The Committee of Free Jurists has informed the US High Commissioner's office in Berlin that Walter Linse, the kidnapped West Berlin lawyer, is being held in Lichterfelde barracks in East Berlin. The Soviet authorities give the impression that they don't know what to do with him and that they had no idea the kidnapping would cause such a world furor.

The Committee points out that Linse can hardly be released under Western pressure, adding that it is not even certain that High Commissioner Chuikov has sufficient control over the MVD to release him. It believes that the best solution would be to intimate that if Linse is permitted to escape the incident would not be publicized by the West.

Comment: Although Chuikov gave Mr. McCloy the impression that he would do what he could, McCloy is not very hopeful of Linse's release.

The kidnapping has tended to undercut the position of West German neutralists who have argued that the Soviet Union could be trusted to fulfill the terms of a negotiated German settlement.

2. Soviet High Commissioner in Vienna protests air corridor "violations":

In a 16 July letter, Soviet High Commissioner Sviridov in Austria protested to the US High Commissioner that the Tulln-Linz air corridor had been violated by United States military planes. He stated that the corridor could be used without advance notice only by transport and liaison planes of the occupying powers.
[PAGE 04]
He warned that in the event of future unauthorized flights, the Soviet authorities will take "stricter measures" against violators, responsibility for which must be borne by American authorities. A similar letter was presented to British officials.

SOVIET UNION

3. Soviet Far Eastern air defense strengthened:

existence of a third fighter division in the 10th Air Army of the Sakhalin Air Defense Corps. The division is placed either in southern Kamchatka or northern Sakhalin.

Comment: Other evidence of Soviet emphasis on strengthening air defense along the Far Eastern approaches to the Soviet Union has been the establishment of a fully-developed air warning center at Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, noted in early 1952, and the recent augmentation of jet fighter strength in the Kurile area.

all Chinese air warning centers between Canton and Mukden are reporting to a central point, probably in the Dairen-Port Arthur area.

4. Aviation gasoline shipped to Kamchatka:

On 23 June 1800 tons of 100-octane aviation gasoline consigned to "Bassalaev" was shipped on the tanker Batumi from Vladivostok to Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka peninsula.
[PAGE 05]
Comment:

This is the first known shipment to Petropavlovsk of a significant quantity of 100-octane aviation gasoline, which is suitable for most conventional aircraft and which is apparently used in the USSR chiefly for light and medium bombers.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. West German Communists may convert to quasi-military status:

The Bavarian branch of the West German Communist Party went underground on 27 June, and may convert to quasi-military status in August.

Cadres of trusted followers are being sent to East Germany for training in sabotage, guerrilla warfare, and weapons transport. Weapons are to be smuggled into West Germany for future use by terrorist groups.

Comment: The party will almost certainly not commit itself to such activities as gun running until the Constitutional Court has ruled on the government's case for outlawing it.

Bavarian Communists have made frequent trips to East Germany since last winter, apparently to obtain instructions and training on future underground activities. Previous evidence indicated, however, that the party's underground plans precluded violence.

6. Postponement of Saar elections favored by West German Social Democrats:

The acting chief of the West German Social Democratic Party now strongly favors the postponement of the Saar elections, scheduled for 19 October, to avoid aggravating
[PAGE 06]
the issue. American officials in Paris and Bonn suggest that the French be urged to delay the elections until December, in order to keep the issue quiet at the time of final German ratification of the Bonn and Paris treaties.

American representatives in Bonn state that the Germans are more interested in the licensing of pro-German parties by the Saar Government than in the date of the elections. The recent conditional refusal of Saar authorities to license two such parties has produced so strong a reaction in Germany that Adenauer may raise the matter in his talks with Schuman next week. American officials feel that if the Saar authorities definitely refuse the licenses, the Bonn government may not be able to prevent a "serious outburst" in its own ranks.

7. Austria considering trade negotiations with Soviet Union:

Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber states that his government has tentatively decided to offer to negotiate a trade agreement with the Soviet Union. The Foreign Minister says Austria will insist that exports of the Soviet-controlled enterprises be credited to Austria, a condition which Gruber believes the Russians will reject.

Comment: In the light of recent Soviet gestures to Austria with respect to interzonal trade and Danube shipping, the Russians might be prepared for political reasons to offer the Austrians quite favorable terms. Trade between the two countries is now virtually non-existent.

8. Italy's support of EDC conditioned on early federation of Europe:

unless the formation of the European Army is quickly followed by European political federation, Italy will reconsider its support of the European Defense Community.
[PAGE 07]
Schuman was concerned lest British opposition to French proposals for European federation have an inhibiting influence, particularly on Belgium and the Netherlands.

Comment: Italy believes that the total integration of Western Europe is the only long-term solution to its economic problems.

9. Moderate French labor leader may be new Communist dupe:

"Fighting Democracy," the international organization which Leon Jouhaux has just launched to mobilize popular support for UN objectives is actually being promoted by two fellow travelers, Henri Laugier and Louis Dolivet, according to the American Embassy in Paris.

Comment: In recent years Jouhaux has been content to get by on the prestige of his earlier success as a labor leader; his identification with a Communist-led movement might wreck the Force Ouvriere, which he founded to provide middle-of-the-road opposition to the Communist-dominated General Confederation of Labor.
[PAGE 08]
Laugier, who has been Assistant Secretary General of the UN, has served as an officer in fellow-traveling groups, and is considered well-disposed toward the USSR. He proposed the "Fighting Democracy" idea last November.

Dolivet is the pseudonym of an old Communist militant of Rumanian origin who was a Comintern agent in Paris before World War II. More recently he directed the pro-Russian United Nations World and helped promote neutralism in France.
