[PAGE 01]
8 April 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
III. THE WEST

Greece: Preliminary returns from the 5 April country-wide Greek municipal elections indicate that the Communist-sponsored EDA party has failed in its effort to discredit the government. However, claims of a "smashing defeat" for EDA appear to be exaggerated. The results do not necessarily indicate a popular anti-leftist trend, but suggest that the Greek Government's anti-EDA propaganda and pre-election police measures have been effective.

*Argentina: The riots of 3 April, led by the Communists and joined by Peronista extremists, demonstrated the Communists' capability for subversion. The Frondizi government has declared at least five Soviet diplomats persona non grata, charging interference in internal affairs. Although the riots apparently were brought under control rapidly, there are reports of increased apprehension, especially among the military

8 Apr 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Greek Municipal Elections

Despite Greek Government claims that the pro-Communists suffered a "smashing defeat" in last Sunday's municipal elections, the alleged "solid victory" for progovernment candidates should not be regarded as indicating a definite popular trend away from the Communist-sponsored United Democratic Left (EDA). Preliminary reports show increased popular support for the incumbent National Radical Union (ERE), some weakening in the political stature of the EDA, and a further trend toward elimination of the center parties. The local administrative picture will not be altered significantly, but the government's drive against pro-Communist elements begun before the election may have considerable impact.

The governing ERE entered no official slates and neither did EDA, except in certain isolated centers of known strength such as Piraeus, Mytilini, and Naoussa. Nonetheless, the main contest was between these two parties. EDA was determined to roll up a massive antigovernment vote and to secure popular support for attaining "bourgeois legality." It failed in both attempts, largely because of the effective anti-EDA campaign by the government and because the issues on which it focused, especially Cyprus and missile bases, failed to stir the electorate.

EDA-supported candidates, who as a result of an agreement with the Liberal faction led by Sophocles Venizelos ran mostly as Liberals, virtually everywhere received fewer votes than EDA-supported candidates in the national election last May. EDA polled nearly 25 percent of the total vote in 1958. However, according to government statistics, EDA strength in last Sunday's election ran as high as 49 and 56 percent in some localities. Despite the loss in total comparative strength, when viewed in terms of the 1958 parliamentary elections, pro-Communist strength was impressive in several localities,

8 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 06]
Argentine Communists Demonstrate Strong
Subversive Capability

The ability of Argentine Communists to mobilize some 3,000 demonstrators for riots in central Buenos Aires on 3 April, despite a well-publicized police ban and state-of-siege regulations, has increased apprehension--especially among the military--over the government's capacity to meet this threat. Worker participation was limited to extremist Peronistas. The interior minister termed the riots "a typical Communist action, considering the persons who took part, the manner in which it was carried out, and the objectives pursued."

The Soviet Embassy counselor was declared persona non grata on 7 April, and as many as four other Bloc diplomats may be expelled as a result of official investigations indicating foreign Communist participation in the riots. Mexico just took similar action against two Soviet diplomats accused of involvement in the recent railway strikes there.

8 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 08]
