Situation in Laos

Soviet civil transports continue their Hanoi-based air supply operations in support of the Kong Le-Pathet Lao forces north of Vientiane. On 20 December five to six Soviet IL-14s were making drops on an area about 40 miles north of Vientiane. The aircraft were apparently engaged in paradropping supplies, and about 75 parachutes were observed on the ground.

"today's drop zone is at Phong Hong," about 50 miles north of Vientiane. The message also stated that the seriously wounded were to be evacuated to Hanoi and the slightly wounded to Sam Neua. Requests for motor gasoline, motor oil, and military uniforms to be dropped at Phong Hong were also noted. It was also stated all supplies and troops would be withdrawn to a location about 70 miles north of Vientiane.

Total tonnage delivered to Kong Le and the Pathet Lao in the Vientiane area is estimated to be in the neighborhood of 230 tons, about half of which is military supplies and the remainder POL carried to Vientiane before the city fell to General Phoumi. Possibly 15 to 25 tons were delivered to Pathet Lao headquarters in Sam Neua by North Vietnamese aircraft. Based on aircraft capability and the number of flights the following tonnages apparently earmarked for the Laos operation could have been delivered to points within Communist China and North Vietnam: about 100 tons to Nanning; between 50 and 60 tons to Canton. About 45 tons have been flown on to Hanoi from both cities. Although these tonnages are relatively small, they may be symptomatic of larger deliveries by sea and rail, on which information is lacking.

Although Soviet IL-14s continue to shuttle between Canton and Hanoi through 20 December and at least one Chinese Communist civil transport was flying between Nanning and Hanoi through 19 December, the Chinese Communist airlift to Nanning appears to have slackened as of 19 December. On 19 December, at least eight CCAF 13th Air Division IL-12s and IL-14s involved in this operation returned to their base in the Kaifeng area. Also on the same date, three CCAF 3rd Independent Regiment transports returned to
