9. Libya may demand double compensation from US for air base:

The Libyan Government will soon request the United States for an annual payment of $2,000,000 for use of the Wheelus Air Base instead of the $1,000,000 previously agreed upon. American Minister Villard believes that the Libyan demand will carry with it the suggestion that ratification of the base agreement will be impossible without the increased compensation.

Villard believes that Prime Minister Muntasser has delayed submitting the base agreement to Parliament because of Libyan indecision on how much additional compensation to demand. He suspects that the new demands may be due to British influence rather than to Libyan initiative.

Comment: British influence has long been strong in Libya; there is no evidence, however, that any new Libyan demand would be due to British pressure. Libyan officials have previously indicated their desire to capitalize on the country's strategic position.

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Comment on Soviet note on Germany:

The Soviet note of 24 August reveals no basic change in the Kremlin's policy toward Germany and caters to German nationalism in condemning the "special rights" given to the Western powers by the Bonn agreement. For the first time in the series of notes, the proposal is made that parliamentary groups from both East and West Germany investigate electoral conditions.

The delivery of the note shortly before the opening of the Bundestag on 4 September suggests that it is timed to delay ratification of the contractual agreement. This aim will be served also by the proposal to hold the four-power meeting no later than October.

The USSR can make no substantial concessions to advance its aims in all of Germany without threatening its control of East Germany and its program of sovietization. It realizes that its proposals will be unacceptable to the West, but hopes to place the onus for refusal to confer upon the West.

The lure of unity may cause some West Germans to press for talks now, but Chancellor Adenauer will probably be able to override any political pressure on this subject.
