Reactions to De Gaulle's Remarks on Algeria

The US Embassy in Paris notes that De Gaulle carefully avoided questions of detail and procedure but feels that he has clarified his general intentions for Algeria once and for all and has offered the rebels a unique opportunity to come to terms. In his follow-up provincial speaking tour, De Gaulle declared on 12 April that he has been and still is offering Algeria peace and cooperation and said, "Let the other side want this and it will be done." On 13 April, he made another overture to the rebels saying, "We want to settle the rebellion by extending our hand to those who, up to now, have not wished to accept it, and in such a manner that it will be possible for them to construct the new Algeria, and for us, if they are willing, to help them do it."

Although De Gaulle's statements are designed to demonstrate French willingness to seek a reasonable solution, he is still a long way from offering to deal with the Provisional Algerian Government on anything resembling a government-to-government basis. He continues to speak only in terms of self-determination by all of the Algerian people after a rebel agreement to stop the fighting. He also threatened that an independent Algeria not closely associated with France would be left to face economic chaos and might also have to submit to partition.

This type of presentation may revive latent discord within the PAG. The rebels had reached their decision to go to Evian in the first place by glossing over such long-range problems, and they were hoping for clarification of a few points of immediate interest to them. The rebels may view De Gaulle's reiteration of these positions at this time as an attempt to limit the scope of negotiations and force a settlement which would provide for continued French influence. Powerful elements within the PAG could argue that no basis exists for successful negotiations within such a context. More moderate elements, however, in view of what they consider improved relations with the US and possibly the UK--a British parliamentary delegation met with rebel Premier Ferhat Abbas on 10 April, apparently on British initiative--may consider it unwise to refuse to meet with the

14 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
