Korean Repatriation From Japan to North Korea Resumed

The repatriation agreement, concluded in mid-1959, is a private agreement between the Japanese and North Korean Red Cross Societies, but has the official backing of both governments. Tokyo has long sought a means for solving the problem of its Korean minority, which has a high crime rate and has required heavy government assistance.

The Japanese failed, however, in efforts to persuade President Syngman Rhee's government that the program was based on humanitarian principles and would be entirely voluntary. Rhee reacted by severing trade with Japan and breaking off negotiations for an over-all settlement of Japanese - South Korean differences. With the ouster of the Rhee regime and the actual implementation of the program, official and public outrage in South Korea subsided. The Chang Myon government opposes the program in principle, but in practice has tended to ignore it. Despite the friendlier atmosphere in negotiations between Tokyo and Seoul in the post-Rhee period, however, major differences on issues other than the repatriation problem have prevented substantive progress.

More than 54,000 Koreans have been sent from Japan to North Korea aboard the two repatriation ships made available by the USSR. There is now a backlog of 17,000 applications for repatriation, but many Koreans are likely to renege before departure time, and it is doubtful that the sailings, resuming on 14 April, will reach the previous average of 1,000 repatriates weekly.

Pyongyang has apparently experienced difficulty in resettling repatriates, who find living conditions in North Korea less appealing than advertised by Chosen Soren, the Korean Communist front in Japan. There are reports that dissatisfied repatriates have refused to accept job assignments and have openly criticized the Communist regime. Many have written to relatives and friends in Japan of shortages in daily necessities and warned them not to apply for repatriation. Pyongyang has imposed strict censorship on all mail, but elaborate private codes

14 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
