West German - Soviet Negotiations For Ship Construction

Contracts concluded by the West German government-owned Howaldt shipyard threaten to undercut a proposed ban against the participation of NATO governments in long-term credits for the USSR. Credit extending for more than five years has been arranged to finance the construction of three fruit carriers, costing ten million dollars, and negotiations are continuing for contracts involving at least thirty million dollars for the construction of five or six floating fish canneries. Half the payment is to be made on delivery, with the balance to be paid in five annual installments. The time from the beginning of construction to final payment will exceed the five-year limit being sought among NATO countries for medium-term credits.

Bonn officials argue that their position in NATO opposing such credits is not affected because the deal is guaranteed by a state government rather than by the Federal Republic and is a "one-time exception" which does not vitiate Bonn's general policy. Bonn officials maintain the projects are necessary to alleviate serious unemployment in the shipbuilding industry. They feel that if West Germany refuses the contracts, other Western nations are sure to fill them. Previous negotiations by a Hamburg shipyard for the construction of passenger ships for the USSR failed because of Soviet insistence on long-term financing. Bonn claims the contracts were later awarded to Dutch shipbuilders. West German approval of the contracts appears likely, and arrangements are pending for an additional 19 ships.

These developments coincide with the conclusion of an extensive British-Soviet trade agreement calling for a substantial increase in trade during the next five years. Increased British exports will, at least in part, be financed through government-guaranteed "intermediate" credits--for less than five years--which the British have made available in an attempt to obtain a substantial share of the Soviet program of purchasing chemical plants.

26 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
