[PAGE 01]
22 September 1956

Copy No. 105

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. BELGRADE SPECULATES KREMLIN IS SPLIT ON POLICY
TOWARD EASTERN EUROPE

4. SINGAPORE GOVERNMENT CRACKS DOWN ON COMMUNISTS

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

22 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. BELGRADE SPECULATES KREMLIN IS SPLIT ON POLICY
TOWARD EASTERN EUROPE

The American embassy in Belgrade reports that a high Yugoslav official recently said that Khrushchev is "alone" in the more liberal Soviet approach to Yugoslavia and Eastern Europe and that the other top Soviet leaders, including Bulganin and Mikoyan, would turn on him "at the first false step." Vice President Vukmanovic-Tempo has also hinted that Khrushchev may be in trouble.

This Yugoslav hypothesis argues that Khrushchev, having sponsored the rapprochement with Tito, now finds that Tito is endangering the Soviet system by making trouble in the Satellites. The purpose of Khrushchev's trip is to get Tito to "call off the dogs."

In any event, Yugoslav officials have encouraged Western diplomats to believe that Soviet-Yugoslav difficulties prompted Khrushchev's visit.

Comment

Bulganin and particularly Mikoyan have been at least as prominently associated with Soviet policy toward Yugoslavia as Khrushchev. These three leaders are probably the most powerful in the hierarchy and seem to agree on the general course of Soviet policy. The consequences of recent Soviet policy toward the Satellites and Yugoslavia have probably caused varying degrees of concern to all Soviet leaders. The alliance of Khrushchev, Bulganin and Mikoyan has shown no sign of disruption.

22 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. SINGAPORE GOVERNMENT CRACKS DOWN
ON COMMUNISTS

The Singapore government's arrest of seven Communist-front leaders in an antisubversive program is likely to provoke a sharp reaction, according to the American consul general in Singapore.

Since Chief Minister Lim Yew Hock had laid his plans carefully and had full British backing, it is believed the Communist-manipulated People's Action Party and its affiliated labor unions will not risk a major showdown but will stage elaborate protests, possibly involving strikes or large-scale riots.

The People's Action Party has considerable resources for mass action, since it controls approximately 40 percent of Singapore's labor force and a growing number of Chinese students.

The consul general comments that the life of Lim's government is staked on the outcome of his antisubversion program.

The government arrests are a second step in Chief Minister Lim's program to challenge and defeat the People's Action Party, heretofore the most vigorous party in Singapore and probably the principal Communist instrument in the colony. Lim's first step was a demand for a vote of confidence from the Legislative Assembly on 6 September. He won a unanimous vote of confidence by basing it principally on plans for self-government, while insisting that the vote cover his entire program.

22 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 21 September)

Canada will sell arms to Israel, including 24 F-86 Sabre jet fighters, according to an announcement from the Canadian prime minister's office. An affirmative decision on an Israeli request of last spring was reached by the Canadian cabinet on 20 September.

Jordan's King Hussain remains preoccupied with the situation on the Israeli border, according to the American embassy in Amman. Hussain alleged that the two isolated police posts recently attacked by Israel had the assignment of preventing infiltration from Jordan into Israel. Since these posts had been wiped out by the Israelis, Jordan would be obliged to abandon similar posts which were not manned in sufficient strength to withstand Israeli attacks. This would, according to Hussain, defeat the control of border infiltration sought by Israel. The Israeli press, however, in commenting on the raids, charged that the Jordanian police posts had been used as bases by terrorist infiltrators from Jordan.

22 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
