[PAGE 01]
13 August 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. France suggests only moderate warning to Chinese on Southeast Asia (page 3).
2. Viet Minh claims to be fighting Chinese Nationalists in Indochina (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Israel determined to transfer Foreign Ministry to Jerusalem (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
6. West Germans hope for US intervention in Saar dispute (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. France suggests only moderate warning to Chinese on Southeast Asia:

According to a high French official in Saigon, his government is suggesting an American-British-French declaration on Southeast Asia setting forth a "readiness to assist powers determined to resist threats to their independence." He added that the British believe such a statement would be premature and that they prefer to wait until a decision is made on how to defend the region in case of a Chinese Communist attack.

Comment: Both the French and British have opposed a US-favored warning to Communist China of retaliation in case of a Chinese invasion of Southeast Asia. They fear such a threat might provoke an attack rather than prevent one.

2. Viet Minh claims to be fighting Chinese Nationalists in Indochina:

Ambassador Heath in Saigon notes that a recent Viet Minh broadcast on the situation near Laokay, in northwestern Tonkin, omitted reference to the presence of Chinese Communist troops there. Instead, it claimed that purely Viet Minh units were conducting a campaign against remnants of Chinese Nationalist troops who were cooperating with French-supported Meo guerrillas.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
The Ambassador comments that the broadcast's insistence on the presence of Nationalist troops may set the stage for an admission of Chinese Communist participation in the Indochina fighting.

Comment: The latest of several Chinese Communist incursions in the northwestern border area, as reported by the French, involved an estimated 5,000 to 6,000 troops who were aiding a Viet Minh regiment against the Meo tribesmen.

There are reported to be approximately 1,500 former Nationalist soldiers living as bandits in the mountainous area in the vicinity of Laokay.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
4. Israel determined to transfer Foreign Ministry to Jerusalem:

The Israeli Foreign Minister has indicated to the American Ambassador that Israel has no intention of abandoning the proposed transfer of its Foreign Ministry from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

The Foreign Minister doubted that there would be any advantage in renewing United Nations discussion on the status of Jerusalem. He dismissed Arab opposition to the move as inevitable.

Comment: On 9 July the United States, Britain, France, and Turkey delivered notes to the Israeli Foreign Minister expressing concern over the proposed transfer of the Israeli Foreign Ministry to Jerusalem until after the United Nations had been given an opportunity to reconsider the status of the city.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. West Germans hope for US intervention in Saar dispute:

According to West German Deputy Foreign Minister Hallstein, Chancellor Adenauer believes that American intervention is now necessary in the French-German negotiations on the Saar. Although Hallstein has dissuaded the Chancellor from requesting intervention at this time, he declares that it may be required later.

Hallstein states that the current negotiations are bogging down because neither side has a clear formula for "Europeanizing" the Saar.

Comment: American "good offices" will probably be invoked since West German diplomats feel that American participation in the talks would result in some moderation of French demands. Both sides, however, seem sincerely desirous of reaching a final settlement in the current talks.

American observers state that more progress could be made if Adenauer were to return from his vacation to take part in the negotiations.

- 6 -
