Vinogradov in Paris told Ambassador Dillon that the USSR was now prepared to accept free all-German elections subject to strict international control, provided only that foreign troops were withdrawn prior to the vote.

Vinogradov also said that it would be very difficult to reach any agreement on disarmament controls, since any really effective inspection might involve an unacceptable invasion of national "privacy rights." He said that, as an alternative, an agreement that no nation would make use of nuclear weapons would be satisfactory to the Soviet Union, which would be willing on this basis to move ahead with conventional disarmament along the lines of the 10 May Soviet proposal.

Comment: Vinogradov's statement may indicate that the USSR has decided to take the calculated risk of making a proposal for free all-German elections, attaching conditions likely to cause the West to reject it. The reference to troop withdrawal as the only condition for free elections does not mean that the USSR has abandoned its insistence on a neutralized Germany, which still remains a Soviet prerequisite to unification. The ambassador's statement may be intended only to test Western reaction to a package offer of neutrality and free elections and to encourage the hopes of neutralists that such a proposal will be made.

Should such a package offer actually be made, West German public opinion would very likely support the Adenauer government's opposition to this unity formula. Few West Germans would advocate the withdrawal of Allied forces from their country before a German army is in being. In the last two months press opinion reflects growing public awareness that neutrality is too high a price for German unity under present conditions.

Vinogradov's statement, as reported, reversed the sequence of disarmament measures as outlined by the 10 May Soviet proposal, which calls for measures designed to prohibit nuclear weapons to follow an agreement on armed force strength and conventional weapons. His remarks on controls again reflect the USSR's unwillingness to accept a far-reaching system such as that advocated by the West.
