I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Officials Removed on Charges of Nationalism
And Localism

The current wave of dismissals of leading Soviet functionaries on charges of nationalism and localism has spread into Latvia with the ouster of Deputy Premier Eduard Berklav. In an article published in Moscow on 24 August, republic Premier Vilis Latsis revealed that Berklav was fired last month for placing "national interests" above those of the Soviet state, openly attacking the party line on heavy industry, and demanding increased consumer-goods production for Latvia. Latsis hinted that other Latvian officials have been fired for "nationalist narrow-mindedness."

Various manifestations of nationalism and localism have led to major personnel shake-ups since last December in six Soviet republics and in several oblasts of the Russian federation (RSFSR). Most cases reflect problems which have grown out of Khrushchev's reorganization of industrial management and the increased authority accorded to local officials. In Latvia, Belorussia, Moldavia, and the RSFSR, the trouble has been caused chiefly by financial corruption and by the diversion of state funds and materials to local use. In Turkmenia and Uzbekistan, nationalism was evident in the continued promotion of local nationals over Russian cadres. In all cases, the shake-ups reflect Khrushchev's determination to fire any official whose performance threatens fulfillment of the Seven-Year Plan.

Pravda on 14 August published a long article by the head of the central committee's department of party organs for the RSFSR, warning that the party will call to account any functionary who tolerates localism. The author cited by name several provincial officials who have been removed or warned to put a stop to such practices, and berated the Soviet Control Commission for its failure to correct the situation. Four days after the article appeared, the chairman of the RSFSR Control Commission was removed from office.

26 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
