[PAGE 01]
24 September 1953  
Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence  
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST  
1. Presence of MIG's in North Korea confirmed (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA  
2. Burmese prime minister says Chinese Nationalist problem is undermining his government (page 3).  
3. Burmese UN delegate recommends further negotiations for evacuation of Chinese Nationalists (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA  
4. Pakistani army chief's American trip is not a policy mission (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA  
5. Iran seeks to improve press relations in Arab states (page 5).  
6. Egyptian vice premier sees hope for Anglo-Egyptian agreement (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE  
7.

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Presence of MIG's in North Korea confirmed:

Comment: This is the first clear indication that North Korean jet aircraft are now operating from North Korean airfields. Photo reconnaissance at the time of the armistice revealed that no jet aircraft were present on these fields, which are all within 75 miles of Pyongyang.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Burmese prime minister says Chinese Nationalist problem is undermining his government:

Prime Minister Nu told the American ambassador in Rangoon on 21 September that his government's stability was being undermined by popular indignation over the Chinese Nationalist problem. He and other cabinet members fear the government may have to accept the local Communists' demand to form a coalition government to lead a united effort against the Nationalists.

Nu said that, as a counter to Communist charges that the government was doing nothing to expel the Nationalists, almost the entire Burmese army was being redeployed against them. Operations against insurgent Communists and other rebellious groups would have to be left to the military police.

Comment: There are important elements in the Burmese government who are neither as level-headed nor as anti-Communist as Nu, and who might be susceptible to such Communist offers to help solve the Nationalist problem.

[PAGE 04]
3. Burmese UN delegate recommends further negotiations for evacuation of Chinese Nationalists:

Comment: There is considerable evidence that Burmese leaders in Rangoon believe that further talks patterned after the Bangkok discussions would be useless. The Burmese ambassador to Thailand, however, recently stated that his government is willing to participate in any negotiations which might prove fruitful and suggested that the matter be taken up among the interested parties in New York.

SOUTH ASIA

4. Pakistani army chief's American trip is not a policy mission:

The Pakistani prime minister on 22 September told the American charge in Karachi that General Ayub, Pakistani army commander in chief, has no policy mission to carry out for his government when he visits Washington on 28 September. The prime minister merely wishes Ayub to become acquainted with American officials and to exchange ideas with them.

Comment: On 13 September General Ayub had stated that he would discuss a bilateral military pact and had implied that Pakistan would make military bases available to the United States, thereby raising the question as to whether or not he was speaking for his government.

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iran seeks to improve press relations in Arab states:

Comment: Former prime minister Mossadeq was a symbol of successful resistance to Britain and colonialism, and the new Iranian regime has met increasing criticism in the Arab press.

The Arab attitude has probably been reinforced by activities of several Iranian diplomats who were dismissed by Prime Minister Zahedi and who are residing in these countries. The recent rumor that the Qashqai tribe was plotting to secure Mossadeq's release possibly originated with this disgruntled group.

6. Egyptian vice premier sees hope for Anglo-Egyptian agreement:

Egyptian vice premier Nasr has indicated that the latest British proposals on the Suez base, including a seven-year duration of the agreement, are "not too bad" and offer a basis for "serious talk."

[PAGE 06]
Nasr expressed some concern, however, over Britain's introduction of the issue of freedom of transit of the Suez Canal and of the use of Egyptian ports in the event of hostilities.

WESTERN EUROPE

7.
