Turkey's Military Regime Losing Popular Support

The Committee of National Union (CNU) is being widely criticized in Turkey and faces the prospect of increasing organized resistance. Popular criticism currently ranges from expressions of general disenchantment to organized conspiracy. (The most recent plot, reported to include retired army officers, air force noncommissioned officers, and civilians, led to several arrests and prompted special security measures throughout the military establishment.

Discontent has also apparently increased among the peasants and in intellectual circles, contributing to the general atmosphere of uneasiness. There is no indication to date that the regime's conduct of the mass political trial of former Menderes government officials has succeeded in dispelling any of Menderes' popularity. In fact, the CNU's attempt to propagandize the trial has caused more damage to the prestige of the interim regime than to that of its predecessor. Nearly 50 of the accused face possible death sentences, and concern over the fate of ex-Premier Menderes is common to most expressions of discontent. General Gursel and Foreign Minister Sarper, fully aware of the foreign as well as domestic impact of political executions, are working discreetly to avoid death sentences. The final decision will rest with a majority vote of the entire membership of the CNU, among which there appears to be considerable support for the proposed executions.

The CNU is also being strongly criticized for the recent dismissal of nearly 150 faculty members from Turkey's five universities. The dismissals were followed by numerous faculty resignations and student boycotts in protest of the government's action. In the face of the strong protest, the CNU is apparently reconsidering its action.

If the regime continues to lose prestige, support for the CNU may also diminish among the military, enhancing the possibility of further instability. As long as the bulk of the army remains loyal, however, the CNU should be able to maintain control, although force and further repression may be necessary.

3 Nov 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
