[PAGE 01]
25 April 1959
Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran-USSR: (The Iranian ambassador in Moscow told Ambassador Thompson on 23 April that he had protested against Soviet overflights and that he will soon present the Iranian reply to the Soviet memorandum of last December which warned Iran of the "serious deterioration" of Soviet-Iranian relations. He states further that continued propaganda attacks against the Shah could lead Iran to break diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. Some Soviet overflights of Iranian territory undoubtedly occur, but the large number of violations reported recently by the Iranians is believed exaggerated.)

[PAGE 04]
Morocco: (Rabat apparently will soon resume formal negotiations--suspended since last fall--regarding the five American air bases located in Morocco. The government is almost certain to press the United States to take further steps toward the evacuation of the bases. Premier Ibrahim, under mounting pressure to eliminate all foreign troops from Morocco, has already raised with Madrid the question of withdrawing the 10,500 Spanish troops from northern Morocco, and King Mohamed V has asked that an agreement on the 28,000 French troops be reached during his projected meeting with De Gaulle)

[PAGE 05]
Britain-Iraq: (The British cabinet has decided to sell Iraq Centurion tanks, Canberra bombers, heavy weapons, and other arms. In informing Premier Qasim of this decision, Ambassador Trevelyan will stress British expectations that Iraq will remain free of Communist control, keep oil flowing to Europe, and improve trade ties with Britain. If Qasim reacts favorably, it is planned to deliver some equipment this year. London points out that its decision can be reversed before delivery of heavy weapons begins in 1960.)

Afro-Asian Economic Conference: A planning committee of the Afro-Asian Economic Conference, whose temporary headquarters is in Cairo, is meeting in Indonesia to study the terms of a permanent constitution for that body. Two problems which are to be resolved by the committee are whether the USSR should be made a member of the conference, and where the permanent headquarters of the conference should be. A draft constitution reportedly forwarded from Cairo envisages Soviet membership and a Cairo headquarters. There is strong opposition to Soviet participation, however, and several nations feel the headquarters should be in South or Southeast Asia. (Page 5)

Burma: The Burmese Army is attempting to exploit the Tibetan situation to stimulate sentiment against Communist China. The army is arranging for political and Buddhist groups to distribute throughout Burma 100,000 copies of a pamphlet on Tibet on an unattributed basis. Fear of China as well as the desire for a border settlement with Peiping prevent Prime Minister Ne Win from adopting an openly anti-Communist foreign policy.

[PAGE 06]
Britain: (Macmillan's decision not to call general elections this spring will tend to increase pressures on his government to promote compromises in coming East-West negotiations. The elections, mandatory by May 1960, are now most likely to be called in October. The American Embassy has noted that holding elections soon after summit talks would place Macmillan under maximum pressure to secure agreement there in view of the expected closeness of the electoral contest.)

[PAGE 07]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
Morocco Appears Ready to Resume Negotiations on American Air Bases

(The Ibrahim government appears ready to resume formal negotiations regarding the status of the five American air bases in Morocco. Discussions were initiated in May 1955 and suspended last fall. Premier Ibrahim, who unexpectedly brought up the subject with Ambassador Yost on 18 April, seems certain to press the United States to take further steps toward evacuating the bases.)

(Ibrahim is under mounting political pressure to obtain the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Morocco. Earlier this month he raised with Madrid the question of withdrawing the 10,500 Spanish troops from northern Morocco. King Mohamed V has indicated he desires to conclude an agreement on the 28,000 French troops in Morocco during his projected meeting with De Gaulle which may take place in mid-June)

[PAGE 09]
Consultative Committee of Afro-Asian Economic Conference
Meets in Indonesia

An eleven-member consultative committee appointed by the Afro-Asian Economic Conference in Cairo last December is meeting in Indonesia from 25 to 30 April to study the terms of a constitution for a permanent Afro-Asian Organization for Economic Cooperation and to decide on a site for its headquarters. Japan, Communist China, Indonesia, India, Pakistan, Iraq, the UAR, Libya, Sudan, Ethiopia, and Ghana are represented on the committee.

The committee's major constitutional problem is to decide whether to admit the USSR as a full member of the new organization. An Indonesian, who was a key figure in the conference in Cairo, says he has received a draft constitution from Cairo which provides for Soviet membership and for an organization headquarters in Cairo. The draft also provides for a powerful secretary general and a significant reduction in the influence of member delegations--an arrangement which would give the UAR a strong hand if the headquarters were to be established in Cairo.

Several nations at the Cairo Conference in December opposed Soviet membership, and Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Japan will probably oppose it again. Ethiopia and Libya may also oppose. The UAR, Iraq, Sudan, Communist China, and possibly Ghana may favor Soviet participation. The vote at the consultative committee meeting will therefore presumably be close.

On the location of a permanent headquarters, the committee may also be widely divided. Indonesia apparently favors Bandung or Djakarta, though it would support Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, or New Delhi. Other nations opposing the UAR's previous attempts to dominate Afro-Asian meetings probably would also favor a shift from Cairo.

The 40-nation Afro-Asian Economic Conference held in Cairo last December was nongovernmental and supposedly nonpolitical in nature. The Egyptians, however, invited the USSR to be a member of the conference and asked delegations from several other Communist countries to be observers. Communist propaganda efforts

[PAGE 10]
at the conference were set back by a conflict over the legitimacy of the USSR's membership, and the resolutions produced were more moderate than originally anticipated. They were concerned mainly with economic collaboration among member countries, the effect of the European Common Market on the Afro-Asian world, means of resolving transfer-of-payments difficulties, and the establishment of a permanent Afro-Asian economic organization,

[PAGE 11]
Burmese Army Using Tibetan Revolt in Internal Anti-Communist
Propaganda Campaign

The psychological warfare section of the Burmese Army is exploiting the strong popular reaction to developments in Tibet in what will apparently be a continuing internal propaganda campaign aimed at discrediting the Chinese Communists as well as Burma's own Communists. The army is discreetly sponsoring distribution of 100,000 copies of a pamphlet on Tibet, as well as additional copies of a pamphlet prepared by the army itself purporting to describe the attitude of Burmese Communists toward religion. These tracts will be distributed by various Buddhist organizations and by local "solidarity committees," which the army has established throughout the country to mobilize popular support for the Ne Win government.

The army is also believed to have been responsible for a series of recent statements by prominent Buddhist clerical and lay leaders strongly denouncing Chinese Communist actions in Tibet and expressing sympathy for the Tibetan lamas. The army's deputy director for psychological warfare is reported, for example, to have been the actual drafter of a recent letter to the press signed by the president of a powerful organization of monks promising that protest meetings would be staged by the monks throughout the country and inviting the Dalai Lama to seek asylum in Burma.

This army campaign is a further manifestation of the strongly anti-Communist policy the Ne Win regime is pursuing internally. Despite their strong personal feelings, however, General Ne Win and his army advisers are apparently still unprepared to risk Chinese Communist pressure by officially denouncing Peiping's actions in Tibet or taking other overt actions to bring Burma's foreign policy more in line with its internal policy.

[PAGE 12]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 14]
