[PAGE 01]
23 December 1954

Copy No.
80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

ARMY and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. American embassy comments on possible split in Soviet leader-
ship (page 3).

FAR EAST
4. Peiping sidesteps discussing Burmese Communists with U Nu
(page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6. Iraqi prime minister stalling on Middle East defense (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
8. War-scare rumors reported in Prague and Bucharest (page 8).
9. Shipment of Soviet military equipment into East Germany reaches
new peak (page 8).

LATIN AMERICA
10. Forceful attempt to oust Costa Rican regime may be imminent
(page 9).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. American embassy comments on possible split in Soviet leader-
ship:

The American embassy in Moscow re-
ports substantial differences between
the party paper, Pravda, and the gov-
ernment paper, Izvestia, in their ex-
tensive coverage of the anniversary of Stalin's birthday. While
signed articles in both papers contained certain points in common,
Pravda repeatedly emphasized the need for growth of heavy indus-
try and touched on the people's welfare only incidentally. Izvestia
emphasized consumers' goods and the people's welfare, and men-
tioned heavy industry only in passing.

The embassy comments that the strik-
ing difference in press treatment would appear to reflect a possi-
ble division in the leadership over the exact course of action the
Soviet government should take when actually confronted with West
German rearmament. The embassy considers it logical that that
differences on this subject would result in debate over the priority
of heavy versus light industry as part of the central issue relating
to the effect which an increase in military production and expendi-
tures would have on domestic economic policy.

Comment: For the past 30 years policy
differences among the Soviet leaders have not been reflected in
the Soviet press. If this is now the case, it suggests that impend-
ing decisions with regard to Germany have caused serious differ-
ences among the top Soviet leaders, with the result that a unified
approach to the problem has not been arrived at.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
4. Peiping sidesteps discussing Burmese Communists with U Nu:

Burmese premier U Nu told newsmen in
Rangoon on 20 December that during his
conversations in Peiping, Chinese Com-
munist leaders professed ignorance of
the existence of three leaders of the insurgent Burma Communist
Party. U Nu stated that the Kachin renegade Naw Seng had also
been discussed, but he declined to reveal what was said.

Comment: This is the first indication
that despite apparent satisfaction with the general results of his
trip, U Nu was disappointed over the Chinese Communist posi-
tion on specific questions. His public reference to Peiping's pro-
fessed ignorance of the three Communist leaders may have been
intended to play down their importance and to have a possible ad-
verse effect on Burmese Communist morale.

Of the three individuals in question,
Thakin Than Tun is internationally known as the leading Commu-
nist in Burma; the other two are reported to have entered China
a year ago for training. Naw Seng has been in China for several
years, where he is reported to have organized under Communist
auspices a Kachin guerrilla force estimated to number about
1,500 men.
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Iraqi prime minister stalling on Middle East defense:

Iraq's prime minister Nuri Said told
Ambassador Gallman on 21 December
that he needed "clarification" on how
far the United States and Britain would
go beyond their NATO commitments before he could sign any
defense agreement with Turkey. He declared his ultimate hope
for a regional defense pact based on the collective security pro-
visions of the UN charter.
[PAGE 07]
Nuri said that he was not prepared to
sign any kind of defense agreement when Turkish prime minister
Menderes visits Baghdad on 6 January. He stated that Egypt's
opposition made it difficult for Iraq to sign a pact with Turkey
now unless it were joined by the United States and Britain. He
added that until there was a more stable internal situation in
Egypt, Syria, and Iran, it was difficult for him to deal with those
countries.

Gallman comments that Nuri is "obvi-
ously stalling" and that the conversation was "inconclusive."

Comment: Nuri's current statements,
contradicting his previous ones reported by Gallman on 7 Decem-
ber, are in line with his usual maneuvering and bargaining. He
apparently hopes to obtain the same kind of assistance and guaran-
tees accorded Turkey and Pakistan.
[PAGE 08]
EASTERN EUROPE

8. War-scare rumors reported in Prague and Bucharest:

War-scare rumors are reported to be
current in two East European Satellite
capitals. Western diplomatic sources
in Czechoslovakia and Rumania have
been informed there are rumors of
imminent call-ups of Satellite reserves,
movement of Soviet troops, and in-
creased civil defense precautions. However, these sources have
seen no evidence to support the rumors.

9. Shipment of Soviet military equipment into East Germany reaches
new peak:

Rail shipment tabulations made by Head-
quarters, US Army, Europe, indicate
that the total number of Soviet military
cargo vehicles arriving in East Germany
from January 1954 through November is larger than the total for
any previous full year since World War II. Incomplete totals in-
dicate the arrival of 16,500 cargo vehicles, as compared with the
return to the USSR of only 6,000 worn-out vehicles. In addition,
500 tanks, substantial numbers of armored scout cars and per-
sonnel carriers, and artillery have arrived, with relatively small
outgoing shipments reported.

US Army, Europe, believes this year's
replacement and maintenance program is intended to modernize
[PAGE 09]
and augment the equipment strength of Soviet forces in Germany,
substantially increasing their mobility and firepower.

Comment: The very large excess of
arrivals over departures may indicate a build-up in the motor
transport holdings of Soviet units or stockpiling of vehicles. It
is known that some new trucks have been turned over to the East
German armed forces.

LATIN AMERICA

10. Forceful attempt to oust Costa Rican regime may be imminent:

"Internal trouble" in Costa Rica is
nearing, according to Nicaraguan pres-
ident Somoza. The expected outbreak,
he told Ambassador Whelan on 19 Decem-
ber, will be a purely domestic affair, and there will be no inva-
sion and no "overt" acts by Nicaragua or any other country.

Regarding Nicaragua's dispute with
Costa Rica, Somoza said he would demand Costa Rican presi-
dent Figueres' resignation and abstention from politics as the
price of a settlement.
