Political Tensions in Italy

The Christian Democrats are now negotiating for new local allies because the 6-7 November local elections in many cities, including Rome, Milan, Genoa, Turin, Venice, and Florence, failed to give a majority to either the coalition supporting the national government--Christian Democrats, Social Democrats, Republicans, and Liberals--or to the Nenni Socialists and Communists. The Christian Democratic party is pledged not to form municipal governments with the Communists or neo-Fascists, and one to the other of its various factions opposes any nationwide collaboration with the Nenni Socialists or with the Monarchists, who have too few city council seats to offer important municipal solutions on a large scale.

Christian Democratic party leaders are anxious to play down the significance of local commitments to the Nenni Socialists because of the implications such commitments would have for the national government. Apprehension on the part of the Liberal party lest the national government rely on Nenni Socialist parliamentary support led to the collapse of the Segni government in February 1960. The extent of Christian Democratic collaboration with the Socialists in municipal councils may therefore determine the life of the Fanfani coalition.

Nenni is stressing the significance of local agreements, however, in order to convince his own party's left wing that his policy of independence of the Communists is paying off. Nenni and his supporters fear that failure to achieve alliances with the Christian Democrats in the important cities would hurt him vis-a-vis the Socialist left wing at the March party congress. He has been pressing for collaboration in the Sicilian regional government with the Christian Democrats, who now participate with the neo-Fascists and Monarchists.

Meanwhile the Communists are attempting to draw the Socialists back into united action by exploiting a series of strikes in the railway and industrial sectors. Additional strikes are threatened by teachers, newsmen, and shopkeepers. The strikes are based on economic issues, and not only the Communist-dominated CGIL but the largely Christian Democratic and Social Democratic unions have participated in most of them.
