Saudi Arabia: Crown Prince Faysal's health has continued to deteriorate, and he will probably go abroad before the middle of May for several months for medical treatment. King Saud, who is already preparing moves to regain domination over the government, has proposed a clandestine meeting with the American ambassador, presumably "to seek some type of US support for his plans. The removal of Faysal, whether through illness or by action of the King, would quickly and sharply reduce Saudi Arabian political and economic stability." (Page 3)

Rhodesia and Nyasaland: The political future of the white-dominated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland appears "extremely bleak," in the opinion of well-informed British Labor party officials following discussions with Nyasaland African leader Hastings Banda. Banda, just recently released from prison, appears determined to take Nyasaland out of the federation, and this will probably be an issue at the constitutional discussions scheduled for London in July. Meanwhile, the white prime minister of Southern Rhodesia, who will be in London later this month, has stated publicly that he is "not prepared to take no for an answer" in his efforts to secure the removal of British restrictions on Southern Rhodesia's power to enact racial legislation. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Venezuela: President Betancourt, who may be under pressure from certain elements in the armed forces to make changes in the government, has shown considerable concern over numerous reports of plotting by dissident military groups, and his coalition regime is taking extensive security precautions. The uneasy atmosphere in Caracas on the eve of the 19 April national holiday is intensified by depressed economic conditions and dissension within the coalition. Betancourt, who is believed to have the loyalty of most top military leaders, is probably capable of controlling the situation for the present, but a period of rising tension is likely. (Page 5)

16 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
