CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 March 1958
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Unidentified submarine contacts: During the Period 12-19 March, unidentified submarine contacts off the US east coast dropped sharply from the high level that had been maintained since mid-February. At present only three contacts, all evaluated as possible submarines, are under investigation in the Atlantic. During the same period, however, two new contacts were reported off the west coast. One of these, a visual sighting 75 miles northwest of San Francisco, has been tentatively evaluated as a positive submarine. (Page 1)

Soviet leadership: Two recent speeches by party presidium member Suslov tend to support earlier reports of his opposition to Khrushchev's machine tractor station (MTS) reorganization plan. In his election speech, Suslov, in contrast with the other leaders, mentioned the MTS plan only perfunctorily and appeared to go out of his way to avoid citing Khrushchev. (Page 3)

Syria--more bloc arms: A Soviet shipment of 70,000 submachine guns, now being readied for delivery to Syria, would supplement 75,000 submachine guns and 40,000 rifles previously ordered from bloc sources. The new weapons are probably scheduled to be used for stepped-up training of reserve forces and quasi-military units which are to be integrated with the Egyptian National Guard. If stocks of older Syrian light arms become available as a result of standardization on the new Soviet bloc weapons, they could be used for support of the North African rebellion or of pro-UAR elements among Syria's Arab neighbors. (Page 4)

Yemen--more Soviet aid: The Imam of Yemen is seeking further economic and military aid from the USSR. In a message on 11 March the Imam told Crown Prince Badr, then in Damascus, that he should make another trip to Moscow to discuss obtaining additional aid. Badr has indicated to the Egyptians that a further Soviet loan would be used to purchase arms and petroleum products. (Page 5)

France: The Socialist party leadership has decided on a gradual shift in its Algerian policy from support of Lacoste's pacification program to one of considerably more autonomy than is now provided for in the Algerian basic statute. When this shift become evident, the rightists, who have recently been gaining some support from center groups for their tough attitude toward North Africa, will either have to back down or precipitate Gaillard's overthrow. (Page 7)

Colombia: Replacement of moderate Conservative Leon Valencia as the agreed Liberal-Conservative choice for president is virtually certain as a result of the congressional elections of 16 March. Returns about three-quarters complete show that while the Liberal party polled a sizable majority of the popular vote, control of the Conservative party has been captured by rightist elements strongly opposed to Valencia and his candidacy. (Page 8)

20 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iii
