I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Seeks to Reassure West on Continuation of Allied Rights in Berlin

In a recent private conversation with the West German ambassador in Moscow, Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin made more explicit the hints contained in Gromyko's public statement on 28 June that Allied rights in West Berlin under an interim agreement would not be challenged at the end of a time limit on negotiations by the Soviet-proposed all-German committee. Zorin stated that the foreign ministers would again meet to review the West Berlin problem at the end of the time period and that Allied rights would be the same as they were at the beginning of the period. He also told the ambassador that the USSR would be prepared to accept a compromise time period of two years. According to press reports from London, Gromyko has also assured the British ambassador that Western rights would be maintained during a Big Four foreign ministers' review of the situation following the expiration of the time limit on all-German talks.

Zorin remarked to the West German ambassador that a separate peace treaty with East Germany would be a very serious step and that the USSR would resort to this alternative only after all attempts to reach a negotiated settlement had failed. He also indicated that Gromyko will attempt to reopen discussions in Geneva of the USSR's proposals on a peace treaty with both German states and European security measures.

These Soviet moves to reassure the Western powers that the USSR will continue to respect their rights in Berlin during an indefinite period of East-West negotiations following a failure of the all-German committee to reach agreement reflect the Soviet leaders' desire to obtain new arrangements on Berlin which, in their view, would supersede the postwar agreements on which existing Allied rights are based. Ambassador Thompson believes acceptance of the Soviet proposal would mean virtually the end to the occupation status. In his efforts to induce the West to agree to the creation of an all-German committee, Gromyko probably will offer to extend the time limit on its negotiations to two years or more. He may also make "concessions" on such issues as the level of Western "token" forces in West Berlin and on the inclusion of East Berlin in a city-wide prohibition on subversive activities and nuclear weapons and missiles.

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
