Algeria: The Algerian rebel government, fearing Western reactions to the presence of Chinese personnel in North Africa, reportedly discussed ways of accepting Chinese Communist material help without any accompanying technicians or advisers during its 4-10 November meeting in Tunis.
The rebels reportedly are preparing to step up military operations.
They have formed new units in Tunisia, and a group of Algerians trained in China have reportedly arrived to train these units in the use of Chinese arms.
The rebels may also be planning to raise an African volunteer regiment in Guinea.
(Page 3)

Laos: Radio Vientiane announced on 17 November that agreement had been reached between the government and the Pathet Lao on the dispatch of a government good-will mission to Hanoi and Peiping, the establishment of postal relations with Hanoi, and the establishment of "friendly relations" with Peiping.
Fulfillment of this agreement would carry Laos further along the road to closer ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc than Premier Souvanna Phouma had previously indicated he was prepared to go.
It may reflect his lessening ability to resist pressures from the extreme left in the face of the erosion of his support from the right, as most recently evidenced by General Ouane's apparent defection to General Phoumi's Savannakhet group.
There is some possibility, however, that Souvanna himself proposed these steps as a means of eliciting stronger bloc diplomatic and propaganda support in his struggle to remain in office.
(Page 4)

Burma: Conflict among Burma's top military leadership over the army's political role appears to be deepening.
Chief of Staff General Ne Win, who persuaded the army to accept the return of civilian government last February, continues to insist that the army avoid any action offensive to civilian political leaders or to Communist China.
His close adviser, Brigadier Maung Maung, is protesting that this is creating an "impossible situation" and that

18 Nov 60 DAILY BRIEF
