Argentine Army

Argentine Army Commander in Chief General Carlos Toranzo Montero, key figure in the mid-October crisis prompted by army complaints over President Frondizi's advisers and policies, intends to renew pressure soon for specific action on these complaints.
Toranzo Montero may attempt a coup, if, as he expects, Frondizi rejects such demands as the removal of Economy Minister Alsogaray and the imposition of federal control over several provinces.
Alsogaray told US Ambassador Rubottom a week ago that the general's attitude "was becoming intolerable and a showdown was expected within two weeks, barring any blunder that might cause it sooner."
The embassy has later information indicating that the army will renew its demands after the departure on 20 November of 27 US governors now visiting Argentina.

Toranzo Montero's prestige has dropped sharply since the October crisis because the majority of the army wanted merely to pressure Frondizi, not upset constitutional government as was threatened by Toranzo Montero's actions.
he no longer has the ability or support to survive the difficulties which would be certain to follow a coup.
While three important army commanders and the commander of the ocean fleet are reportedly behind Toranzo Montero, less than 30 percent of the army supports him fully.
The US naval attache reported on 7 November that a group of admirals has decided that the navy would definitely resist any army coup "with all means available," and that they felt the army would have little spirit to continue a coup when faced by the navy.
Toranzo Montero, who considers himself "destined to save the nation," apparently does not anticipate such a navy reaction and counts on reluctance within the army to oppose his plans with force.

Unrest in the army is widespread.
Many officers are convinced that the government is permitting graft and even facilitating profiteering, especially in the petroleum industry, to obtain funds for the presidential election in 1964.
Even officers who oppose a coup believe this situation exists and that only army pressure will force Frondizi to change it.
These officers will probably try to dissuade Toranzo Montero from upsetting constitutional government.
