[PAGE 01]
20 August 1960
Copy No. C

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
20 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR may attempt to recover new earth
satellite in next few days.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Congo-- Lumumba says he is prepared
to "renounce" services of UN troops.

III. THE WEST
Adenauer concerned over De Gaulle's
plans for European confederation and
revamping of NATO.

LATE ITEMS
Situation in Laos.
Rift in Mali Federation.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Sputnik V was launched from Tyura Tam about
0445 EDT 19 August 1960.

According to the TASS announcement, the space ship weights
approximately 10,000 pounds and carries experimental animals
including two dogs. Also according to TASS, the satellite is in near
circular orbit at an altitude of about 200 miles.

Sputnik V's orbit is nearly identical with that of Sputnik IV,
launched on 15 May. A comparison of announced and derived
characteristics of Sputnik V with those of Sputnik IV indicates
a similar configuration.

The only differences thus far
noted are the inclusion of animals and of radio television
apparatus for reporting their behavior.

It is considered likely that an attempt will be made to recover
the payload intact within the next few days, although no
specific announcement re[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]-

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Republic of the Congo: Lumumba's 19 August statement
that he is prepared to "renounce" the services of the UN troops
in the Congo is his strongest implication to date that he may de-
mand a complete UN withdrawal. Although Lumumba hinted that
he had commitments of "unselfish" aid from unnamed countries,
he did not repeat his earlier threat to take unilateral action
against Katanga unless given satisfaction by the UN Security
Council by 24 August.

Ambassador Timberlake has reported that anti-Lumumba
elements in the Congo might attempt to overthrow the govern-
ment by assassinating Lumumba or by attempting a coup. The
[PAGE 05]
constitution requires that a motion in the Senate for a vote of
no confidence be followed by a 48-hour waiting period. This
would allow time for Lumumba to take what steps he felt neces-
sary to prevent a quorum. (Page 1)

III. THE WEST

West Germany - France: West German Foreign Minister
Brentano has told US Ambassador Dowling that Adenauer and
he are seriously concerned regarding the plans of De Gaulle for
a European confederation and revamping of NATO which are
"quite opposed" to the views still held by Bonn. Although Ade-
nauer feels he cannot directly oppose De Gaulle, he hopes to
wear him down by demonstrating the impracticality of De Gaulle's
plans. Brentano said Adenauer and De Gaulle do agree that the
powers of the Common Market's executive should be reduced in
favor of the council of the six national foreign ministers, but
Dowling believes this "seeming retreat from integration" by Ade-
nauer is only a tactical move. (Page 3)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]NOTE:

In the brief on Iran in the[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] Central Intelligence Bulletin [[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]for
19 August, the first sentence should read:

General Timur Bakhtiar, chief of the Iranian National and
Security Organization (SAVAK), believes Iran is headed for revolu-
tion as a result of the election policies followed by the Shah and
Prime Minister Eqbal, and that the Shah will lose courage and
flee when he realizes the situation has gone out of control[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

20 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEMS

*[[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]Laos: King Savang is reported hopeful that a negotiated
settlement can be worked out between Souvanna Phouma and
General Phoumi as a way toward a bloodless solution which
would preserve his neutrality in the situation. Souvanna's first
attempt to enter into negotiations with Phoumi has ended in
failure, however. Troop movements in preparation for Phoumi's
scheme to encircle Vientiane are continuing;

it will
take ten days for Phoumi's planned force of 5,000 to reach the
capital. Meanwhile, Captain Kong Le, leader of the Vientiane
rebels,

if the new Souvanna government did not conform to his ideals, he would have
to remove it[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]. (Page 5)

*Mali Federation: The newly independent Mali Federation--
comprising the states of Senegal and Soudan--appears to have
broken apart as a result of the vote of the National Assembly of
Senegal on 19 August to withdraw from the federation and proclaim
the independence of Senegal. Senegal's action raises the imminent
threat of civil war, because Mali President Modibo Keita recently
warned that secession was unconstitutional and would lead to blood-
shed. The main differences concern foreign policy and the alloca-
tion of top administrative posts. (Page 7)

20 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
The Situation in the Congo

Lumumba's statement on 19 August that he is prepared to
"renounce" the services of UN troops in the Congo is his
strongest implication to date that he may demand a complete
withdrawal of UN forces. Lumumba charged that Hammarskjold
had "betrayed the United Nations," alleging that the incident on
18 August in which Canadian officers were assaulted by Congo-
lese police had been "blown out of proportion" by Hammarskjold
in order to influence the forthcoming Security Council debate.
Although Lumumba hinted that he had commitments of "unselfish"
aid from certain countries, he did not repeat his earlier threat
to take unilateral action against Katanga if the Security Council
did not act by 24 August.

The Security Council is expected to begin debate on the UN
role in the Congo on 21 August. An Indian delegate estimated on
18 August that African delegations will support the secretary gen-
eral. Since then the incident involving the Canadians has stimu-
lated criticism of Lumumba from a number of African contingents
in the Congo. This will probably operate to Hammarskjold's ad-
vantage in the UN debate.

Ambassador Timberlake has reported that anti-Lumumba
elements in the Congo might attempt to overthrow the government
by assassinating Lumumba or by attempting a coup. If an attempt
were made to oust the government by a vote of no confidence, the
compulsory 48-hour waiting period would give Lumumba time to
take strong-arm action to prevent a quorum. No single leader of
anti-Lumumba forces has emerged, although the Senate was a focal
point of anti-Lumumba sentiment in the early weeks following in-
dependence.

While current negotiations in Geneva between Belgium and
the Congo on the division of assets of the Central Congo Bank and
the protection of Ruanda-Urundi interests are reportedly going
well, Belgians fear that Lumumba will refuse to implement the
[PAGE 08]
agreements reached there. Belgium probably will transfer ex-
change control powers to the Congo Government in Leopoldville
this week, and the Congo finance minister probably will then is-
sue a decree blocking all foreign currency transactions. It will
then be impossible for the Belgian Government to pay Belgian
technicians in the Congo outside Katanga, and most of them would
leave rather than accept their salaries in nontransferable currency.
This could result in greater confusion, as it is doubtful that the UN
will be able to replace them effectively for some time to come.
[PAGE 09]
Adenauer's Differences With De Gaulle Over European
Integration and NATO

In a conversation with US Ambassador Dowling on 16 Au-
gust, West German Foreign Minister Brentano declared that
Chancellor Adenauer and he are "seriously concerned" over
French President de Gaulle's plans for a European confedera-
tion and a revamping of NATO--plans which are "quite opposed"
to the views still held by Bonn.

Brentano said De Gaulle seems even more set in his views
than two years ago, and implied it was the chancellor's strategy
to attempt to "wear De Gaulle down" by demonstrating the im-
practicality of his plans. Adenauer has accordingly written a
personal letter to De Gaulle and has sent Deputy Foreign Min-
ister van Scherpenberg to Paris to make clear that Bonn re-
mains dedicated to the realization of European integration.

While Brentano said that Adenauer and De Gaulle are substan-
tially agreed on reducing the supranational powers of the Com-
mon Market's executive commission, Dowling believes this
"seeming retreat from integration" is only tactical and is at-
tributable in part to electoral pressures on the chancellor.

Despite the fact that this tactical shift would seem to have
brought Adenauer closer to De Gaulle's opposition to suprana-
tional institutions, Brentano's remarks tend to confirm earlier
impressions that Bonn is not yet prepared to accept as an al-
ternative a loose, French-dominated confederation with anti-
British and possibly anti-NATO overtones. This reserve would
account for Adenauer's friendly offer during Macmillan's visit
to Bonn on 10-11 August to work out a long-range solution to
the split between the Common Market and the British-led Outer
Seven.

De Gaulle's plans, still not fully known, reportedly involve
the creation of a council of heads of government of the six
Common Market countries and three ministerial committees to
coordinate political, defense, and cultural policies. No such
[PAGE 10]
committee would be set up for economic affairs, which would
be left in the institutional framework of the Common Market.
This new structure would presumably be the basis for De Gaulle's
proposed "revitalization" of NATO, which, according to Van
Scherpenberg, De Gaulle wants to replace with an "alliance" of
the US speaking for itself, Britain speaking for the Common-
wealth, and France representing the Common Market.
[PAGE 11]
Situation in Laos

King Savang, while opposed to the Souvanna Phouma govern-
ment, is reported anxious to appear neutral in order to avoid
jeopardizing his crown and hopeful for a bloodless solution through
negotiations between Souvanna and General Phoumi, leader of the
countercoup forces. The King is understood to expect that Captain
Kong Le and his supporters will be punished, once order is re-
stored.

Souvanna's first effort to enter into negotiations has ended in
failure. Phoumi placed Souvanna's three emissaries under house
arrest after an inconclusive meeting on 18 August. The emissaries
are said to have had no authority or terms for a settlement, bringing
only a request that Phoumi return to Vientiane.

Troop movements in furtherance of Phoumi's plan to encircle
Vientiane are continuing. A second battalion has been brought up
from Pakse to Savannakhet to join the one which arrived earlier
in the week. Another battalion is reported moving toward the
Savannakhet area, while in northern Laos the movement of more
troops toward Vientiane is said to have begun. Phoumi claims he
will move his forces to Vientiane by road if no air transport be-
comes available.

the overland movement of the general's troops to
Vientiane will take about ten days.

Captain Kong Le
the purposes of his coup were to stop Lao from
fighting Lao and to install a government which would do something
other than remain in Vientiane and get rich through corruption
while there was fighting in the countryside. He added that for the
present he was "just observing," but that if the new government did
not live up to his ideals he would have to remove it.

Kong Le was clear-headed and alert and had the qualities of an ex-
cellent soldier, but that he was incredibly naive politically.
[PAGE 12]
Hanoi seems to want to avoid giving any impression that
overt North Vietnamese intervention is likely under present
circumstances. A recent Hanoi broadcast emphasized the
internal nature of the "struggle" and pointedly stated that a
countercoup would be opposed "exclusively" by Laotians.
On 18 August, North Vietnam expressed its "satisfaction"
with the Souvanna government and called for "friendly re-
lations in all fields."
[PAGE 13]
Situation in Mali Federation

The newly independent Federation of Mali, beset with growing
friction between its component states of Senegal and Soudan, ap-
pears to be in the throes of dissolution and perhaps on the threshold
of civil war. On 19 August the Senegalese National Assembly voted
to withdraw from the federation and proclaim Senegal's independence.
The immediate causes of the friction are differences over the allo-
cation of top administrative posts. However, underlying cultural
dissimilarities and opposing attitudes on foreign policy have led to
growing suspicion and mistrust. Senegalese leaders such as Leo-
pold Senghor and Mamadou Dia have urged a moderate, generally
pro-French course of action, while the Soudanese, under the leader-
ship of Modibo Keita, have favored a more extreme nationalist
viewpoint.

Civil war may be imminent, in view of previous warnings by
Modibo Keita, president of the Mali Council of Ministers, that
there was no constitutional provision for secession and that any
such effort would result in bloodshed. Keita has declared a state
of emergency, and the cabinet has granted him security powers.
He reportedly has moved troops into positions around government
buildings in the federation's capital of Dakar and has discharged
Senegalese Premier Mamadou Dia from his office as Mali vice
president. In a speech to the Senegalese assembly, Dia accused
Keita of attempting a coup and called on his countrymen to mobilize.

The landlocked Soudan is economically dependent on Senegal,
although the Soudanese comprise 60 percent of Mali's population of
6,500,000. If the federal ties are severed, the Soudanese leaders may
consider closer relations with neighboring Guinea, with which
considerable political rapport has existed in the past.

Dissolution of the federation poses several problems for
France. Mali is an independent member of the French Community,
and Paris has both military and economic agreements with the
[PAGE 14]
federation, including defense installations at the modern port
of Dakar. Furthermore, the influential French minority of
about 50,000 at Dakar might become involved if civil war breaks
out. A rupture of the federation may create international
problems over recognition similar to those prevailing between
the Congo and Katanga Province. The UN Security Council ap-
proved Mali's bid for membership soon after that state gained
independence in mid-June.
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
