[PAGE 01]
9 July 1960
Copy No. C 73

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev probably attempting to maneuver Bonn into foregoing West Berlin Bundestag session this fall under threat of new crisis.

Soviet support for East German efforts to assert control over Allied missions suggested by stiff reply to British protest.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Yemen--Bloc personnel attempting to gain favor with Imam while undermining his regime; Imam's prestige lowered by internal difficulties.

LATE ITEM

Disturbances in Republic of Congo.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Khrushchev's warning that the USSR might use a meeting of the West German Bundestag in West Berlin this fall as a pretext for signing a separate peace treaty with East Germany was probably intended to force Bonn either to forego this meeting, which has been held annually in recent years, or assume responsibility for provoking a new and dangerous Berlin crisis. Khrushchev's move probably is also intended to serve notice to the West that his conditional commitment to maintain the status quo in Berlin until another summit meeting can be held in six to eight months does not imply any retreat from the USSR's objective of achieving a change in the city's status.

Although Chancellor Adenauer and other top leaders of his Christian Democratic party were in agreement in late June that they were not inclined to risk Soviet retaliation, they may view Khrushchev's warning as a formal challenge requiring a reappraisal. (Page 1)

East Germany: A stiff Soviet note handed on 4 July to the British commander in chief in West Germany, together with three new incidents on 4 and 5 July involving harassment of British mission personnel by East German police, suggests Moscow is supporting the Ulbricht regime's efforts to assert control over the Allied missions. In the note--a formal reply to a British protest concerning an earlier East German assault on mission members--the Soviet commander in chief accused the British of provoking incidents and stated that he could prevent further trouble only if the mission "strictly observes the laws and regulations of the German Democratic Republic." This contrasted with the apparently conciliatory tone of his earlier verbal answer. As a result of the continued harassment, the British commander in chief has temporarily suspended all travel by the mission. (Page 2)

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Yemen: Although the Imam has recently suppressed a tribal rebellion in Yemen, the internal situation remains disturbed. Financial difficulties and general unrest among the populace have lowered the Imam's prestige at a time when he is working especially hard to ensure the succession of his son, Crown Prince Badr. Communist bloc personnel are endeavoring to expand their economic and cultural activities in order to gain favor with the Imam. At the same time, they are undermining the medieval regime by implanting new ideas. Pro-Western Yemeni officials are urging that a "swift and adequate" aid program by the United States be instituted to halt the expansion of Communist prestige. (Page 3)

LATE ITEM

Congo: The total breakdown of authority in Leopoldville Province from 6 to 8 July could foreshadow the disintegration of the newly-independent Congo. The American consulate in Elisabethville has characterized separatist elements there as awaiting only the propitious moment to secede from the Congo. The anti-European disorders of 8 July, led by mutineers from the Force Publique, continued unchecked for most of the day, and at one time held the American embassy under siege. Two companies of infantry are being flown from Brussels to reinforce Belgian Army troops at bases in the Congo. A degree of order appears to have been restored by the evening of 8 July, but further disorders are possible and the Lumumba government appears fearful of a coup d'etat.

[PAGE 06]
Khrushchev Warns West German Action May Create New Berlin Crisis

Khrushchev used his final press conference in Vienna on 8 July to threaten unilateral action on a separate peace treaty with East Germany if Bonn holds its annual meeting of the Bundestag in West Berlin this fall. Using ambiguous terms as he did in earlier private talks with Austrian officials, the Soviet premier warned that "we will consider whether it would be possible to sign a peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic at the same time as the Bundestag holds its sessions."

Khrushchev's primary aim probably is to force Bonn either to back down from the established practice of meeting once a year in Berlin or to accept responsibility for provoking a new and dangerous Berlin crisis. Moscow may have been encouraged to tie its new threat to the Bundestag action by the belief that the three Western powers and Bonn would be divided on the issue as was the case in June 1959. Khrushchev may also be using the new threat to dispel Western speculation that he is seeking a way out of his commitment to change the status of Berlin and to make it clear that his commitment to maintain the status quo is conditional on Western willingness to refrain from "provocative" actions.

Although Chancellor Adenauer and other top leaders of his Christian Democratic party were in agreement in late June that they were not inclined to risk Soviet retaliation, they may view Khrushchev's warning as a challenge requiring a reappraisal. West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt is expected to view a cancellation of the Bundestag session as an unnecessary concession harmful to the city's morale.

[PAGE 07]
East German Police Step Up Harassment of British Military Liaison Mission

Recent developments suggest that Moscow is supporting East Germany's intensified pressure on the Allied Military Liaison Missions (MLM) accredited to Colonel General Yakubovsky, commander in chief of the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany. On 4 July, the British commander in chief in West Germany was handed Yakubovsky's formal answer to the British note of 24 June which had strongly protested the assault by East German secret police on Brigadier Packard and other members of the British mission. In contrast with his apparently conciliatory remarks on receiving the British note, Yakubovsky in his note accused the British of carrying out "activities which, under the present circumstances, could lead to undesirable consequences," and undertook to guarantee safety of mission personnel only "so long as the members of the mission strictly observe the laws and regulations of the German Democratic Republic."

Meanwhile, East German police have intensified their harassment of the British mission, which they appear to have selected as a special target, using "traffic violations" as a pretext. On 4 July, the East Germans attempted to force MLM members into an East German police car. On 5 July, a mission car was stopped in Potsdam on the allegation it had exceeded the speed limit. On the same day, East German police halted a British mission officer traveling on the Helmstedt-Berlin Autobahn and threatened him with armed violence. The East Germans also have harassed the US and French missions, but to a lesser degree.

Fearing that the East Germans will stage even more serious incidents in an effort to pin spying charges on mission officers, the British commander in chief in West Germany has temporarily suspended travel by the mission. London, which thought Yakubovsky's letter was highly unsatisfactory, is considering whether to take the question up on a high diplomatic level, either in Moscow or London, or to continue action through military channels.

Meanwhile, the chief of the French mission, who submitted a stiff letter of protest to Yakubovsky following an assault on a mission car on 8 June, has received no answer.

[PAGE 08]
The Yemeni Situation

The Imam's ruthless suppression of a recent tribal rebellion has not eliminated unrest in Yemen. Financial difficulties, a hungry and embittered population, and increasing dissident activities have lowered the Imam's prestige. Subversive activities by the Free Yemeni Movement, based in Cairo and Aden, add to the Imam's problems. Reports are circulating in Yemen that Egypt is disappointed with Crown Prince Badr, the Imam's chosen successor, and is ready to support a Yemeni republic.

Although the Imam apparently has little reason at the moment to fear that his regime will be overthrown, Badr's succession is open to question. The 32-year-old Badr is considered weaker than his father, and has less influence on the key tribes that would determine the succession.

Communist bloc representatives in Yemen are tempting the Imam with offers for oil and mineral exploitation, road building, and irrigation and industrial projects. The Imam has hoped that projects of this type would help him to assure Badr's succession. Working through pro-Soviet officials, the bloc is campaigning to undermine the position of pro-Western officials and create resentment against the US for not readily complying with the Imam's wishes. At the same time, Chinese and Soviet technicians in Yemen are stirring up popular dissatisfaction by intimating that the Imam is retarding progress.

Pro-Western officials, including Prince Abd al-Rahman, the Imam's brother, are urging American support for Badr as a tactic to regain the Imam's favor. Badr, in conversation with the American charge last April, expressed his concern over Communist inroads, but said Yemen must at present accept bloc assistance because it "cannot afford to stand still any longer."

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 July 1960
Copy No. C 73
