elections show that the opposition Social Democrats (SPD) are no longer gaining ground. Recent SPD opposition to the Schuman Plan has not been as profitable as earlier exploitation of the rearmament issue. The government's successful continuation is still largely dependent on the maintenance of its slim working majority (211 out of 402) in the Federal Parliament's lower house. In spite of the Chancellor's somewhat dictatorial treatment of his coalition partners, they are not likely to desert a government which he heads.

Comment: Recent strains within the coalition over questions of economic policy, such as the issue of codetermination in the coal and steel industries, have resulted from Adenauer's concessions to labor over the objections of his coalition partners. A similar situation is not expected to develop in the near future. The coalition parties are united in support of the Schuman Plan, which is actively opposed only by the Socialist opposition.

11. French exert pressure on Tunisian Bey to dismiss cabinet:

The French Resident General in Tunisia has informed the reigning monarch, Lamine Pasha Bey, that if he retains his present cabinet the French will conduct no further negotiations with it. This decision resulted from the cabinet's boycott of the advisory Tunisian Grand Council during budget deliberations and the Bey's attempt to rush reforms. Because the dismissal of his ministers would be a difficult decision for the Bey, who has just proclaimed his complete confidence in them, he probably will take no action for the present.

Comment: This ultimatum is another indication that the French intend to maintain a whiphand in Tunisia, as in French Morocco. Extremely modest reforms announced last June have proceeded very slowly. French troops and police in the area are capable of controlling disorders arising from the disagreement of the Resident General and the Bey, but the anti-French sentiment aroused in the Middle East by the Morocco crisis will be further fanned by French intransigence in Tunisia.
