[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

5 September 1953
Copy No. 67

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SECURITY INFORMATION

SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Comment on new Soviet electronic equipment (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
2. Pakistan alarmed by Nimitz' resignation as Kashmir plebiscite administrator (page 3).
3. India reportedly pressuring Nepal to recognize Communist China (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. Italian-Yugoslav dispute causes increasing tension in Trieste (page 4).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
SECURITY INFORMATION

SOVIET UNION

1. Comment on new Soviet electronic equipment:

The first detailed examination of a modern Soviet IFF, a radar device used to distinguish between enemy and friendly planes, has confirmed previous evidence of a high degree of Soviet capability in electronics. IFF equipment is carried in aircraft and responds automatically with a coded signal when challenged by a ground radar.

The components of the Soviet set are of good quality, and the design is excellent. Further, as in the case of the MIG-15, the Russians have again demonstrated their ability to improve considerably on Western designs and add unique features of their own. The Soviet IFF set, for example, provides 28 identification codes while the US model had only six.

SOUTH ASIA

2. Pakistan alarmed by Nimitz' resignation as Kashmir plebiscite administrator:

Pakistani prime minister Mohammed Ali is deeply concerned by Admiral Nimitz' letter of resignation as UN plebiscite administrator for Kashmir.

Ali fears that he will be accused of having made a deal with Nehru and that the Pakistani public will see the resignation as evidence of US-Indian collusion.

Ambassador Hildreth in Karachi agrees with the prime minister, and believes that the effect of Nimitz' retirement would be serious for Ali's government and disastrous for further Indo-Pakistani talks on Kashmir.

[PAGE 04]
SECURITY INFORMATION

3. India reportedly pressuring Nepal to recognize Communist China:

Comment: The Chinese have raised the question of recognition several times since 1951, but Nepal has invariably refused to comply,

recognition would constitute a major shift in policy, probably resulting from the conclusion of the armistice in Korea and from a desire to expand area trade relations with China.

To date, American requests to open an embassy in Katmandu have been put off with the excuse that if they were granted, Chinese requests for a similar privilege could not be refused.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Italian-Yugoslav dispute causes increasing tension in Trieste:

Tension in Trieste is increasing, and the US political adviser believes that Marshal Tito's speech on 6 September could lead to mob demonstrations requiring police action, and in turn to a demand for the entry of Italian troops.

[PAGE 05]
SECURITY INFORMATION

Mayor Bartoli allegedly has threatened to lead demonstrations against the United States and Britain. Four pro-Italian political parties in Trieste have notified the US and British political advisers that they would not be able to prevent demonstrations if Tito's speech accentuated nationalistic Yugoslav demands.

Comment: Serious demonstrations in Trieste are also likely if Yugoslavia carries out its threat to move troops into the border area to counter Italy's alleged special military measures.
