conference is untimely in view of Japan's draft proposal in the UN. Japanese officials regard the move as a propaganda effort.

The Indonesian Government has announced its decision to recognize the new Iraqi republic, apparently in the belief that such action will help forestall Western moves against Iraq.

Africa: The Ethiopian prime minister privately approves the US intervention, but has publicly deplored its necessity. The government is being pressed by the Yugoslavs, Indians, and others to join in condemnation of the United States, which the prime minister refuses to do. The government is exerting strong pressure on local newspapers to present a solid pro-Western view, and news dispatches unfavorable to the US are being suppressed.

Moroccan press reports indicate that the Iraqi coup is accepted with approval as a logical step toward freedom of the Middle East from "colonialist domination." Moroccans at all levels are reported hostile to the American intervention and feel that the use of American troops is further proof that the US is dedicated to colonial policies.

Western Europe: Khrushchev's notes have brought favorable responses from Swedish Prime Minister Erlander and from the British Labor party. Erlander, expressing pleasure at the inclusion of Mr. Hammarskjold among those invited, publicly urged acceptance of the proposal. British Labor party leader Gaitskell and his top associates called for quick acceptance of the invitation and may believe this aspect of the Middle East issue offers a safer line for attacking the government than the intervention itself. British press comment also shows considerable sympathy for the idea of early summit talks.

The French Foreign Ministry, following a special meeting between Premier de Gaulle and Foreign Minister Couve de Murville, instructed its missions to state that the Soviet invitation did not appear to be serious, and that the results of the UN Security Council meeting on 21 July would be reviewed before a decision is made on any further initiative.

Latin America: Official reaction to the Middle East crisis ranges from unconditional backing of the US position by some of

21 July 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
