[PAGE 01]
6 September 1957

Copy No. 136

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. OPPOSITION TO BATISTA BREAKS OUT IN CUBAN ARMED FORCES

2. VIOLENCE BY TURKISH CYPRIOTS FEARED
(page 5).

3. BOURGES-MAUNOURY GOVERNMENT FACES INCREASED OPPOSITION

4. SOVIET LECTURER CLAIMS AGREEMENTS REACHED AT
TITO-KHRUSHCHEV MEETING

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee

[PAGE 03]
1. OPPOSITION TO BATISTA BREAKS OUT IN CUBAN
ARMED FORCES

Revolt against the Batista government
spread into the armed forces early on
5 September when the naval garrison at
the south coast port of Cienfuegos at-
tacked police and army posts. The at-
tackers were said to be distributing arms
to the many Fidel Castro sympathizers in
the city. Government troops were reported
to be moving on Cienfuegos and other pos-
sible centers of revolt,and the navy in
Havana was put on alert status. Fidel Cas-
tro's headquarters in the Sierra Maestra
is at the eastern end of the island.

CUBA
6 SEPTEMBER 1957
MARIEL
HAVANA
CIENFUEGOS
SIERRA MAESTRA
SANTIAGO DE CUBA
0 100 200 MILES

[PAGE 04]
Disaffection is evidently spreading within the
armed forces. According to embassy information, many offi-
cers are convinced Batista cannot last much longer and are anx-
ious to get on the revolutionary bandwagon. However, Batista
has been able to put down many recent attempts to oust him be-
cause the plotters have been handicapped by lack of organiza-
tion, cooperation, and security.

[PAGE 05]
2. VIOLENCE BY TURKISH CYPRIOTS FEARED

The discovery by police of unexploded
bombs and bags of gunpowder following
an explosion in the home of a Turkish
Cypriot on 31 August is causing fear of
new violence on Cyprus, according to the American consul in
Nicosia. The explosion resulted in the death of one Turkish
Cypriot and injury to three others. According to security
forces, those involved are leading members of a new Turkish
organization, the "Ninth September Front." The explosives
found on 31 August were reportedly intended for use against
Greek Cypriots on 9 September, a Turkish Cypriot holiday.

British authorities on Cyprus believe ex-
tremists among the Turkish Cypriots are willing to force a breach
between the Turkish and Greek communities on Cyprus in an
effort to justify the Turkish demand for partition of the island.
In preparation for possible violence on 9 September, the Brit-
ish have rearmed the police and doubled the number on duty.

Comment
This report indicates that the Turkish
minority on Cyprus, 18 percent of the total
population, may be planning to assume a far more active and
violent role in Cypriot affairs than in the past in an attempt to
influence the disposition of the Cyprus problem. British secu-
rity forces are probably capable of coping with any large-scale
program of violence but will be unable to prevent isolated acts
of terrorism.

Greek officials have charged that a Turkish
terrorist organization is being created on Cyprus and that arms
and military personnel are being dispatched from Turkey. The
British have recently warned Turkish Cypriot leaders against
adopting the tactics of EOKA, the Greek Cypriot underground
organization.

[PAGE 06]
3. BOURGES-MAUNOURY GOVERNMENT FACES
INCREASED OPPOSITION

Widespread popular opposition to French
Premier Bourges-Maunoury's anti-
inflation program, coupled with deep-
seated conservative resistance to the
proposed basic statute for Algeria, suggests that his cab-
inet may not long survive the return of the National Assembly
from its summer recess. He has called a special session of
the National Assembly for later this month seeking quick ap-
proval for his proposed Algerian statute before any debate of
the issue in the UN General Assembly. The National Assem-
bly had not been scheduled to return until 1 October.

Farmers demonstrated against the new price
ceilings on 1 September, and strikes planned by bakers and
farmers for 15 September may force the government to take
strong measures to maintain order. In the meantime, the Com-
munists are championing labor's demands for wage increases,
and there are indications that free labor unions feel they will
have to go along to hold their following. Finance Minister
Gaillard's earlier insistence on budget cuts makes it appear
unlikely that he will compromise on wages and prices. Right-
wing parliamentary groups, disliking the proposed Algerian
statute, may use the broader economic issues as a means of
scuttling the government.

[PAGE 07]
4. SOVIET LECTURER CLAIMS AGREEMENTS REACHED
AT TITO-KHRUSHCHEV MEETING

In a public lecture at Gorki on 2 Septem-
ber, the Soviet speaker described the
recent meeting of Tito and Khrushchev
in Rumania as of great significance.

He claimed that Yugoslav leaders had
made five major declarations in a "still unpublished" docu-
ment. According to the speaker, the Yugoslavs "fully with-
drew" from their position on events in Hungary, stated that
Yugoslav experience in building socialism had no greater value
than Soviet, Chinese or other socialist experience, and agreed
that close contacts between Communist parties and an organ-
ized center for such contacts were necessary. They also ac-
cepted the Warsaw pact under present circumstances and stated
their intention to recognize East Germany "in the near future."

The embassy believes that the Tito-Khru-
shchev meeting may have resulted in unpublished statements of
positions on these issues, but assumes that the speaker's state-
ments are a Soviet interpretation.

Comment
The failure of the two participants to issue
a formal communique at the conclusion of
the meeting suggests that their basic differences were not re-
solved. There have been no recent signs that Yugoslavia is
about to recognize the East German government, an action which
would jeopardize Yugoslavia's favorable trading arrangements
with West Germany.

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
ANNEX

Watch Report 370, 5 September 1957
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee, the Intel-
ligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A.  No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities
against the continental US or its possessions in the imme-
diate future.

B.  No Sino-Soviet bloc country intends to initiate hostilities
against US forces abroad, US allies, or areas peripheral to
the orbit in the immediate future.

C.  Although the deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle
East in the immediate future is unlikely, tensions stemming
from recent developments in Syria and unstable conditions in
the area continue to create possibilities for conflict.

[PAGE 11]
