5. MacDonald warns Burmese of growing Communist threat:

Malcolm MacDonald, the British Commissioner General in Southeast Asia, during a recent visit to Rangoon attempted to arouse the apprehensions of Burmese leaders to the internal and external Communist pressures which now seriously menace their regime. He urged the Burmese to undertake strong measures to defeat the Communist insurgents and specifically recommended steps to improve the training and morale of the Burmese armed forces and a settlement of the Karen problem. MacDonald felt that Burmese officials, although outwardly responsive to his ideas, were not as concerned as the situation appeared to warrant.

Comment: It is doubtful that the Commissioner General has been successful in shaking the widespread Burmese complacency toward Communism and stimulating Burmese authorities to more vigorous efforts to suppress Communist activities. The continuing deterioration of the Burmese Government's political and military position will tempt the influential pro-Communist faction of the Socialist Party to seek the removal of moderate leaders and assume complete control of the government.

6. Indonesian Government may submit New Guinea issue to UN:

If the New Guinea question is not settled through bilateral Dutch-Indonesian negotiations, Indonesia may place the issue before the UN.
Although the Cabinet may wish to take a moderate stand on the New Guinea issue, such a position would be used by left-wing groups as an excuse to force its fall.

Comment: Communist and left-wing groups both inside and outside Parliament have consistently tried to relate the New Guinea issue to general dissatisfaction over Dutch-Indonesian agreements signed in 1949. The Indonesian Cabinet has been proceeding cautiously in the current New Guinea crisis and, although indicating that it may be forced to dissolve the Netherlands-Indonesian Union, probably prefers less drastic action. Should the renewal of bilateral negotiations with the Dutch prove impossible, the Indonesian Government may attempt to avoid both international and domestic complications by placing the New Guinea issue before the UN.
