III. THE WEST

Belgian Default on Minimum Force Requirements Foreseen

Finance Minister Van Houtte says Belgium will not be able to attain its goals under the NATO minimum essential force (MC-70) requirements, and "hopes" that Defense Minister Gilson, who is currently in Washington, will tell this to American military authorities. In a 23 July conversation with an American Embassy official in Brussels, Van Houtte said that, despite the recent improvement in the Belgian economy, it would be "politically and economically impossible" to comply with SHAPE recommendations for a 10-percent increase in the over-all defense budget. Van Houtte added that the Belgian public will not long accept the continued high cost of maintaining Belgian forces in West Germany, and he deplored the lack of progress toward integration of NATO forces which would reduce the defense burden on the smaller NATO countries.

The Social Christian - Liberal government is not likely to make an all-out defense effort. The Social Christians believe that they lost the 1954 elections on defense issues. In keeping with the party's campaign pledges during the 1958 campaign, the government is reducing the military service term, apparently in preparation for eventual replacement of compulsory military service with a voluntary system. Moreover, the Social Christians and the Liberals have frequently been at odds on social and economic issues, and liberal leaders have made it clear they would desert the coalition if direct taxes are increased.

The Belgian situation typifies the trend among NATO countries toward reduced military efforts because of domestic problems, and highlights the chronic problem of the gap between national defense plans and NATO requirements. At a meeting of the NATO Council on 8 July when anxiety was expressed over new Danish defense proposals which in effect also abandon MC-70 force goals, the Belgian representative showed concern lest this start a chain reaction. Most NATO countries accepted the MC-70 force requirements as a guide, but did not make commitments to meet them.

27 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
