[PAGE 01]
5 August 1951
Copy No. CI-1

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

USSR

FAR EAST

4. Offensive preparations noted in Korea during past 24 hours (page 5).

SOUTH ASIA

NEAR EAST

6. Iranian Government increasingly concerned over public order (page 6).
7. The UK discourages Iraqi-Jordan union plans (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Italian extremists in Trieste plan pre-election violence (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

USSR
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
4. Offensive preparations noted in Korea during past 24 hours:

Indications that the Communists may resume the offensive on the UN western flank have been noted in the past 24 hours, according to the US Far East Command. Enemy forces in this area have suddenly tightened their counter-reconnaissance screen. They may also have moved armor into the Otan area 25 miles northeast of Kaesong, where aerial observers have sighted tank tracks and noted the filling in of anti-tank ditches.

The Far East Command tentatively accepts a recent displacement of enemy units in this sector which would not indicate an enemy intention to mount an early general offensive.

Comment: These hostile developments in the general area of the Kaesong conference may be designed only to exert pressure on the negotiations, but could be preparations to seize strategic positions for the launching of a general offensive.

SOUTH ASIA
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST

6. Iranian Government increasingly concerned over public order:

The Tehran Police announced on 3 August that no permits for public meetings would be granted until further notice. Fearing a recurrence of disorder, Parliament's lower house on 2 August cancelled its annual Constitution Day reception, usually held on the Parliamentary grounds.

Comment: Both the Communists and the extreme nationalists have warned the Prime Minister that they will not tolerate any deviation from the oil nationalization laws. The Prime Minister, as well as other government officials, are showing an increasing awareness of the dangers posed by mob action and terrorist assassination. The government's action suggests that it is aware that any compromise settlement of the oil dispute increases the possibility of violence.

7. The UK discourages Iraqi-Jordan union plans:

The UK Foreign Office has told the Regent of Iraq that serious repercussions throughout the entire Near East might follow attempts to unite Iraq and Jordan at this time. This opinion was voiced when, subsequent to King Abdullah's assassination, the Regent approached the Foreign Office on the matter of Iraqi-Jordan union.

According to the Regent, before his death Abdullah gave him a draft declaration making young King Faisal of Iraq the heir to the Jordan throne. The Iraqi Government in turn suggested that in preparation for the union, steps be taken to align the two countries during the next five years.
[PAGE 07]
Despite these maneuvers the UK has instructed its ambassador in Jordan to advise the new Jordanian Regent to assess most carefully the effect that any union move might have on Jordan and the Arab world.

Comment: Iraqi spokesmen have been pressing for union in the past week. However, with the UK Foreign Office opposed to the union and with some Jordanian opposition, there seems to be little chance that it will be arranged now. Although the UK has generally favored the creation of a single Arab State in this part of the Near East, the strong opposition of Syria and Israel as well as that of other Arab countries, makes the US hesitant to push the idea at this time.

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Italian extremists in Trieste plan pre-election violence:

US Political Adviser Unger reports that General Winterton, British Commander of Allied troops in Trieste, has been threatened with assassination unless he adopts a more pro-Italian policy. Unger notes that this threat is in line with recent indications that the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement and other groups in Trieste are organizing a pre-electoral campaign of sabotage and violence directed at the Allied Military Government. As a precautionary move, AMG will dismiss a number of its local employees whose connections with Italian Social Movement have recently been discovered.
[PAGE 08]
