[PAGE 01]
18 December 1951

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. MIG-15 strength on Korea-Manchuria border reported growing (page 3).

NEAR EAST

2. Iranian Minister suggests American aid in developing foreign trade (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans seek to abolish labor units supporting Allied forces (page 5).
5. Sweden refuses to withdraw its resolution on German elections (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. MIG-15 strength on Korea-Manchuria border reported growing:

Far East Air Force estimates that 290 MIG-15's are based on the Manchurian airfields at Antung, Tatungkou and Takushan near the Korean border.
Although in late November and early December an extremely high level of enemy jet fighter activity was noted -- about 200 sorties a day over an eleven-day period -- there are sufficient MIG-15's near the Yalu River to expand the daily number of sorties even more.

The estimate forecasts that it would be possible for the Communists to mount 376 sorties daily, assuming a serviceability rate of 65 percent and two sorties a day for each serviceable aircraft. FEAF believes that following a limited period of preparation, the enemy would possess the capability of concentrating over a specified area a number of MIG's which could attain localized air superiority through sheer weight of numbers alone.

NEAR EAST

2. Iranian Minister suggests American aid in developing foreign trade:

The Iranian Minister of National Economy has told the US Embassy that, rather than a loan or other financial assistance, Iran would prefer American help in developing long-term stable foreign markets for its exports. Iran is particularly interested in selling to Japan, Korea and the Philippines, feeling that because of the relatively low quality of some of its products it could compete successfully only in these low-income areas. The development of such markets, the Minister believes, would prevent Iran from becoming dependent on the Soviet Union.

[PAGE 04]
Comment: While expansion of Iranian foreign trade with US assistance would satisfy Iranian sentiments, the time required to develop new markets makes it unlikely that such a plan could be implemented soon enough to stave off the expected economic collapse. The British economic sanctions and the loss of oil revenues have increased the sentiment in Iran for barter trade with the Soviet bloc. Iran is in no position to resist even unfavorable terms from the Russians.

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans seek to abolish labor units supporting Allied forces:

The West German delegation at the European Defense Treaty discussions in Paris insists on the adoption of a proviso which would eliminate the German Labor Service units now serving with the American and British occupying forces. To date only the Netherlands delegation has opposed this proposal, which the Germans declare must be accepted to secure ratification of the treaty by their parliament. The loss of these support units would handicap American military operations in Germany.

Comment: German Labor Service units relieve approximately 85,000 American and British soldiers from troop support functions. The existence of these units has been repeatedly denounced by the Social Democrats, who charge, among other things, that they are paramilitary in character and represent Allied attempts "to secure remilitarization through the back door" without parliamentary sanction. Chancellor Adenauer fears that these allegations will adversely affect the issue of treaty ratification. The Labor Service is unpopular in West Germany because it is financed by occupation costs and is symbolic of the unequal status of an occupied country.

5. Sweden refuses to withdraw its resolution on German elections:

A Swedish substitute resolution is still delaying adoption of the tripartite Western UN resolution calling for an investigation to determine whether free elections could be held in East and West Germany. The American delegation estimates that Sweden, in an attempt to maintain its neutrality on the German question, will refuse to yield to pressure to withdraw its resolution. The US delegates feel, however, that the Swedish resolution will not attract many votes.

Comment: The Swedish resolution is completely unacceptable to the Allies because it eliminates the whole idea of a UN preliminary investigation of electoral conditions, and would instead return the whole German unity question to the level of four-power negotiations, which

[PAGE 06]
have in the past proved fruitless. American officials believe that such a course, by permitting the veto, would play directly into Soviet hands and might result in further costly delays in West Germany's integration into the European community.
