WESTERN EUROPE

8. Niemoeller limits scope of Moscow discussions:

Pastor Martin Niemoeller, during his recent visit to Moscow, concentrated his attention on church matters and the question of German prisoners of war. He refused to have high-level political talks except for a discussion with Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin.

Bishop Otto Dibelius, top German Protestant leader, feels that the Western Powers have not taken sufficient interest in promoting talks on unity between the East and West Germans. The Bishop points out that the strongest anti-Communist element of a united Germany would be found in East Germany.

Comment: Dibelius' recent statements on the Niemoeller trip and the question of German unification have not been consistent. Although he first indicated that he agreed with some of the criticism of Niemoeller's mission to Moscow, he later publicly defended the trip.

On the issue of German unity, Dibelius has told Adenauer that he approved in general of the Chancellor's policy of placing West German integration ahead of German unification. This latest report of his support of unity discussions suggests a lack of strong convictions on the subject.

9. Belgium takes firm stand against Temporary Council recommendations:

Belgian Foreign Minister van Zeeland has refused to consider withdrawing his country's note rejecting the NATO Temporary Council Committee's recommendations for increased Belgian defense expenditures. Claiming domestic approval, he reiterated Belgium's opposition to the Committee's procedures and stated that his country was not alone in thinking that the rights of the smaller countries were at stake. Van Zeeland suggested that the only solution would be for another group of twelve representatives to discuss comparative national contributions.

Comment: Belgium's intransigent attitude on this question and on the European Payments Union may have extended to its position on the European Defense Community, notwithstanding the recently announced modification of the Dutch stand.
