[PAGE 01]
25 June 1959
Copy No. 62

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 JUNE 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Communists reported planning to harass West German presidential election set for 1 July in West Berlin.
New evidence of MIG-19 jet fighters in Communist China.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Algerian rebels mount strongest attack in past two years; French counterattacking in force.
Tunisia and UAR negotiating rapprochement.
Indonesian rebel representatives to be expelled from Singapore and Malaya; will hamper rebel activity.

III. THE WEST
President Betancourt of Venezuela opposes OAS action concerning Dominican Republic; he believes Trujillo should be pressed to resign.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Berlin: West German officials have received reports that "voluntary" action may be taken by East German workers to interfere with the West German presidential election in West Berlin on 1 July. This would include a "strike" by railway workers and autobahn police. A Moscow commentary of 23 June declared that the decision to hold the election is a "gross and dangerous provocation."

West Berlin Mayor Brandt does not expect serious interference with travel of assembly members to Berlin. However, should the East Germans take drastic action and prevent a significant number from getting to Berlin, he has agreed with Bundestag President Gerstenmaier that the assembly should be convoked elsewhere. (Page 1)

Watch Committee conclusion--Berlin: No significant indications bearing on hostilities. With regard to the West German presidential election in West Berlin on 1 July, the East Germans will probably start a propaganda barrage and may engage in some forms of harassment, which would possibly include some interference with civilian traffic. Physical prevention of holding the election seems highly unlikely.

Communist China: Ten aircraft, probably MIG-19s,
This supports other evidence that high-performance jet fighters are based in Communist China. The MIG-19 is a twin-engined supersonic jet fighter first observed in the USSR in May 1955. (Page 2)

[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist, particularly in Iraq and Iran. The initiation of significant hostilities is unlikely in the immediate future.

Algeria: The attack by Algerian rebels on the outskirts of the eastern port city of Bone, about 30 miles from the Tunisian frontier, is the strongest rebel military action in two years. It appears designed primarily to demonstrate the rebels' ability to continue the war in the face of reverses which have ended, at least temporarily, organized military resistance in western Algeria. The French have counterattacked in force and appear to have routed the attacking Algerian force. (Page 3)

Tunisia-UAR:
Tunisian and UAR officials have established direct contact in Libya with a view to reaching agreement on an early restoration of normal relations.
Presidents Bourguiba and Nasir, despite their continuing distrust of one another, appear to have concluded that the desirability of an appearance of Arab unity in North Africa makes a reconciliation expedient. Diplomatic ties between Tunis and Cairo have been disrupted since last October when Tunisia denounced the Nasir regime at a public meeting of the Arab League Council. (Page 4)

Indonesia: The Malayan and Singapore governments reportedly have agreed to an Indonesian Government request not to renew the visas of Indonesian rebel representatives. The dissidents are arranging to transfer their major overseas operations from Singapore to Hong Kong, a change in distance which will make rebel activities far more difficult. The Malayan port of Penang and Singapore have played key roles in the delivery of supplies to the rebels. (Page 5)

25 June 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

Caribbean-OAS: President Betancourt of Venezuela has stated that the situation in the Caribbean is "drifting toward war." He says that his government and others in the area would oppose consideration of the Dominican Republic affairs by the Organization of American States (OAS). In Betancourt's view, such action would only strengthen the Trujillo dictatorship which he said popular opinion throughout the Americas considers "a focus of infection that must be removed." Betancourt believes that the only alternative to war and to a fiasco for the OAS is for Trujillo to be persuaded to resign. (Page 6)

25 June 59 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
1. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communists Planning to Interfere With West German Presidential Election

West German officials have received reports--possibly leaked by the East German regime--of "voluntary" action to be taken by East German workers to interfere with the West German presidential election in West Berlin. Such "spontaneous" action--possibly including a "strike" by railway workers and autobahn police--would be in line with party propagandist Gerhard Eisler's threats on 6 June when he said it was not easy to persuade East Berlin workers to be patient in the face of the West German provocation.

Soviet propaganda has termed holding the election in Berlin a "gross and dangerous provocation," but the USSR has made no direct threat to prevent the holding of the election. The Communist strategy appears rather to be aimed at so frightening some West German electors that they will not attend the 1 July meeting in Berlin. Some harassment such as deliberate slowdowns at the checkpoints cannot be ruled out.

Mayor Brandt agrees with Bundestag President Gerstenmaier that if significant numbers of delegates fail to arrive in Berlin, the election should be held elsewhere. Brandt does not anticipate any serious trouble. He also said that East German interference "would not necessarily be a bad thing" because it could be exploited before world public opinion.

Three cases of East German interference with American military personnel on the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn during the past week--if publicized--might influence some West German delegates not to make the journey. In each case the East German police stopped the Americans after they had been processed through the Soviet checkpoint and demanded to see their travel documents. When one American officer refused and asked to see a Soviet officer, the policeman replied that the East Germans and not the Russians controlled the autobahn, and he threatened to detain the American "for a week or longer."

25 June 59 Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Probable MIG-19s in China

10 jet fighter aircraft, probably MIG-19s, at Tsanghsien Airfield 110 miles south of Peiping. These fighters were definitely larger than MIG-17s which, along with IL-28 jet light bombers, were also on the field.

The numerous reports, received since last fall, of high-altitude flights over the Chinese mainland may have been reflections of familiarization and training operations with this aircraft. Most of the extreme altitudes reported are within the capability of the MIG-19, which has a service ceiling of 62,200 feet.

This supersonic rapid-climbing aircraft enhances the overall capability of the Chinese Communist Air Force as it can be used for low-altitude and toss bombing in addition to intercept operations. The MIG-19 carries one or two small cannons, unguided rockets, and could easily be adapted to use homing missiles. One model, the MIG-19B, has an all-weather capability.

Communist China, with Soviet assistance, is preparing to produce this aircraft.

25 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian Rebels Battle French Outside Bone

The attack by a "strong" band of Algerian rebels on the outskirts of the eastern Algerian port city of Bone, about 30 miles from the Tunisian frontier, is the first on such a scale in two years. French forces in the area are believed to outnumber the rebels, who are armed with rifles, grenades, and some automatic weapons.

The nature of the attack suggests that it was designed to demonstrate the rebels' ability to continue the war rather than to achieve any single military objective. French successes in western Algeria have been such that French statements have alluded to the Oran area as "pacified," and rebel messages have reflected a breakdown in organized resistance.

25 June 59 Page 3

[PAGE 10]
Tunisia and UAR Moving Toward Formal Reconciliation

Tunisia and the UAR appear to be moving toward an early formal reconciliation despite the strong dislike between Presidents Bourguiba and Nasir. Tunis broke off diplomatic ties with Cairo last October after accusing the UAR of trying to dominate other countries at a public meeting of the Arab League Council.

High-level Tunisian and UAR officials recently met in Libya to discuss an early restoration of normal relations.

Tunisians expressed appreciation for a "note verbale" transmitted to Bourguiba by Fuad Galal, UAR representative at the recent meeting in Tunis of the steering committee of the All-African People's Conference. The Tunisians were saying that Bourguiba was "very interested" in a rapprochement and that mediation--a reference to active efforts since early April by Morocco to bring the two disputants together--was no longer necessary.

The Tunisians then proposed further secret talks in Libya. Arrangements were said to have been made for contacting Bourguiba--now on vacation in Italy--at any time.

Earlier this month Bourguiba told the American ambassador in Tunis he had informed Galal that Cairo's refusal to expel Salah ben Youssef, Bourguiba's exiled extremist rival, was "wholly secondary" and that Tunisia would be willing to re-establish relations if Cairo evidenced a willingness to refrain from interfering in Tunisian affairs. Bourguiba referred specifically to Cairo radio's attacks on him, which had been vitriolic but have ceased since early May.

Bourguiba and Nasir appear to have concluded that the desirability of an appearance of Arab unity in North Africa makes a normalization of relations expedient. Such a move has long been favored by many of Bourguiba's subordinates.

25 June 59 Page 4

[PAGE 11]
Singapore and Malaya Reportedly Will Oust Indonesian Dissident Representatives

The Malayan and Singapore governments have agreed to comply with an Indonesian Government request to deny residence and entry to Indonesian dissident representatives after their visas expire in early July.

Djakarta has given both governments a list of dissidents known to be abroad.

The Communist-infiltrated People's Action party, which won control of the Singapore government in May, promised the Indonesian Consulate General last February that it would oust dissident representatives when it achieved power. Indonesian Prime Minister Djuanda requested similar action from the Federation of Malaya.

The dissidents are reported making plans to transfer their major overseas operations from Singapore to Hong Kong. The distance involved in operating from Hong Kong, however, is likely to cause them further difficulties. Singapore and the port of Penang in the Federation of Malaya have been ideally suited for dissident purposes, particularly for operations in Sumatra. These two cities are within easy reach of the Sumatran coast by small vessels, and provide a ready market for rubber, the dissidents' principal barter product. Although the rebels will undoubtedly attempt to continue smuggling to and from Singapore and Malaya, the operation will be more difficult.

25 June 59 Page 5

[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Venezuelan President Sees OAS Powerless to Avert Caribbean War

President Betancourt of Venezuela has stated that the situation in the Caribbean is "drifting toward war" but that his government and others in the area will oppose action by the Organization of American States (OAS) to stop this.

Betancourt--a spokesman for the several leftist-liberal regimes seeking to overthrow the remaining dictatorships in the hemisphere and to oust them from membership in the OAS--stated that collective action to prevent hostilities between Cuba and the Dominican Republic would only serve to strengthen the Dominican dictatorship and discredit the OAS. He said the only alternative to war and to a fiasco for the OAS is for Trujillo to resign.

Betancourt commented that he had failed to prevent the current and rather ineffectual OAS investigation of foreign aggression against Nicaragua, but that he is confident he can block OAS aid to Trujillo. His assertion that hemisphere sentiment is running heavily against Trujillo is borne out by the excessive care with which most governments are examining OAS competence to act in this case.

Should Trujillo decide to make a formal appeal to the OAS instead of mounting a counterattack against Cuba as he now reportedly plans, most governments in southern Latin America would probably feel obliged to vote for action in his favor. Many governments in the Caribbean area, however, feel that domestic opinion would not permit this. Although an OAS meeting of consultation can be convened by a simple majority vote, subsequent decisions on aid to the victims of aggression require a two-thirds vote.

June 59 Page 6

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 14]
