[PAGE 01]
14 February 1961
Copy No. C 79

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 February 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Congo: Lumumba's death will further discredit Tshombe and Kasavubu regimes. (Page 1)

2. Berlin: East Germany bars West German churchmen from East Berlin. (Page 1)

3. Burma: Army leadership may shift toward a more neutral position following recent purge of senior officers. (Page 1)

4. Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: Federation may break up on issue of African representation in government of Northern Rhodesia. (Page 1)

5. North Vietnam: Government delegation planning trip to new African states. (Page 1)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

Congo: Lumumba's death will further discredit Tshombe's government. Opposition to the leaders in Leopoldville will also be intensified, and there may be reprisals by Lumumba's supporters against whites and Africans in the Congo. The announcement of Lumumba's death also provoked a vigorous attack against Hammarskjold in the UN Security Council by Soviet delegate Zorin. Zorin stated that the USSR has "not the slightest confidence" in the secretary general, whom he blamed for "this shameful crime." Moscow may now publicly press for replacing the UN operation in the Congo with a supervisory commission drawn from Afro-Asian nations which support Gizenga's Stanleyville regime.

Mobutu's forces, which moved up the Congo River by barge last week, have engaged troops of Gizenga about 200 miles northwest of Stanleyville. (Backup, Page 1) (Map)

Berlin: The East German action on 12 February barring seven West German bishops and other leading churchmen from attending religious services in East Berlin is further evidence that the regime is not living up to its agreement with the West Germans to relax controls on the Berlin sector border. It was this agreement which was instrumental in inducing Bonn to reactivate the interzonal trade agreement on 29 December. East Germany's action is the latest in a series of steps toward the long-held goal of severing remaining links between the Evangelical Church in East Germany and its leaders in West Berlin and West Germany. While
[PAGE 05]
this move was probably taken with Soviet knowledge, it does not appear to represent a shift from the Soviet policy of avoiding a Berlin crisis at this time.
(Backup, Page 3)

Burma: The recent purge of senior Burmese Army officers favorably disposed toward the West has removed the principal proponents of army resistance to Prime Minister U Nu's policy of closer relations with Communist China. One effect of this may be decreased receptivity to United States materiel and training assistance. With the removal of some of the army's most able commanders, the government's anti-insurgent campaign may be adversely affected.
(Backup, Page 5)

Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: The outcome of the current talks between Rhodesian and British officials concerning constitutional changes which would increase African influence in the British protectorate of Northern Rhodesia may determine whether the Federation breaks up. The Federation's prime minister reportedly has stated that white-controlled Southern Rhodesia will leave the Federation if London insists, as now seems likely, on an African majority in the legislature of Northern Rhodesia. The American consul general in Salisbury views the next weeks and months as critical.

*On 12 February the federal government called up Northern Rhodesian territorial reserves to be ready for possible disorders, which may arise when London announces the new constitution for Northern Rhodesia. Africans have held large rallies and are reportedly ready to engage in violence if their demands for franchise and representation are not met. (Backup, Page 6)

North Vietnam - Africa: North Vietnam is moving to expand further its international contacts, particularly with the new African states. A North Vietnamese government delegation was asking permission to visit Cairo on an African trip that will include stops in Morocco, Guinea, Mali, and Nigeria. Guinea and Mali--in addition to Cuba--recognized North Vietnam last year; Cairo is host to a permanent North Vietnamese trade delegation but does not formally recognize the Communist regime. In the past several months, North Vietnam also has sent trade and cultural delegations to promote closer ties in the Middle East and in Indonesia.
(Backup, Page 8)
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Republic of the Congo

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page
[PAGE 08]
Situation in the Congo

Lumumba's death--probably at the hands of Katanga officials--is likely to widen the gap between international supporters and opponents of the ex-premier. Members of Nigeria's UN delegation, who have been spearheading efforts to work out a moderate solution to the Congo situation, were likely to be frustrated by a wave of recrimination against Tshombe and, by association, Kasavubu, Belgium, and France. The Nigerians fear that Morocco and Ghana, the only members of the militant African neutralist bloc whose forces remain in the Congo, might order their 4,900 troops to intervene on the side of Lumumba forces against Kasavubu and Tshombe.

Tshombe's government is likely to find it even more difficult than before to obtain support abroad. Belgian financial interests and some factions of the Belgian Government, who have been Katanga's principal props to date, may now be unwilling to furnish adequate assistance.

Katanga forces reportedly are moving up the rail line from Elisabethville to Kamina. Tshombe's troops have occupied a town about 60 miles southwest of Kamina and 20 miles inside Baluba tribal territory. Further advance will be hindered by hostile Baluba action, which has prevented trains escorted by UN troops from reaching Kamina since mid-January.

Mobutu's forces attacked a town near Bumba on 10 February.

Gizenga has asked "all friendly countries" that if aid had not arrived by 15 February, "Stanleyville will have ceased to exist."

In Leopoldville, UN representative Dayal apparently is working against the Ileo government's efforts to obtain the support of Lumumba followers. As a result,

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
[PAGE 09]
his party would gain more by waiting than by participating in the government now.
Dayal stated on 30 January that Lumumba's strength was growing and that the Kasavubu government was "only the instrument of a foreign power."

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
[PAGE 10]
East Germany Bars Churchmen From East Berlin

The religious services were held in connection with the all-German Evangelical Church synod now meeting in West Berlin. Past synod sessions in both East and West Berlin have been attended by large numbers of ecclesiastics and laymen from both parts of the country. Prior to scheduling this year's synod, East German churchmen sounded out the regime on its attitude toward permitting synod sessions in East Berlin. The chairman of the State Office for Church Affairs indicated that the regime might tolerate a "purely religious service" but under no circumstances would it permit a business meeting.

In a speech on 9 February East German party boss Ulbricht made clear that his regime intended to use the church meeting to drive a wedge between church members in East and West Germany. He said that Bishop Dibelius of Berlin-Brandenburg and other prominent churchmen "have no business in the GDR or its capital." Nevertheless, on 12 February Dibelius was permitted to attend the religious service in East Berlin, perhaps because he is a West Berliner, rather than a West German, and the regime does not see its way clear to bar West Berliners from the Soviet sector at this time.

This is the second recent step to undercut the ties between the church in East and West Germany. On 12 January, the Ulbricht regime announced that the Evangelical Church would not be permitted to hold its congress (Kirchentag) in East Berlin in July, on grounds that the selection of Berlin for the meeting was intended as "provocation" and an occasion for "revanchist outbursts." The regime offered to permit the meeting in some East German city, such as Leipzig, but flatly refused to guarantee that anyone desiring to attend would be allowed to do so.

Earlier, East German officials sharply reduced the financial aid which the church in West Germany is allowed to transmit to East German congregations. The East German people give lip service to the regime's objectives but continue to adhere to the church as one of the few

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 3
[PAGE 11]
remaining ties with the West and the focal point for opposition to Communism.

In view of the continuing East German harassing of the movement of West Germans in Berlin, Bonn will probably urge that NATO maintain its retaliatory restrictions on the travel of East Germans to NATO countries. Bonn, however, has thus far given no indication that it intends to halt vital steel or machinery shipments to East Germany in an effort to force the East Germans to implement their 29 December pledge to stop requiring passes for West Germans entering East Berlin.

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
[PAGE 12]
Adverse Effects of Burmese Army Shake-up

Two brigadiers and nine field-grade officers who were ousted from their commands on 3 February included Burma's most forceful advocates of an active army role in Burmese politics. With Brigadier Maung Maung as their spokesman, they comprised the pro-Western core of army leadership and had pressed General Ne Win for an extension of the American military aid program under way since 1958. Many officers remaining in the army share the views of those relieved, and some, in protest against Ne Win's actions, reportedly plan to avoid combat with Burma's various insurgent forces for three to four months, which would allow internal security to deteriorate seriously.

The American military aid program is in particular jeopardy at this time, both because it was the special project of Brigadier Maung Maung and because General Ne Win sees it as a potential source of embarrassment with the Chinese Communists. Ne Win is said to have argued that while he is neither pro- nor anti-American, "the government of Burma and the army cannot afford to be aligned too closely with any non-socialist ideal whether it be American or Communist."

A further factor affecting the stability of both the government and army in Burma is the marked disaffection of the ethnic minority elements who feel they are discriminated against by the Burman majority. Added to the long-standing Karen insurgency and the Shan dissidents, Chin army officers have been reported prepared to mutiny against their Burman superiors, and one Kachin unit has deserted. Karens, Chins, and Kachins are upset by Burmese plans to establish Buddhism as the state religion; Kachin civilians recently rioted and stoned a train in protest. Many Kachins in North Burma feel their elected leaders are incapable of supporting their interests against the Burmans. So strong is this feeling that one hereditary chieftain was disowned by his following and recently committed suicide.

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5
[PAGE 13]
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland

The Federation, formed by Britain in 1953 of three dependent areas in differing stages of political evolution, is accorded the status of a self-governing territory handled by the Commonwealth Relations Office as is the keystone territory, Southern Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, on the other hand, are under the control of the Colonial Office. Negotiations concerning Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia have been in progress recently.

A meeting at Salisbury between Southern Rhodesian officials including African representatives and Commonwealth Relations Secretary Sandys has resulted in an agreement--subject to British parliamentary approval and a Southern Rhodesian referendum in June. The agreement calls for a bill of rights in the Southern Rhodesian constitution, a dual electoral roll system by which in essence 70,000 white voters will elect 50 representatives and some 50,000 Africans will elect 15 representatives, and a constitutional council to safeguard civil rights with the power to delay discriminatory legislation. In return for Rhodesian acceptance of these pro-African provisions, Britain is to surrender its reserve powers to veto legislation affecting native affairs--one of London's major powers over Southern Rhodesia.

The white segregationist Dominion party has refused to agree to the proposals and will probably wage a bitter campaign against such a settlement. To a lesser extent, there is some dissatisfaction in African circles over the limited gains, and the position of Joshua Nkomo, leader of the National Democratic party, may be weakened by the extremist faction.

The negotiations in London concerning Northern Rhodesia's constitutional reform are proceeding less satisfactorily because of differences over the extent of African participation in the legislature. The Africans demand a clear majority in both the Legislative and the Executive Council. In the Legislative Council they now have nine members out of 30; in the Executive Council, 2 out of 10. African delegates have warned that a failure to reach a satisfactory solution "must lead to unrest" in Northern Rhodesia. In preparation for the possibility of political and/or racial disorders when Britain's Colonial Secretary

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
[PAGE 14]
Macleod announces a new constitution, reserve troops--predominantly white--were called up on 12 February in Northern Rhodesia by the Federation's Ministry of Defense. This is the first time the federal government has called up territorial units without a specific request from a territorial government.

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7
[PAGE 15]
North Vietnam Seeks More Contacts in Africa And Asia

North Vietnamese ambassadors are already accredited to Guinea and Mali, and an ambassador is on the way to Cuba. The forthcoming African visit by the North Vietnamese government delegation underscores the importance Hanoi puts on this area. Seeking to use their own former colonial status to establish a common bond, the North Vietnamese will try to encourage formal diplomatic exchanges with the UAR, Morocco--which recently formalized relations with Saigon--and Nigeria. Neither Nigeria nor the UAR is likely to agree, but Morocco, anxious to demonstrate its nonalignment, may be more amenable to North Vietnamese overtures.

The culture troupe that Hanoi recently sent to Indonesia reportedly turned in a creditable performance and, on 19 December, North Vietnam's minister of culture, who led the company on its tour, signed a cultural agreement with Indonesia. This agreement provides for additional visits in 1961. For several years, Indonesia and North Vietnam have had consular relations, although Djakarta does not formally recognize the North Vietnamese Government.

A delegation of North Vietnamese assemblymen visited Burma in January. Like Indonesia, Burma does not formally recognize North Vietnam but permits Hanoi to maintain a consular post in Rangoon. There also is a North Vietnamese consul in India, and North Vietnamese trade representatives are in Cambodia and the UAR. Iraq has given Hanoi permission to open a permanent trade post in Baghdad, and a two-man North Vietnamese trade delegation visited Yemen in January. North Vietnam's trade potential with these countries is not impressive, yet Hanoi seems intent on using this avenue to establish contacts in hopes of building them into formal diplomatic relations.

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8
[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Director, The Joint Staff
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]
