[PAGE 01]
15 February 1952
Copy No. 49
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

USSR

1. Ignatiev's appointment as Soviet Minister of State Security confirmed (page 3).
2. Order suggests stockpiling for Soviet chemical warfare defense program (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. US mission concerned over South Korean anti-cease fire campaign (page 4).
4. Ex-South Korean soldiers serving with Communist army segregated (page 4).
5. Burmese pressing investigation of Chinese Nationalists (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Egyptian Ambassador in Washington seeks Turkish support for Egyptian demands (page 5).
7. Greek army morale deteriorating (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Yugoslavia to propose the establishment of a condominium for Trieste (page 6).
9. Yugoslavia continues to oppose membership in regional defense pacts (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austria fears Polish retaliation for non-delivery of bearings (page 8).
11. Switzerland may withdraw from economic organization (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
USSR

1. Ignatiev's appointment as Soviet Minister of State Security confirmed:

there is a new USSR Minister of State Security, S. D. Ignatiev, whose previous career appears to have been restricted to Communist Party affairs. There is no record of his having previously held positions in the MGB.

a personal request by the Yakutsk Party Secretary to Ignatiev resulted in an order to replace within a period of two days an important MGB official in Yakutsk.

Comment: Since the preceding Minister Abakumov had been primarily a police official, his replacement by Ignatiev confirms and strengthens party control over the police apparatus.

2. Order suggests stockpiling for Soviet chemical warfare defense program:

a Ministry of Health order which forbade the issuance of certain pharmaceuticals to the therapeutic establishments. It was requested specifically that the Health Minister authorize the Tbilisi Institute to issue belladonna extract necessary for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Comment: Extract of belladonna is a major source of atropine sulfate which is the agent of choice in treatment of nerve gas poisoning. It also has a wide variety of therapeutic uses including the treatment of the nervous disease mentioned.

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. US mission concerned over South Korean anti-cease fire campaign:

Ambassador Muccio reports that official South Korean hysteria against a cease fire is "sparked by President Rhee" and will reach a crescendo as the possibilities of a successful armistice grow. If the Rhee government boycotts the armistice talks and the ensuing political discussions, Muccio observes, "our faces will be very red." However, he does not think that South Korean forces will continue the fight after an armistice.

Comment: This is the first time that Muccio has expressed any suspicion that Rhee might refuse to accept the outcome of the truce talks. President Rhee's public statements that he could not accept an armistice and that South Korean troops should ignore the negotiations and fight on "to the Yalu" presage a more extreme line in this crusade against the Panmunjom talks.

4. Ex-South Korean soldiers serving with Communist army segregated:

An unidentified North Korean security officer on 11 February ordered complete histories on "the liberated enlisted men who have been assembled from every division." The ex-prisoners were to be assembled in "particular secrecy" and a report submitted by 15 February.

Comment: The term "liberated" soldiers is applied by the Communists to captured South Korean troops who have been impressed into the Communist forces. The Communists failed to list this category of prisoners in the list turned over during negotiations at Panmunjom. The secret assembling of these prisoners suggests that the Communists may be willing to negotiate further on the question of their repatriation.

[PAGE 05]
5. Burmese pressing investigation of Chinese Nationalists:

Six high-ranking Burmese police officers are reliably reported to have been sent to Kengtung State in northeastern Burma to collect evidence of American involvement with the Chinese Nationalist forces there. This evidence, according to the source, is to be submitted to the UN.

Comment: The Burmese have already appointed a committee of high government officials to compile a case against the Nationalists for presentation to the United Nations. Nationalist activities in Burma have been centered in Kengtung.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Egyptian Ambassador in Washington seeks Turkish support for Egyptian demands:

The Egyptian Ambassador in Washington has induced his Turkish colleague to inform Ankara that evacuation of British troops from the Suez Canal zone is the only acceptable solution to the Anglo-Egyptian crisis. The Egyptian representative urged that Turkey use its influence with Britain, the US and France in order to promote a quick settlement of the dispute.

Insisting that no Egyptian government could agree to the presence of foreign troops in the Canal area, the Egyptian Ambassador further maintained that the departure of British troops would deprive the Communists of a very strong weapon which they have been using to foment trouble in Egypt.

Comment: Turkey has recently attempted to persuade Egypt that the establishment of the proposed Middle East Command would solve British and Egyptian differences. Turkey has been loath to become involved more directly in the Anglo-Egyptian dispute, believing that it could exert greater influence on Egypt by not identifying itself too closely with Britain.

[PAGE 06]
7. Greek army morale deteriorating:

The morale and discipline of the Greek army are steadily deteriorating according to Marshal Papagos. He told the US Military Attache that if he had the authority he would dismiss four lieutenant generals and the Defense Minister. The Marshal emphasized that the US military mission must handle the direction of the Greek armed forces firmly and that it should advise the King on exactly what was happening.

Comment: These statements were apparently designed to persuade the United States to halt the Greek government's current purge of the army. The generals whose dismissal Papagos favors are the ones believed responsible for the removal of several high-ranking pro-Papagos officers during the last few weeks. Although the Marshal's report is apparently biased, there is evidence of serious political meddling with the army.

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Yugoslavia to propose the establishment of a condominium for Trieste:

Yugoslavia, anticipating a failure of the negotiations with Italy on Trieste, will propose in the next two or three months the establishment of an Italo-Yugoslav condominium for the Free Territory of Trieste, Attached to this proposal will be the condition that a union of the two zones will not be a preliminary step towards Italian annexation.

The Yugoslav Government, convinced that the present Italian Government will not accept such a proposal, will reportedly advance this tactic in an effort to appease the population of Trieste and strengthen Yugoslavia's international position.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Such a proposal would serve to strengthen the heretofore negligible Yugoslav appeal among the strong independent groups in Trieste and to embarrass the Italian Government by forcing it to modify its present intransigent attitude or further weaken its position in Trieste.

A recent report that Marshal Tito this month will secretly receive one of the leaders of a strong independent group in Trieste may be related to this Yugoslav proposal.

9. Yugoslavia continues to oppose membership in regional defense pacts:

The US Embassy in Belgrade believes that it would be premature to press Yugoslavia in the near future toward formal military arrangements with Greece and Turkey, but that a favorable occasion may arise in connection with direct Yugoslav-US staff talks in which the Yugoslavs have professed interest.

The Greek Minister in Belgrade has informed the Embassy that he does not believe that there has been any change in Yugoslav opposition to involvement in Western political and military blocs, and that the independent Yugoslav attitude in this respect is possibly reinforced by their feeling that the immediate danger of Soviet attack is lessening.

Comment: The Turkish Foreign Minister recently informed Ambassador McGhee in Ankara that Greek and Turkish officials had agreed upon the desirability of asking the Yugoslavs to enter into secret military staff talks and would welcome US aid in obtaining Yugoslav adherence.

While the Yugoslavs would undoubtedly like to know more about Greece and Turkey's relationship with NATO, they continue to maintain that Yugoslavia cannot join such a pact or make political or military arrangements with Western powers.

[PAGE 08]
WESTERN EUROPE

10. Austria fears Polish retaliation for non-delivery of bearings:

The Austrian Government fears the consequences of its failure to deliver during January and February the embargo-type ball bearings called for under its trade agreement with Poland. Calling the US-requested action "a dangerous game being played with Austria's vital coal supply," government officials warn that if Poland stops coal deliveries, it may not start them again on the present terms. The officials state that Polish coal cannot be immediately replaced with high-priced American coal.

The Austrian Foreign Office expects a retaliatory reduction in coal deliveries within two weeks.

Comment: American officials have pressed the Austrian Government to suspend delivery of embargo-type bearings to see whether Poland would actually stop coal shipments. The large stock-piles of coal in Austria and Poland's recent failure to fulfill other parts of the trade agreement appeared to offer favorable conditions for such a test.

11. Switzerland may withdraw from economic organization:

The American Minister in Bern warns that Switzerland will withdraw from the Organization for European Economic Cooperation if that body becomes the economic arm of NATO. Switzerland does not object too strongly, however, to covert cooperation between OEEC and NATO.

Comment: The Swiss have been concerned over the possibility of OEEC's subordination to NATO. They have informally indicated that in such an eventuality they would try to maintain economic cooperation with Western Europe through the Council of Europe, which coordinates closely with OEEC on economic matters.
