[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

US OFFICIALS ONLY

28 August 1952
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. Ambassador Kennan analyzes changes in party structure (page 3).

FAR EAST

WESTERN EUROPE

6. France may seek American concessions for ratification of EDC treaty (page 6).
7. French and German officials comment on four-power talks (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Ambassador Kennan analyzes changes in party structure:

Ambassador Kennan points out that a Pravda article of 26 August confirms that the establishment of a Presidium merely formalizes an already existing situation. The article suggests that since the war, control over the party apparatus has rested with the Secretariat.

The Ambassador comments that under the arrangement now to be formalized, lesser members of the Politburo, and even Molotov himself, have apparently been excluded from control over personnel, which would also mean control over the delicate question of future succession. This latter function has apparently been delegated to Malenkov and a few people under him, working within the framework of the Secretariat and receiving general guidance from Stalin.

Comment:
Malenkov seems to be the Politburo member responsible for party appointments.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
Page Denied
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. France may seek American concessions for ratification of EDC treaty:

France may still attempt to use ratification of the EDC treaty as a lever for additional American support for French policy. This was suggested by a Foreign Ministry spokesman's explanation of a reference to "related problems" in Schuman's message to Secretary Acheson on the US Senate's approval of the contractual agreement.

Schuman's statement that French ratification of the Bonn and Paris treaties would involve more difficulties was interpreted by the spokesman as referring to stronger American support in Indochina and North Africa and to additional assurance against German secession from the EDC. Such assurances would involve replacement by American or British troops of any divisions withdrawn by the Germans.

7. French and German officials comment on four-power talks:

The head of the Political Affairs Section of the French Foreign Ministry favors agreeing to another four-power meeting on Germany, despite its obvious futility. His personal opinion is that the latest Soviet note is a "signing-off on what the Russians had started in March." The USSR has abandoned hope of influencing the West against integrating West Germany into Atlantic defense planning and is now concentrating on German opinion.

- 6 -

[PAGE 06]
Meanwhile, in West Germany an aide to Chancellor Adenauer states that it would be disastrous for the Western Allies to agree to a conference on Soviet terms, and that their reply should reverse the agenda order proposed by Moscow. Calling the latest Soviet note an "assist for our side," the German official stated that it would not delay ratification of the Bonn and Paris treaties by the Bundestag.

Comment: The French Government will probably insist on continuing the exchange of notes, and may even press for immediate talks if public sentiment develops in that direction.

- 7 -
