NEAR EAST

3. Current outlook for Iranian oil negotiations unfavorable:

US Ambassador Grady reports that he has pointed out to Iranian Prime Minister Mossadeq that the presentation of ultimatums to the British will make effective discussion with them impossible. He urged Mossadeq to reconsider his present course of action, to halt the provocative acts of government representatives at Abadan and to attempt to seek an agreement with the British within the principle of nationalization. Mossadeq replied that he had never contemplated talks with the British except within the framework of the nationalization law.

The Department of State, in suggesting that Ambassador Grady stress to the Shah the dangers inherent in the current Iranian attitude, characterizes the present Iranian position as not only unreasonable but designed to remove all hope of negotiation except on terms of complete capitulation.

According to the British Embassy in Tehran, the Iranians have demanded the company's funds deposited in Iran, amounting to approximately 300 million rials (roughly $8 to 9 million), and have announced that the several thousand British, Indian and Pakistani contract laborers of the "ex-AIOC" are now on contract to the Iranian Government. The UK Foreign Office is drawing up a request to the International Court of Justice for "interim measures of protection" against these and other Iranian interferences.

Comment: The Iranian attempt to implement the section of the nationalization law calling for the transfer to the Iranian Government of 75 percent of AIOC revenue earned since 20 March can hardly be acceptable to the British, who have recognized the principle of nationalization but consider the Iranian nationalization law both "illegal and unworkable." The Iranians, having refused to submit the oil dispute to the International Court of Justice, will not be dissuaded from action by UK requests to the Court for protection. A further unfavorable factor is the possibility that the tensions being created in the oil area by anti-British propaganda might result in violence, and thus close the door to a negotiated settlement.

- 4 -
