[PAGE 01]
25 July 1953
Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
2. Prospects good for 1953 Soviet grain harvests (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Indonesia approaches United Kingdom for military mission (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE
4. Comment on reorganization of Albanian government (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Comment on purge of East German security minister (page 5).
6. De Gasperi cabinet facing parliamentary defeat (page 5).
7. Italians react to West's approach to Yugoslavia (page 6).

* * * *


[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

2. Prospects good for 1953 Soviet grain harvests:

US embassy agricultural officers report after personal observation that crop conditions are fair to good throughout most of the west central region of the USSR and grain harvesting is progressing satisfactorily. In the North Caucasus area prospects for the corn harvest are considered at least as good as in 1952.

Comment: Estimates of Soviet grain crops for 1953 have indicated that they would approximate the good harvest of 1952, which totaled 92,000,000 tons.

With such a harvest, the Soviet Union would have about 5,500,000 tons to devote to stockpiling, foreign trade programs, and alleviation of Satellite food shortages.


[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Indonesia approaches United Kingdom for military mission:

Senior Indonesian military officers have informally approached the British embassy in Djakarta on sending a military mission to Indonesia, according to a report from the American embassy in London. The British Foreign Office plans to consider the problem in view of the probable deterioration following the withdrawal of the Dutch mission, and the possible alternative of a military mission in Djakarta from a nation whose views are incompatible with those of Britain.

Comment: Indonesian military officials consider a military training mission essential and at various times have also approached Australia and the United States on the matter. Political pressures from nationalist and leftist groups, however, forced the Indonesian government to demand the withdrawal of the Dutch military mission last March, and would probably be exerted against a mission from any Western power.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on reorganization of Albanian government:

The reorganization of the Albanian government announced on 23 July reflects a general streamlining of the administration and is similar to recent changes in Hungary and the USSR which were followed by announcements of more liberal policies.

Control of the country, however, remains in the hands of the two rivals, Enver Hoxha and Mehmet Shehu. While Hoxha no longer holds his foreign affairs and national defense portfolios, he continues as premier and party leader. Shehu is relieved of his responsibility as secretary of the central committee of the Workers Party, but retains his position as minister of interior and deputy premier and continues as politbureau member.


[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Comment on purge of East German security minister:

The purge of Wilhelm Zaisser, East German security minister, and his replacement by Ernst Wollweber, former director general of the East German Inland Waterways, indicate that the East German security service probably has been reorganized on current Soviet lines and is now under the control of the Interior Ministry.

Previous information had indicated that the ministry would be abolished and Zaisser dismissed because the ministry represented a concentration of political power and had failed in its task of uncovering the planners of the 17 June demonstrations.

It is probable that Zaisser was removed chiefly because of his power position vis-a-vis other Communist factions in East Germany. This would explain the appointment of Wollweber, who is not prominent in the party, but who has a long and faithful record of subversion and espionage for the Communist cause.

Zaisser's ouster may have some connection with Beria's arrest. Zaisser reportedly was a friend of Zhdanov, one-time rival of Malenkov, and it has been rumored that his friendship with Beria dates back to 1924.

6. De Gasperi cabinet facing parliamentary defeat:

De Gasperi's proposed cabinet is in danger of parliamentary defeat owing to opposition of the Monarchists because of their exclusion, according to the American embassy in Rome.

The Social Democrats are still undecided, but seem to favor abstention at best. However, they and the other center moderate parties may yet support De Gasperi to avoid the possibility of a further government shift to the right under a more conservative premier.


[PAGE 06]
Comment: De Gasperi's defeat appears still more likely in view of the press reports that the Republican and Liberal Parties will not support his proposed cabinet. The Chamber of Deputies is expected to vote on the proposed cabinet early next week.

If De Gasperi is defeated, he has a choice of attempting to form a more leftist or more rightist government, of letting someone else try, or of calling for new elections, presumably after the fall harvest.

7. Italians react to West's approach to Yugoslavia:

Premier de Gasperi has informed Chancellor Adenauer that current American-Yugoslav negotiations may create a situation forcing him to place a Trieste solution above EDC ratification. He added that he might not attend the 7 August foreign ministers' conference in Baden-Baden on the proposed European Political Community because of the political situation in Rome.

Meanwhile, the American embassy in Rome reports that some Italian officials are apparently now considering refusing to conclude the negotiations for US-manned Nato bases in Italy prior to a favorable solution of the Trieste problem.

Comment: De Gasperi's absence from the Baden-Baden conference would eliminate any possibility of effective decisions being reached there.
