[PAGE 01]
15 May 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

Possible presence of jet light bomber aircraft in Soviet Far East
(page 3).

FAR EAST

More effective Communist training with AA rockets reported in
Korea (page 3).
Japanese deny visas to Soviet nationals (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

Comment on new Indian Cabinet (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

Health of Jordan's King is deteriorating (page 5).
Ankara complains of anti-Turkish propaganda in Arab states (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

Communists sponsor international conference against German
agreements (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

Possible presence of jet light bomber aircraft in Soviet Far East:

the appearance on 26 April of possible IL-28
twin-jet light bombers in the southern part of
the Maritime Military District.

that one and possibly two aircraft of this type were active in an area
120 miles north of Vladivostok.

Comment: This is the most reliable evidence
of the presence of Soviet jet light Bombers in the Far East. There is no
evidence that such aircraft are permanently stationed in the area.

FAR EAST

More effective Communist training with AA rockets reported in Korea:

A garbled and fragmentary Chinese Communi-
nist message of 4 May states that an unidentified Communist unit commenced antiaircraft
firing on 3 May with equipment tentatively
identified by translation as "rocket launchers." The unit reported that
it expended rounds of ammunition at various altitudes from 10,800 to
24,600 feet. The message stated further that two of the launchers
"performed splendidly" and that it was estimated that "we either hit
and damaged or hit and dropped" each of the targets.

Comment:
the Communist forces are training with AA rockets possessing
vertical range and accuracy characteristics in excess of those of any
known Soviet or Chinese rocket. During the last three months, there
have been a series of sightings of Communist AA rockets at steadily
increasing vertical ranges, but this is the first indication of a ground-
launched rocket attaining 24,600 feet.

[PAGE 04]
The USAF reports that rockets directed against
UN aircraft to date have been ineffective and inaccurate.
suggests that the enemy may have new equipment which will increase his
AA capability.

Japanese deny visas to Soviet nationals:

The Japanese Foreign Office requested the
Japanese embassy and consulates in the United
States on 30 April to suspend issuing entry and
transit visas to Soviet nationals.

Comment: The Japanese Government has also
refused to extend diplomatic privileges to the Soviet Mission in Tokyo, has
rejected recent Soviet trade offers, and has been unwilling to sell real
estate in Japan to the USSR. These decisions may indicate a government
intention to avoid all relations with the USSR until the latter moves to settle
outstanding mutual problems such as fisheries, repatriation and the regulari-
zation of future relations.

SOUTH ASIA

Comment on new Indian Cabinet:

Cabinet changes announced by Prime Minister
Nehru on 13 May suggest that somewhat abler executives have been placed
in certain key posts, but that no major revisions of Indian domestic or
foreign policies are foreshadowed. There are six newcomers in the
cabinet, while several of its older members have shifted positions.

Home Minister Katju is a respected Congress
Party member of long standing, friendly to the United States. Defense
Minister Ayyangar\but he replaces a much
less competent man. He may be expected to reflect the Prime Minister's
views on defense. Kidwai probably brings greater administrative ability
to his post as Food Minister than his predecessor, but there is little reason
to believe that he will be more successful.

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

Health of Jordan's King is deteriorating:

The health of King Talal of Jordan has seriously
deteriorated,
The King's mental state has become
so serious that the Prime Minister is trying to
persuade him to go to Switzerland for medical treatment. The Prime
Minister hopes that Talal may somehow continue in power at least until
May 1953, when the Crown Prince comes of age.

Comment: There have been other reports in
past months that Talal's mental health has been poor. Should he not be
able to carry on as King until his son takes over, Jordan would be ruled
either by a council appointed by the Council of Ministers or by a regency.
Talal's younger brother, Prince Naif, who was Regent for a short time
after King Abdullah's death, may try to re-enter the picture.

Ankara complains of anti-Turkish propaganda in Arab states:

The Turkish Foreign Minister on 9 May told
Ambassador McGhee emphatically that anti-
Turkish propaganda in certain Arab states was
being inspired by "friends," presumably British
in the case of Iraq. He added that such action was against the common
interest, but that Turkey did not intend to lodge a protest or to make it a
public issue.

Comment: Turkish Foreign Office officials
have previously expressed dissatisfaction with the lack of cooperation on
Middle East defense planning from the British and particularly from the
French in Damascus. British and French officials in Syria have not
favored a Turkish plan to train Syrian officers in Turkey.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Communists sponsor international conference against German agreements:

A Communist-sponsored international conference
"for the peaceful solution of the German problem"
is scheduled to meet in Paris from 13 to 15 June.
Representatives from all Western European
countries, including German Pastor Niemoeller, and delegates from Poland
and Czechoslovakia are allegedly planning to attend.

The American Embassy in Paris believes that
the preponderance of professors and theologians among the foreign repre-
sentatives suggests that many are not aware of the actual nature of the
conference.

Comment: This conference, which is being
widely publicized by the French Communist press, undoubtedly will
challenge the legality of the contractual agreements scheduled to be signed
late this month between the Western powers and Germany.
