Situation in the Congo

Anti-white disturbances have been reported in several parts of the Congo, the most serious in Bukavu, capital of Kivu Province. The degree to which Gizenga and his lieutenants are involved is not clear. However, the closing of the border suggests that Orientale and Kivu authorities wish to maintain close control over Europeans either to use them as hostages or to assure their continued presence to maintain key administrative and economic activities.

According to press reports, Anicet Kashamura, Gizenga's pro-Communist lieutenant who had headed the Kivu administration since December, has been removed from office and sent back to Stanleyville. His successor, who apparently was a close associate of Lumumba but has had little following of his own, urged Gizenga to "play the whole range of politics in order to retain the members of parliament"--possibly a reference to dissension which might occur among Kashamura's followers in Stanleyville.

In his 15 February outline of a plan of action, Gizenga's associate in Cairo proposed that he travel from the UAR to West Africa to investigate, among other things, the possibility of smuggling arms through former French Equatorial Africa. He stated that by using a borrowed passport he might be able to reach Leopoldville, where he could deliver funds--possibly as much as $70,000--to the pro-Lumumba provincial governor, who could use "them to bribe the police, the army, and the legislature. He added that Thomas Kanza, who leads the Gizenga faction's "delegation" in New York, needed additional funds for "corruption, boycott agents, liaison agents, transportation of materials, etc."

In Leopoldville, UN representative Dayal on 15 February publicly blamed the United States Government for the chaotic situation in the Congo. He charged that the United States had failed to support the ouster of Belgians from Katanga, and he disparaged the quality of the American transport aircraft--principally C-119s and C-47s--supplied to the UN.

18 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
