[PAGE 01]
9 June 1961

Copy No. 517

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 June 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Dominican Republic. (Page ii)

4. Communist China - India: Peiping's foreign minister criticizes "increasing closeness" of Indian-US relations. (Page iii)

6. Panama: One of coalition parties joins campaign calling for break in relations with Castro. (Page iv)
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
*Dominican Republic: Dominican authorities may be having some success in creating the impression that the regime is turning away from the ruthless policies of the past. The presence of the OAS subcommittee, which arrived in the Dominican Republic on 7 June, will temporarily hamper General Ramfis Trujillo in any public manifestation of his drive to consolidate his position in the armed forces.

On 7 June his public relations adviser remarked to a newsman that General Jose Roman, minister of defense, had "escaped." He had earlier been reported under arrest, and yesterday a presidential decree formally removed him from his post. General Roman, believed friendly to the US, is known to have had personal difficulties with Ramfis in the past and to have had contact with dissident elements prior to the assassination. Ramfis probably considers Roman's elimination a necessary step in gaining full control of the armed forces.

Official Dominican allegations on 7 June that the assassination of Trujillo was part of a "vast conspiracy with ramifications in a foreign country" are probably a prelude to an effort to implicate Venezuelan President Betancourt. This charge, which could probably be backed up by the Dominicans with plausible evidence, could be used in an attempt to urge removal of the OAS sanctions imposed against the Dominican Republic last August and prompted by Trujillo's effort to kill Betancourt. The American Consulate believes that the now-publicized contacts which a private American citizen had with the dissidents may later be used in an effort to implicate the United States, if this should serve the regime's purposes.

The Venezuelan foreign minister told Ambassador Moscoso yesterday that Colombia, earlier reported as reluctant to join possible joint action against the Dominican regime, is now agreeable to advancing the date of Venezuelan-Colombian joint fleet maneuvers previously agreed on for 18 to 25 June, and to moving its participating vessels from Colombian waters to the vicinity of the Dominican Republic. The Colombian vessels will consist of two destroyers and a frigate. Venezuela will have three destroyers participating. Both countries are agreeable to continuing the maneuvers as long as necessary. A Venezuelan navy captain was to leave for Colombia yesterday to serve as liaison between the two fleet units.

9 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
Communist China - India: Peiping has apparently all but written off any chance for the present of normalizing its strained relations with New Delhi. Foreign Minister Chen Yi complained recently of the "increasing closeness" in relations between Washington and New Delhi. Chen also criticized Prime Minister Nehru's "determination to fulfill, with no excessive modesty," the role of spokesman for the Indian bourgeoisie. He said that these considerations, together with Nehru's fear that China's "enormous accomplishments" would seduce the impoverished Indian masses, accounted for India's unfriendly attitude and its "periodic fomentation" of border incidents. Chen's statements have been echoed by Chinese diplomats in New Delhi, and Chinese propaganda attacks on India's growing economic alignment with the US and the West have sharply increased during the

9 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]
past few months. Chen also expressed satisfaction over what he termed the stronger public stand now being taken by the USSR against Nehru's foreign policy, implying that Moscow had been taken in for a time by Indian duplicity

Panama: Business and church groups which for several months have been urging the Panamanian Government to break relations with Castro have stepped up their campaign. Their efforts have received support this week in a manifesto from an important element of the government coalition--the Republican party led by Second Vice President Bazan. The Chiari government still maintains, however, that it will act against Cuba only on a multilateral basis. (Backup, Page 4)

SELECTED INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Short-term Prospects in South Korea: Significance of the May 1961 Military Coup Led by Major General Pak and Probable Trends Over the Next Few Months. U.S.I.B. SNIE 42-2-61. 31 May 1961.

9 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 12]
Pressure on Panamanian Government to Break Relations
With Castro

A group of Catholic students staged an organized demonstration on 2 June petitioning President Chiari to break relations with Cuba, to intercede on behalf of two Panamanian-born student leaders held by Castro, and to enforce the act outlawing communism in Panama. News media, more outspoken and influential in Panama than in many Latin American countries, are concentrating on anti-Communist, anti-Castro material, and business groups reportedly are trying to organize a commercial and industrial shutdown until Chiari severs relations. This general shutdown, now planned to start on Monday, 12 June, is said to be receiving widespread popular support.

Foreign Minister Solis has received Cuban diplomats coldly, warned them against continued interference in internal Panamanian affairs, and succeeded in having at least three of them, including the ambassador, withdrawn. Pro-Castro agitators are under surveillance, and several have been arrested for short periods.

The Panamanian Government has said that it maintains relations with Cuba primarily to offer asylum to Cubans seeking protection, but it probably sees the issue as a good bargaining point with the US.

The stand taken by the Republican party in its manifesto--which emphasized also Panama's need for social and economic reforms--is probably at least partially a political move by the party's effective head, Second Vice President Jose Bazan. He is a bitter enemy of Finance Minister Gilberto Arias, whose family wields great influence in Panamanian foreign policy, and Bazan may feel that by backing a break with Castro he will attract both US and conservative Panamanian approval of his presidential ambitions.

9 June 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Under Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
