[PAGE 01]
19 February 1958

Copy No.
137

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

North Korea Uses Plane Incident to Press for North-
South Negotiations

Pyongyang apparently views the landing on 16 February of
a South Korean airliner in North Korea as an opportunity
to force its demands for negotiations with Seoul. The
North Koreans' claim that the 34 passengers voluntarily
defected is intimation that they will not be released im-
mediately but may be held for their hostage value.

The North Koreans have refused to discuss the inci-
dent in the Military Armistice Commission and have pro-
posed instead "direct" negotiations between the govern-
ments of North and South Korea. Repeated bids by the
Communists for North-South negotiations to promote
trade and prepare for unification elections have hereto-
fore been categorically rejected by Seoul.

North Korea is linking the incident to its current
propaganda campaign for the withdrawal of foreign
forces from South Korea. Pyongyang is alleging that
the passengers defected because they opposed the "oc-
cupation" of the South by US troops. Communist China's
Premier Chou En-lai, who now is in North Korea to dis-
cuss the withdrawal of Chinese Communist forces, will
probably exploit the incident in a similar way, stressing
US "occupation" and Chinese Communist willingness to
act to get all foreign troops out of Korea.

19 Feb 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
South Korean airliner: Pyongyang's claim of voluntary
defection by the 34 passengers of the South Korean airliner
which crossed the armistice line on 16 February suggests
that the Communists intend to hold them as hostages to force
negotiations with South Korea. Repeated bids by the Commu-
nists for direct contacts as a first step toward unification
have thus far been categorically rejected by Seoul.

II. ASIA -AFRICA

Federation plan for Kuwait: Iraqi and Jordanian leaders
are considering the possibility of bringing Kuwait--largest
oil producer in the Middle East with more than 1,000,000
barrels a day--into their recently formed federation. Un-
less the British withdraw their opposition, the move is not
likely to occur.

Sudan-Egypt: The publicity given by the government
of the Sudan to its dispute with Egypt over the status of

19 Feb 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 07]
border areas is probably intended in part to arouse anti-
Egyptian feelings which would strengthen the Khartoum
cabinet's hand in parliamentary elections scheduled from
27 February to 8 March. Egypt in turn appears to be pro-
moting this border rectification in connection with its un-
ion plebiscite scheduled for 21 February. The Sudanese
appear genuinely concerned over notes sent them by Nasir
calling for a return to the pre-1903 boundary. They have
sent troops into the area.
Reports of Egyptian troop movements are un-
confirmed.

III. THE WEST

Cyprus: Greek and Cypriot misrepresentations of Brit-
ish Foreign Secretary Lloyd's statements in Athens leave
the Cyprus issue confused. Lloyd suggested that Turkey
be offered a base on the island to mollify Ankara's demand
for immediate partition. Athens has inferred erroneously
that London is also prepared to give up the idea of parti-
tion. The British evidently plan further bilateral talks
with both the Greeks and the Turks, but prospects for any
progress remain slight.

19 Feb 58    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
EGYPT- SUDAN
19 FEBRUARY 1958
RAILROADS
SCALE

LIBYA
EGYPT
SYRIA
LEBANON
ISRAEL
JORDAN
IRAQ
SAUDI
ARABIA
Cairo
Principal Area in Dispute
Aswan
Wadi Halfa
Original Political Boundary
Port
Sudan
Khartoum
El Obeid
Senar
ETHIOPIA
FRENCH EQUATORIAL AFRICA
BELGIAN CONGO
UGANDA
KENYA
[PAGE 13]
Sudanese-Egyptian Border Dispute

The government of the Sudan is seriously concerned
over a note received from Egyptian President Nasir on
13 February reaffirming Egypt's claim to sovereignty
over all areas along the Sudanese border north of the
22nd parallel and indicating Egypt's intention to conduct
a plebiscite in these areas on 21 February regarding
the establishment of Egyptian-Syrian union. Egypt has
stated that it will send a commission accompanied by an
armed guard into the disputed area, and has challenged
the right of the Sudan to conduct parliamentary elections,
scheduled for 27 February - 8 March, in "Egyptian ter-
ritory among Egyptian subjects." Reports of Egyptian
troop movements toward the area are unconfirmed.

The Sudan has rejected the Egyptian demands but
has sent its foreign minister to discuss the question with
Cairo, meanwhile dispatching troops northward into the
disputed area

The publicity given the dispute by the
Sudan is probably intended in part to arouse anti-Egyptian
feeling which would strengthen the government against
pro-Egyptian opposition in the forthcoming elections.

The Anglo-Egyptian convention of 1899, which estab-
lished a condominium over the Sudan provided for a border
along the 22nd parallel. In 1903, however, certain areas
north of the parallel inhabited by Sudanese tribes were
placed under Sudanese administration, and a small area be-
low the parallel was assigned to Egyptian control. The
principal area in dispute is the wedge-shaped parcel of ter-
ritory on the Red Sea coast. Should Cairo question the
status of the other area north of Wadi Halfa, this could pre-
sage an attempt by Egypt to avoid compensating the Sudan
for any submersion of lands as a result of the construction
of a high dam at Aswan.

19 Feb 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]
III. THE WEST

The Cyprus Situation

Greek and Cypriot misinterpretations of British For-
eign Secretary Lloyd's statements in Athens leave the Cy-
prus situation confused and potentially explosive. Athens has
mistakenly inferred that London is prepared to give up any
idea of partition.

London, however, evidently plans further bilateral
talks with both Athens and Ankara. A high-ranking official
of the British Foreign Office said on 13 February that For-
eign Secretary Lloyd may decide to consult with the Greek
and Turkish ambassadors in London and attempt to bring
their positions closer together. The government is also
still considering the idea of a tripartite conference. In the
meantime, Lloyd will probably make only a general state-
ment in Parliament in an effort to keep flexibility for the
talks and to avoid saying anything which might provoke the
Cypriots to violence.

One of the latest British suggestions is apparently that
the Turks be offered a military base on Cyprus in lieu of im-
mediate partition. Greek Foreign Minister Averoff has ex-
pressed willingness to study this idea further--despite Arch-
bishop Makarios' expected outright rejection--provided Brit-
ain makes such a proposal in detail. It is highly questionable,
however, that Makarios could be ignored as Averoff suggests.

Ankara is interested in a military base on Cyprus but
only as a forerunner of the eventual partition to which it re-
gards Britain as already committed.

19 Feb 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 17]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]
