[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

7 June 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Rhee may be replacing chiefs of staff (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. East Germans reportedly centralize control in "inner cabinet" (page 4).

6. Czech delegates withdraw visa applications for Paris peace meeting (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Rhee may be replacing chiefs of staff:

American Charge Lightner reports the receipt of information that President Rhee is planning to replace all three chiefs of staff, and to conduct an extensive shake-up of the top levels of the South Korean Army.

A report that the President has directed the Army Chief of Staff to transfer six of his ranking officers suggests that Rhee is putting such a plan into effect.

Comment: Recent information has indicated that all three chiefs of staff have been alienated by Rhee's recent behavior.

2. Chinese Communist network appears to exist in Malaya:

evidence accumulated in recent months makes it increasingly clear that since the beginning of the terrorist campaign in 1948 a Chinese Communist network has existed in Malaya in addition to the Malayan Communist Party, which itself is preponderantly Chinese. There is considerable evidence of a clash of interests between the two groups and of concern and dissatisfaction among Malayan party members over their position.

Comment: The Malayan Communist movement is led by and predominantly composed of Malayan Chinese. The reported activity of Communists from China, who are more experienced and more reliable Stalinists than are the Malayan Chinese leaders, may indicate a Sino-Soviet effort to strengthen international Communist control over the Malayan Communist movement as well as to give it more expert direction.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
WESTERN EUROPE

4. East Germans reportedly centralize control in "inner cabinet":

an East German "inner cabinet" with top East German Communist Walter Ulbricht as chairman has been organized directly under the Soviet Control Commission to "coordinate measures for the protection of the German Democratic Republic."

Werner Eggerath, State Secretary for Coordination and Control, is a member of the group.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
The first orders issued by the cabinet were reportedly to put the People's Police under Deputy Minister of Interior Johannes Warnke, and to start the recruitment of labor gangs for constructing barriers along the zonal border.

Comment: Premier Grotewohl announced last week the establishment of five economic coordinating agencies in East Germany. Eggerath's announced appointment as head of one of these agencies, plus his elevation from the presidency of Thuringia to cabinet rank, probably gives him extensive powers of control. The emphasis on economic coordination suggests that heavier armaments production is envisaged for East German remilitarization.

The reported consolidation of control in the hands of an "inner cabinet" of the most reliable and efficient Communists may be in preparation for granting the government ostensible full sovereignty.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
6. Czech delegates withdraw visa applications for Paris peace meeting:

The Czech Foreign Office has withdrawn its application for 15 French visas for delegates to the "International Conference on the Peaceful Solution of the German Problem" scheduled to be held from 13 to 15 June in Paris,

Comment: This report coincides with an announcement from Prague that a plenary session of the World Peace Council will be held in Berlin from 1 to 5 July. The Paris meeting may have been cancelled or merged with the Berlin session because the recent demonstrations culminating in the arrest of Duclos have created an atmosphere that is not conducive to Communist meetings in Paris.

The Council agenda for the Berlin meeting calls for discussion on the peaceful solution of the German and Japanese problems; the immediate cessation of the war in Korea; and the armaments race and the fight for peace. This agenda suggests that further pressure will be exerted against the ratification of the German agreements.

- 6 -
