[PAGE 01]
8 February 1961
Copy No. C 80

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
8 February 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]1. Laos: Road from North Vietnam to Plaines des Jarres
area now open to truck traffic. (Page i[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]])

2. Congo: Kasavubu opposes enlarging the mandate of the
UN forces in the Congo. (Page i)

3. India: New Delhi has reportedly purchased 18 to 24 twin-
engine IL-14 transport aircraft from USSR. (Page ii)

4. Turkey: Soviet ambassador warns government
leaders that Soviet-American relations are improving
rapidly and Turkey may soon be "outside the club." (Page ii)

5. Conclusions of Special USIB Subcommittee on Berlin
Situation. (Page iii)
[PAGE 04]
LAOS
5 FEBRUARY 1961

Government forces
----- Government
----- Antigovernment
Antigovernment concentrations
Kong Le / Pathet Lao forces
Main route number
Road
-- - - - Trail
Chinese Nationalist Irregulars
[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 February 1961

DAILY BRIEF

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Laos: an element of the North Vietnamese 324th Division, normally located in the Vinh area, was as of 22 January engaged in improving the road (Route 7) between the North Vietnamese border and Ban Ban in the Plaines des Jarres area.
this road is now open to truck traffic. The road could become a main Communist supply route to the Plaines des Jarres area but a major effort would be required to keep it passable during the rainy season which commences in about two months.

Hanoi on 7 February broadcast a recent interview with Kong Le in which he expressed his thanks for aid from "the Soviet Union and other socialist countries." This is the second recent public reference to Soviet assistance for pro-Communist forces in Laos. On 2 February, Chen Yi, Communist China's foreign minister, commented that Soviet "support" was a "righteous action." Chen Yi's remark may have been intended to justify his own offer of Chinese Communist support—"if the lawful government of Laos headed by Souvanna Phouma" asks for it[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]. (Map)

Congo: President Kasavubu and Foreign Minister Bomboko have expressed strong opposition to any plan which would enlarge the mandate of the UN force in the Congo. They reportedly believe that such a move would infringe on the Congo's sovereignty and feel that a UN attempt to neutralize the Congolese Army would interfere with their planned operation against Kivu Province, which Bomboko stated was imminent. At the UN, Soviet delegate Zorin
[PAGE 06]
reiterated Moscow's position that elimination of Belgian influence and the release of Lumumba were prerequisites for a solution of the situation in the Congo. He opposed a neutralization of the troops supporting Lumumba until these conditions had been fulfilled. Stepped-up political and military activity in Leopoldville is coinciding with indications that Katanga may take a more strongly separatist line under the influence of Tshombe's new French military adviser, who stated on 4 February that he believed a unified Congo state is unrealizable.
(Backup, Page 1)

India-USSR: New Delhi's determination to build up its airlift capability in the Himalayan frontier regions apparently has led Indian officials to arrange for the purchase of 18 to 24 Soviet IL-14 (Crate) transports.
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]arrangements for delivery, which New Delhi hopes can begin by mid-March, are now being made in Moscow following agreement last month[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]. These twin-engine piston transports will apparently supplement the 30 C-119 "Flying Boxcars" and eight AN-12 (Cub) turboprop transports purchased last year from the United States and the Soviet Union, respectively. Like the AN-12s, which are scheduled to arrive in India before April, the IL-14s are probably being purchased at bargain prices and for rupees rather than hard foreign currency.
(Backup, Page 3)

USSR-Turkey: As part of Moscow's effort to induce the Turkish Government to adopt a friendlier policy toward the USSR, the Soviet ambassador has been warning Turkish leaders that Soviet-American relations are improving very rapidly to a point where agreement might be reached which would leave Turkey "outside the club." The ambassador also delivered a note on 3 February inquiring if reports in the local

8 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 07]
press that NATO IRBM bases are being constructed in Turkey are correct. The note reaffirmed the USSR's desire for "good neighborly relations" and warned against any steps that might draw Turkey into "dangerous ventures." Soviet diplomats employed similar tactics following Khrushchev's visit to the US in 1959, accusing smaller NATO countries, including Greece and Turkey, of being out of step with the "new trend" in East-West relations.

Turkish Foreign Minister Sarper has described Premier Gursel as "furious" at the Soviet ambassador's action but he also expressed some apprehension over the possible reaction to the latest Soviet moves by the "more naive" officials in the government.
(Backup, Page 4)

CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB SUBCOMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has approved the following conclusions reached by its Special Berlin Subcommittee which reviewed the situation for the period 17 January 1961 through 6 February 1961.

1. We are currently in an interim period during which the USSR is intent on reaching an assessment of the new US administration and the possibilities of negotiating with the West on major issues. Therefore, for the next few months the USSR is unlikely to increase tensions over Berlin. However, should the Soviet leaders any time during this period estimate that additional pressure would be calculated to bring the West more quickly to high-level negotiations with the USSR, they may increase the threat of unilateral action in an effort to expedite talks.

2. The East German control practices on the Berlin intersector boundary have not softened to the extent that West

8 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 08]
Germany had been led to expect as part of the price for reinstituting the Interzonal Trade agreements. However, the West German Economic Ministry is "still not unhopeful" that action will occur soon in accord with earlier assurances.

3. There are indications that East Germany has begun on some of the necessary long-range moves in an effort to make its economy independent of Western imports and thereby deprive the West of this leverage in future negotiations over Berlin.

8 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
[PAGE 09]
The Situation in the Congo

President Kasavubu and Foreign Minister Bomboko, in a conversation with the American chargé in Leopoldville on 6 February, expressed the belief that events are moving in their favor in the political and military fields and that a neutralization of the Congolese Army would reverse this trend. They also reportedly feel that the UN would use any additional powers to the disadvantage of their government and might eventually impose a trusteeship over the Congo. The chargé comments that Kasavubu is unlikely to consent to such a program so long as he feels time is on his side.

According to Bomboko, an attempt by the UN to bring the Congolese Army under its control would thwart the Leopoldville government's plans to mount a military operation against Kivu Province within ten days. Bomboko and Kasavubu apparently believe that their chances for regaining control of eastern Congo are fairly good as a result of disaffection among Gizenga's troops. At the same time, Kasavubu stated that Congolese officials were attempting to form a "provisional" government which could be installed immediately.

Hammarskjold has scoffed at Western concern for Kasavubu's position, stating that the Congolese President "has no prestige." He continues to believe that a military solution to the Congolese situation is impossible, and he reportedly feels that Mobutu and Bomboko are too closely tied to Belgium to have any future in the Congo. Hammarskjold feels that if they are removed, Kasavubu can be persuaded to form a constitutional government.

Soviet UN representative Zorin told Ambassador Stevenson on 6 February that the UN would not be able to deal with troops which are subject to colonial domination--presumably a reference to Mobutu's and Tshombe's forces--in the same manner as those which support the "legitimate government." He questioned whether the latter would lay down their arms until Lumumba is released and parliament is reconvened. Zorin also reiterated the Soviet charge that Hammarskjold has failed to carry out previous Security Council mandates.

Colonel Roger Trinquier, the French officer who reportedly is to become the chief of Tshombe's Katanga armed forces,

8 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 10]
told a press conference on 4 February that a unified Congo state is unrealizable. Pressure from Trinquier, whom previous reports had linked with separatist members of Tshombe's government, may weaken Tshombe's willingness to maintain his present tenuous contacts with Leopoldville and make it even more difficult to bring Katanga into a federated Congo state.

8 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 11]
Indian Purchase of Soviet IL-14 Transports

Objections by Indian military leaders to the purchase of Soviet equipment appear to have been overruled recently by economic factors, especially the gradually worsening foreign exchange position, coupled with New Delhi's desire to demonstrate its cordial relations with Moscow as a hedge against Peiping in the Sino-Indian border dispute. These same factors, plus the desire for a high-altitude capability, led New Delhi to seek MI-4 (Hound) helicopters from the Soviet Union in late 1960. The failure of the demonstrator on its first proving flights in the Ladakh area has apparently stalled further negotiations for helicopters.

The reported purchase of IL-14s reflects also the Defense Ministry's desire to relieve the mounting pressure on its fleet of aging C-47 (Dakota) transports, which have borne the brunt of New Delhi's logistic support of road-building crews and military forces in the sensitive and remote Indo-Tibetan frontier region.

The IL-14 is capable of operating at altitudes some 7,000-8,000 feet higher and carries about 2,000 pounds more cargo than the C-47. The USSR has substantial numbers of IL-14s in civil air service, but they are expected to be largely replaced by the newer, higher performance TU-124 and AN-24. Nearly 100 of these aircraft have been furnished by the bloc to non-bloc countries. The purchase of IL-14s will provide New Delhi with a stopgap aircraft until it decides on a more suitable C-47 replacement to be manufactured in India. The cabinet is now considering prototypes designed by Lockheed and AVRO, a British firm.

3 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 12]
Soviet Attitude Toward Turkey

Since the overthrow of the Menderes regime last May, the USSR has maintained a cautious but friendly attitude toward the Gursel government and sought to encourage the Turkish leaders to adopt a more independent foreign policy. Khrushchev invited General Gursel to make the trip to Moscow which had been scheduled for last July by his predecessor but Gursel refused. While expressing disappointment that the new regime was not going to return to Ataturk's policy of neutrality but was planning to remain in NATO and CENTO, Khrushchev indicated there was no reason why Soviet-Turkish relations could not be gradually improved.

Soviet officials on a number of occasions have offered Turkey economic aid, including credits of up to $500,000,000. In a talk with Turkish Foreign Minister Sarper in New York last October, Khrushchev reiterated offers of Soviet assistance and asserted that Turkey's membership in Western alliances is not a major obstacle to better relations. He suggested that the two countries establish a demilitarized zone along their common frontier by withdrawing their forces "several hundred kilometers," and observed that the Black Sea could be turned into a "sea of peace." Shortly thereafter, the Soviet ambassador in Ankara told a key Turkish government figure that the USSR is willing to demonstrate its good will toward Turkey by reducing its Black Sea Fleet and naval installations in the area and by guaranteeing to respect the present Soviet-Turkish border.

Some members of the ruling military Committee of National Unity reportedly favor accepting economic aid from, and improving relations with, the Soviet bloc, but such action would run counter to popular feeling in Turkey. Both Gursel and Sarper are committed to maintenance of Turkey's close ties with the West.

8 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
