Hanoi as they were originally scheduled to do but are to fly to Peiping on 20 December. Flights by Soviet IL-14s between Hanoi and Canton on 18 and 19, and three flights scheduled for 20 December indicate that the cargo ferried in by the AN-12s is being transshipped to Hanoi. Soviet and Chinese Communist transports continued to shuttle between Nanning and Hanoi through 19 December. Five of the Soviet IL-14s flew from Hanoi to the Vientiane area on 19 December, and five are scheduled to fly two round trips each from Hanoi to Vientiane on 20 December. Also scheduled for 20 December is the flight of three North Vietnamese transports from Hanoi to Sam Neua. On 19 December, three North Vietnamese transports were taking off from Sam Neua. This is the first confirmation that North Vietnamese aircraft have landed at Sam Neua, although previous flights to the area

a North Vietnamese helicopter en route to Laos may have crashed. contact with the helicopter was lost on 17 December and it was still unreported as of 18 December.

Chou En-lai on 19 December forwarded to Hanoi a "second Chinese Government statement on the situation in Laos" which noted that Peiping holds that the Laotian question should be settled by the Laotian people themselves without foreign interference. It condemned US imperialism for the grave situation in Laos. The statement gave full support to the 17 December North Vietnamese proposal for reconvening another Geneva conference and reactivating the ICC in Laos.

Prince Sihanouk told a Peiping rally on 19 December that "a new conference like the 1954 Geneva meeting on Indochina" should be convened to consider Laos. Hanoi will view Sihanouk's comment as evidence of neutral support for the North Vietnamese call for another Geneva conference and reactivation of the ICC. The ICC for Vietnam also has been the recipient of another North Vietnamese protest calling for "urgent measures to stop the dangerous activities of the US 7th Fleet in South Vietnam!" US fleet movements were linked to events in Laos by North Vietnam's chief of staff, General Vo Nguyen Giap, who sent the protest to the ICC in Vietnam on 17 December.
