Congo: Hammarskjold said on 9 May that contrary to fears in Katanga, the UN did not intend to use force to secure the withdrawal of Belgian military or political advisers from the Congo. He added, however, that any Belgians who fell into UN hands would be repatriated. Hammarskjold now plans to keep Dayal in New York for about five weeks; thereafter, if relations between Leopoldville and the UN remain cordial, he will return Dayal to Leopoldville for a brief stay. Hammarskjold said that Nkrumah is not pressing his threat to withdraw Ghana's troops from the Congo and expressed doubts that the Ghanaian President would do so.

According to the American Embassy in Brussels, Belgian Foreign Ministry officials regard the arrest of Tshombé, who is now being removed to Leopoldville under guard, as a stupid maneuver which might increase unrest in Katanga without facilitating a rapprochement between Leopoldville and Stanleyville. Brussels reportedly is attempting to keep itself disengaged from the public dispute over Tshombé, although it has told Congolese representatives in New York that it disapproves of Leopoldville action.

Iran: The Iranian Government has forbidden any further demonstrations, except at one specified public stadium where assemblies may be held "to express the people's demands" and stated it will take strong measures to maintain order.

Crowds, including many students, have been in the streets, however, celebrating the collapse of Sharif-Emami's cabinet and hailing the government's announcement that the police officer responsible for killing a demonstrator last week would be prosecuted. The teachers' organization, which sparked the earlier demonstrations, appears willing to continue its strike for higher wages, although its leader, Mohammad Derakhshesh, appears undecided. He has been mentioned as a possible candidate for minister of education, a cabinet post not yet filled by Amini.

Amini has told the American ambassador that he intends to draw up a new election law, to work for and with the Shah, and to ask for prompt US aid in carrying out major reforms.

11 May 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
