[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 November 1959

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 NOVEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Arab League oil experts call for Arab-owned pipeline from Persian Gulf, Arab tanker fleet, boycott of oil firms operating in Algeria.

Nepalese prime minister alert to threat from China but says his domestic position requires for the present a policy of "pragmatic neutralism."

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 November 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Middle East Oil: Oil specialists from nine of the Arab League's ten member states and delegates from Kuwait, Qatar, and Bahrein have indicated trends in Arab thinking on oil questions during a ten-day meeting which began in Jidda on 26 October. The delegates called for building a pipeline from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean, to be owned by the Arab governments involved; establishing an Arab tanker fleet; and boycotting firms operating in Algeria--which includes most of the major oil companies operating in Arab lands.

The Saudi delegate advocated converting the oil companies to national companies directed by Arab governments. Saudi Arabia's American legal consultant urged producing countries to scrap the 50-50 profit-sharing formula and enact income-tax legislation without prior consultation or negotiations. The experts' proposals will be voted on at the 11 December meeting of the Arab League's High Economic Council.

Nepal: Prime Minister Koirala in late October assured the American ambassador that he was alert to the threat of Chinese infiltration and subversion in Nepal, but said his domestic position required that he maintain a policy of "pragmatic neutralism" toward Peiping. Koirala explained that he does not consider he can take full control of foreign policy until he has consolidated his personal power and developed a closer understanding with King Mahendra, who he feels is still under the influence of certain pro-Chinese palace advisers. Koirala reiterated his interest in increased American aid and in an early visit to the United States.
(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Nepalese Prime Minister Reaffirms Neutralist Policy

Prime Minister Koirala reassured the American ambassador in late October that his government is fully aware of the threat to Nepal posed by Communist China and that it is concerned over China's opportunities for subversion and infiltration across the Tibetan frontier. Koirala added, however, that he would have to maintain his present policy of "pragmatic neutralism" toward Peiping and the Sino-Indian border dispute "for the time being." The Nepalese leader explained that until he consolidated his position domestically and developed a closer understanding with King Mahendra he could not exert full control over the country's foreign policy. Koirala, whose government took office on 29 May, believes that the King is still under the influence of certain palace advisers who are sympathetic toward China.

The prime minister said that Chinese Communist propaganda activity in Nepal had been increasing noticeably and that his government attributed this to recent financial support from the Chinese diplomatic mission in New Delhi. Koirala also reported that Soviet officials were making progress in establishing their resident embassy in spite of logistic difficulties. The Soviet ambassador presented his credentials on 29 September, and Soviet technicians are beginning to arrive under Moscow's economic aid program.

The King and government leaders expressed general approval of the American aid program, and Koirala personally restated his desire for further assistance. He is primarily interested in agreement on a currency stabilization project and in procurement of additional aircraft for border surveillance and internal security. In this connection, Koirala hopes to visit the United States some time

[PAGE 06]
before the current UN General Assembly session concludes. He stressed, however, his conviction that such a visit would be advisable only if he returned with "concrete benefits" with which to impress both the palace and the public with American interest in Nepal.

Koirala probably believes that his own political interests as well as those of his government will be best served by carefully balancing Nepal's relations with Moscow, Peiping, Washington, and New Delhi to gain the maximum benefits from each without antagonizing any one of them.

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
  Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
  Scientific Adviser to the President
  Director of the Budget
  Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
  Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
  Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
  Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
  Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
  Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
  The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
  The Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State
  The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
  The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
  The Counselor
  Director, International Cooperation Administration
  The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
  The Secretary of Defense
  The Deputy Secretary of Defense
  Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
  The Secretary of the Army
  The Secretary of the Navy
  The Secretary of the Air Force
  The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
  Commandant, United States Marine Corps
  The Director, The Joint Staff
  Chief of Staff, United States Army
  Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
  Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
  Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
  Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
  Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
  Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
  Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
  Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
  Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
  The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
  The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
  The Chairman
National Security Agency
  The Director
National Indications Center
  The Director

[PAGE 08]
