GENERAL

1. NATO Council of Ministers to consider Greek-Turkish membership at Ottawa 15 September:

The NATO Deputies decided on 1 August that the Council of Ministers will meet in Ottawa on 15 September in the "preliminary" session which the US hopes will bring agreement on admitting Greece and Turkey. It was decided that discussion of Germany will await the regular annual meeting to be held in Rome in October.

In the discussion on the scheduling of these meetings, Denmark and France, supported by the UK, stressed their desire for information on the contemplated command structure involving Greece and Turkey before reaching a final decision on those two countries' admission to NATO. The US reiterated the difficulties of settling the command structure now, as Greece and Turkey refuse to discuss that question prior to being assured of admission. The British representative offered some hope that the UK might be won over to the US point of view.

In summarizing the attitudes expressed by the various NATO members, the US Deputy points out that there is no assurance that the September meeting will produce a final decision on extending membership to Greece and Turkey.

2. UK sharply protests Nehru's charges against British generals:

Prime Minister Attlee's sharp protest in the House of Commons against Indian Prime Minister Nehru's 16 July statement, which charged improper activity by British military advisers to Pakistan, followed a British investigation and a very determined but unsuccessful British attempt in New Delhi to obtain a withdrawal of the allegations.

Comment: The seriousness with which the UK Government has evidently taken Nehru's charges is a measure of the importance which, since 1947, it has attached to maintaining a position of complete impartiality in all military matters affecting India and Pakistan. In the present period of tension between the two Commonwealth countries, the UK seems particularly anxious to avoid arousing antagonisms that might preclude the development of the defensive capabilities of these countries in line with Britain's over-all strategy in South Asia.
