[PAGE 01]
31 December 1952
US OFFICIALS ONLY
Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Rumania plans to send bearings to China (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Communist pilots in Korea demonstrate high degree of proficiency (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE

LATIN AMERICA
4. Guatemalan Government reportedly arming Communist and exile groups (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Rumania plans to send bearings to China:

Comment: Rumanian imports a large proportion of its own bearing requirements. These export plans and recent Bulgarian shipments to China of items which Bulgaria also imports, such as machinery and electrical equipment, demonstrate that even these less-developed European Satellites are being called upon to furnish a share of the industrial goods required for the Chinese industrialization program.

FAR EAST
2. Communist pilots in Korea demonstrate high degree of proficiency:
Communist pilots during the week ending 28 December showed an unusually high degree of proficiency, according to the Far East Air Force. Although avoiding engagements with UN F-86's, the Communists displayed an unusual variety of tactics designed to position themselves for brief firing passes.

This departure from the pattern of the previous six weeks suggests that more experienced pilots are again over Korea for additional combat training. FEAF believes that well-trained units are experimenting with tactics to develop an intercept pattern against F-86's, or aircraft of comparable performance.
[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE

LATIN AMERICA
4. Guatemalan Government reportedly arming Communist and exile groups:
The Guatemalan Government, no longer trusting the army, is arming secret civilian groups to defend it in the event of a crisis. These elements, reportedly numbering about 1,500 men, include about 500 Communist "shock troops" as well as groups of exiles from neighboring countries.

Comment: growing discontent within the army over Communist infiltration in the government. Unrest seems most evident among lower-ranking army officers
[PAGE 05]
and in the small air force, despite the fact that the present government has given the armed forces unprecedented benefits.

Communist-controlled labor organizations are reportedly well armed and under standing orders to fight for the government in the event of an attempted revolt. Labor's timely support helped save the government in July 1949 when part of the army revolted.
