[PAGE 01]
30 January 1953
TOP SECRET
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Italy indicates it will block Iranian oil barter deal (page 3).
2. Tito hints acceptance of Trieste compromise and Italian participation in Balkan pact (page 3).
3. Large Western shipments of strategic metals to Soviet bloc noted (page 4).

FAR EAST
4. Chinese Communist paratroop division may be moving to Manchuria (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Israel may transfer Foreign Office to Jerusalem around 15 March (page 5).
6. Sudan disorders predicted if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations fail (page 6).
7. Tito proposes treaty with Greece and Turkey (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Italy indicates it will block Iranian oil barter deal:

the Rome government was not aware of any Iranian-Italian-Polish oil deal or that the Italian-owned Miriella's cargo of Iranian oil is destined for Poland, The government will not issue export licenses for Italian products sent to Iran in exchange for oil and expects that this will prevent such a three-way deal.

Comment: Italy would not interfere with this shipment, Even though the denial of export licenses would probably discourage further oil deals, it might not affect the disposition of the Miriella's present cargo.

the Miriella's oil will not go to Poland, but will be used for bunkering in Italy.

2. Tito hints acceptance of Trieste compromise and Italian participation in Balkan pact:

Turkish Foreign Minister Koprulu told Ambassador Peurifoy in Athens that, in reply to his suggestion that provision be made for eventual Italian adherence to a Balkan defense pact, Tito said that this could probably be arranged and that the Trieste issue itself was capable of "reasonably prompt solution."

Koprulu deplores Premier de Gasperi's attempts to have the West exert pressure on Belgrade in order to achieve a favorable Trieste solution. The Turkish Foreign Minister
[PAGE 04]
hopes that after the Italian elections it will be possible to obtain an early solution of the Trieste issue and secure Italian adherence to a Greek-Turkish-Yugoslav protocol.

Comment: Tito has offered to put aside the Trieste question in order to achieve closer economic and military collaboration with Italy. In a private conversation earlier this month the Italian political adviser in Trieste admitted that Premier de Gasperi would be able to make substantial concessions on Trieste after the Italian elections.

3. Large Western shipments of strategic metals to Soviet bloc noted:

Comment: These shipments illustrate the continuing evasion of export controls. It is estimated that in 1951 three times as much lead and one and one-half times as much copper was shipped to the Orbit from the West. Reports for the first five months of 1952 showed that the volume of strategic Western goods transshipped to the Orbit was increasing.
[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

4. Chinese Communist paratroop division may be moving to Manchuria:

Comment: This Chinese Communist paratroop division, the only one identified, has apparently been training at Kaifeng for more than a year.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Israel may transfer Foreign Office to Jerusalem around 15 March:

The French Charge in Tel Aviv has been informed by the Israeli Foreign Minister that the Ben Gurion government will transfer its Foreign Office from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem around 15 March. The Charge also stated that other diplomatic missions have apparently been told by the Israelis that the move would take place "before summer."

According to the American Ambassador in Paris, current opinion in the French Foreign Ministry favors an immediate demarche against the proposed move by the United States, Britain and France.

Comment: Israel has long insisted that Jerusalem is its real capital and has accordingly transferred all the governmental departments, except the Foreign Office, to the Israeli part of the city.
[PAGE 06]
An Israeli "fait accompli" in regard to the transfer would be strongly opposed by all the Arab states, with the exception of Jordan, which now shares de facto control of the city. It would also meet vigorous opposition from the Vatican, and from many Latin American countries which favor the internationalization of Jerusalem.

6. Sudan disorders predicted if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations fail:

at Khartoum, a British citizen with 26 years of experience in the Sudan, believes that serious outbreaks will occur there if an Anglo-Egyptian agreement is not reached. He believes Britain is losing the good will of the Sudanese and may jeopardize its future position by prolonged delay in concluding a settlement.

Comment: Other sources have stated that disorders in the Sudan may occur if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations on self-government fail. Reports also indicate that Egypt has succeeded in gaining considerable Sudanese support by insisting on a greater degree of independence than the British have proposed.

7. Tito proposes treaty with Greece and Turkey:

Turkish Foreign Minister Koprulu told Ambassador Peurifoy on 28 January that, during recent Belgrade talks, Tito had proposed a "tripartite treaty of friendship" between Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia. Koprulu had expressed his approval provided the treaty in no way contravened prevailing NATO obligations, and had stated he hoped that such a political arrangement would be a step toward Yugoslav membership in NATO.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Turkey has previously reported that Tito has been pressing for specific mutual security commitments. It has assured Britain and the United States that it would make no military or political arrangements which might contravene its NATO obligations.

There is widespread Western agreement that Yugoslavia should eventually be associated with NATO, but that the time is not yet ripe.
