said any Western move toward "aggravating the military conflict" would lead to the defeat of the Boun Oum government. Khrushchev offered no new proposals for arranging a settlement and confined himself to reaffirming Soviet support of Souvanna Phouma as the lawful government and for Prince Sihanouk's proposal for a 14-nation conference. Khrushchev said he would welcome a neutral Laos on the Austrian model, pursuing a policy like Cambodia's and Burma's.

In Laos, military pressure by Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces west of the Plaine des Jarres continues to increase. Muong Kasey, an important point on the Vientiane - Luang Prabang highway, is reported to have been occupied by the enemy on 10 March. This report follows the withdrawal earlier this week of government troops from the strategic Phou Khoun road junction north of Muong Kasey. The Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces evidently are continuing to press this initial advantage, but information available as of 0500 EST today is insufficient to tell whether they have embarked on a major ef-

*USSR: Ambassador Thompson feels that Khrushchev's remarks on a nuclear test ban during their private conversation on 9 March indicate that the USSR has less interest than formerly in a treaty and may intend to use the question of French adherence as an excuse for failure to reach agreement. After stressing that the main question was complete and general disarmament and not a test ban, Khrushchev stated that the USSR was willing to sign a treaty but questioned whether France would adhere. In reply to the ambassador's question on Communist China's adherence, Khrushchev pointed out that France was conducting tests whereas China was not. He added, however, that the Chinese may "achieve progress" in this field and that it would be necessary for both France and Communist China to sign an agreement.

Khrushchev's attempt to play down the urgency of a test ban agreement contrasts with his recent public pronouncements on this issue. Khrushchev may feel his freedom of action in

11 Mar 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
