Soviet - East German Trade Relations

Trade between East Germany and the USSR is planned to reach a level of over $2 billion this year. Soviet deliveries of many commodities, including ferrous and nonferrous metals, are scheduled to increase in line with the provisions of the long-term agreement, while deliveries of chemicals and engineering products are to be higher than the amounts stipulated by the agreement. The total increase in trade is not sufficient to enable East Germany to reduce significantly its reliance on West Germany as a source of many necessary materials. West Germany now accounts for about 11 percent of East Germany's total trade and is second only to the USSR as East Germany's most important trading partner.

East Germany will probably seek alternate sources for traditionally West German imports in other Western countries as well as in the satellites. Trade with the industrial countries of the West, however, would be limited by East Germany's inability to provide goods of sufficient quality and quantity to pay for them.

In at least one key industry--chemicals--East German officials reportedly already feel that earlier estimates concerning the reduction of dependence on West German deliveries were overly optimistic and must be revised. They fear that it may take as long as three years to become independent of West German chemical deliveries and five years to achieve independence from other Western countries. Other areas of the East German economy--machine building and metallurgy--are probably even more sensitive to any interruption of Western imports. While East Germany has affirmed its great interest in continuing interzonal trade, Deputy Premier Heinrich Rau hinted at a press conference at the Leipzig Fair that the regime intends to change the character of such trade. "It may be that we may no longer need the same goods," he said, "but we shall need other goods instead; goods for which we can overnight switch over to other suppliers."

11 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
