[PAGE 01]
5 July 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet fighter aircraft scrambled against US RB-47 reconnaissance aircraft in Barents Sea, but no evidence aircraft was downed by hostile action.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Recent escape of Prince Souphannouvong and other NLHS party leaders from prison prompted by fear of impending "liquidation" by government. (TOP SECRET DAUNT ISHTAR)
Cambodia--Reports persist of pending arms deal with Czechoslovakia.

III. THE WEST
Venezuela wants OAS to convene foreign ministers' meeting not later than 15 July to take action against Dominican Republic.

LATE ITEM
High Indonesian officers urge Nasution to seize power.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The US RB-47 which failed to return from a routine reconnaissance flight over the Barents Sea on 1 July may be down in an area approximately midway between the Kola Peninsula and Novaya Zemlya.
the US aircraft did not approach closer than 30 nautical miles to Soviet territory. At least six fighter aircraft were scrambled during the period that the mission aircraft was under Soviet radar surveillance, but there is no conclusive evidence that an intercept was accomplished. Two fighters from a Kola Peninsula base were vectored in what appeared to be an identification pass against the US aircraft. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos:
the escape of Prince Souphannouvong and 15 other leaders of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) party from a Vientiane prison last May was prompted by the prisoners' fear of impending "liquidation" by the government, and was coordinated with the Pathet Lao central headquarters. The prisoners were convinced that the triumph of the militantly anti-Communist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI) in the late April national elections foreshadowed their early prosecution and the suppression of all pro-Communist elements in Laos. Communist propaganda continues to place heavy emphasis on the "dangerous antipopular" nature of the Somsanith government in Vientiane. (Page 2)

[PAGE 05]
Cambodia: Recent statements by Chief of State Sihanouk indicate he does not contemplate requesting arms and aircraft from Communist China in the immediate future unless he is provoked by sudden inimical acts by South Vietnam or Thailand. Reports persist, however, of a pending arms deal with Czechoslovakia, where a Cambodian mission headed by Deputy Premier Tioulong now is visiting. Sihanouk may have in mind a stand-by arrangement with Czechoslovakia or may be planning to use such arms to outfit Cambodian irregular forces, pending American reaction to Cambodia's request for stepped-up aid to the Cambodian regular forces. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Caribbean: Venezuelan Foreign Minister Arcaya wants the meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States, which Venezuela has requested for 6 July, to convene a meeting of foreign ministers not later than 15 July to take action against the Dominican Republic. Venezuela holds the Trujillo regime responsible for the 24 June attempt to assassinate President Betancourt, and Arcaya has told the American ambassador that if the OAS does not act firmly his government will be unable to restrain its people from direct action against the Trujillo regime. Colombian President Lleras Camargo is also intent on OAS action against Trujillo and has told the American ambassador in Bogota that, if action is taken first against Trujillo, he will then help persuade other Latin American governments to take quick action against Fidel Castro.
The Venezuelan government expects another assassination attempt against Betancourt, possibly as early as 5 July.
Betancourt plans to take military action to overthrow the Trujillo regime shortly after the Venezuelan case has been presented to the OAS foreign ministers. Betancourt has reportedly designated ex-President Figueres of Costa Rica to organize an anti-Communist and anti-Castro junta for the Dominican Republic following Trujillo's ouster. (Page 4)

5 July 60
DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

Indonesia: A group of high-ranking Indonesian army officers is reported urging Army Chief of Staff General Nasution to seize power at once in order to thwart President Sukarno's pro-Communist activities. According to a headquarters staff officer, these officers have informed Nasution that unless he supports them they will take steps without him against the president. The informant stressed that this action might occur at any moment. Sukarno is maneuvering to replace several officers who have been particularly active against the Communists, and is said to have ordered Nasution to discontinue all anti-Communist activity. Army leadership has been gravely concerned for months over Sukarno's continued concessions to the Communists.

[PAGE 07]
US RB-47 FLIGHT INTO
BARENTS SEA AREA 1 JULY 1960

FLIGHT ROUTE OF US RB-47
FLIGHT TRACKS OF SOVIET FIGHTER AIRCRAFT

NOVAYA ZEMLYA
PLAN NORT
Belushya Guba
POSSIBLE TRACK
Amderma

Kola Penn.
Salekhard
Archangel

STATUTE MILES
NAUTICAL MILES

[PAGE 08]
US RB-47 Aircraft Missing Over Barents Sea

A US RB-47 which flew into the Barents Sea area on 1 July on a routine reconnaissance flight that was to have lasted approximately four hours failed to return from its mission.

the RB-47 was tracked until approximately 1533Z (1133 EDT) to an area midway between the Kola Peninsula and the southwest tip of Novaya Zemlya.

The cause of the plane's failure to return is unknown. There is no conclusive evidence that a hostile intercept was accomplished, although at least six Soviet interceptors were scrambled during the period that the mission aircraft was under Soviet radar surveillance. Two Soviet fighters from a Kola Peninsula base made an apparent visual identification pass at approximately 1500Z

the US aircraft did not approach closer than 30 nautical miles to Soviet territory, maintaining an average distance of 50 to 60 nautical miles from the Kola Peninsula at an altitude of more than 32,000 feet.

Press reports indicate that Soviet ships joined in the American-Norwegian air search for the missing aircraft. There is no firm communications intelligence reflecting Soviet air search activity.

[PAGE 09]
Souphannouvong's Escape Last May in Laos Clarified

Much of the mystery surrounding the dramatic escape of Prince Souphannouvong and 15 other leaders of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) party from a Vientiane prison on 24 May has been clarified.

The escape was conceived by the prisoners themselves in the belief that the dominant position gained by the militantly anti-Communist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI) in the late April elections spelled their early "liquidation" and the suppression of all pro-Communist elements in Laos.
the escape might have been arranged by government elements, possibly to deflate CDNI strong man General Phoumi or to avoid a trial, which had become a matter of international concern.

the prisoners earlier in May had informed the Pathet Lao central headquarters of their plight, and had requested that "military forces or guides at least" be sent to Vientiane to facilitate their escape. On 17 May, headquarters agreed that "it would be good if they can escape," but cautioned of the need for preparations to guarantee success.

There has been no direct word of Souphannouvong since his escape, but he probably has made his way to the Pathet Lao headquarters, believed located in the Laotian - North Vietnamese border area. The continuing heavy emphasis in Communist propaganda on the "dangerous antipopular" nature of the Somsanith government in Vientiane suggests that a recrudescence of the "civil war" is in the offing, now that political lines in Laos have been more sharply defined.

[PAGE 10]
Reports Persist of Cambodian-Czech Arms Deal

Recent criticism by Cambodian Chief of State Sihanouk of the alleged imbalance between American military aid to Cambodia and that given South Vietnam, Thailand, and Laos indicates that, unless provoked by inimical acts by these neighboring states, he is not contemplating requesting a major arms program from the Communist bloc in the immediate future. Sihanouk is quoted by a correspondent of the London Observer as saying he might be forced to accept proffered bloc arms--including jet aircraft--unless the United States "radically revises" its anti-Communist military aid policy in Southeast Asia by the year's end. Previously, he had indicated he would prefer an increase in American military aid to Cambodia combined with a decrease of such aid to the neighboring states.

Reports persist, however, of a pending arms deal with Czechoslovakia, where a Cambodian mission headed by Deputy Premier and Minister of Plans Nhiek Tioulong is visiting. The ordnance chief of the Cambodian Defense Ministry is with Tioulong.

Sihanouk may be contemplating a stand-by arrangement with Czechoslovakia, pending American reaction to Cambodia's request for more and newer arms for the Cambodian armed forces. He may calculate that Czech arms, procured either on a purchase or grant basis, could be used to outfit Cambodian irregular forces without jeopardizing America's military aid program for the regular troops. Sihanouk is pushing the expansion of irregular forces, particularly the Cambodian Socialist Youth commandos, on the grounds that threatened external attacks can best be met by village-level troops trained in guerrilla tactics.

[PAGE 11]
Venezuela and Colombia Want Early OAS Action Against
The Dominican Republic

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Arcaya wants the meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States, which Venezuela has requested for 6 July, to convene a meeting of foreign ministers as early as possible but not later than 15 July to take action against the Dominican Republic. Venezuela holds the Trujillo regime responsible for the 24 June attempt to assassinate President Betancourt and seeks anti-Dominican action by OAS members under Article 8 of the Rio Pact for the mutual defense of the 21 American republics. Article 8 permits measures ranging from recall of chiefs of mission to the use of armed force.

When informing the US ambassador on 30 June of Venezuela's intent to call for OAS action, Arcaya said that, if the OAS does not act quickly and firmly in this situation, the Venezuelan Government will be unable to restrain its people from direct action, since both public opinion and the military favor an attack, even without a declaration of war.

The Venezuelan Government has reports that another attempt will be made to assassinate Betancourt, possibly as early as 5 July.

Betancourt feels it is time for a showdown and plans to take military action to overthrow the Trujillo regime shortly after the Venezuelan case has been presented to the OAS foreign ministers. Betancourt has reportedly designated former President Figueres of Costa Rica to organize an anti-Communist and anti-Castro junta for the Dominican Republic following Trujillo's fall, and has plans for a naval patrol to prevent Cuba from intervening. Following Trujillo's ouster, Betancourt plans to call a meeting of Latin American governments to denounce Castro as undemocratic and call for his overthrow.

Colombian President Lleras Camargo is also intent on OAS action against Trujillo and told the American ambassador in Bogota on 29 June that, if action is taken first against Trujillo, he will then help persuade other Latin American governments to take quick action

[PAGE 12]
against Fidel Castro. Lleras commented that most South American governments agree with him that Castro is a greater threat than Trujillo. Lleras is nevertheless a firm backer of Betancourt's position that the OAS must resolve the Trujillo problem first and believes that this priority is essential to the stability of the Betancourt regime. Lleras urged that the OAS act at least within a month on Trujillo and follow within 15 days with consideration of the Cuban situation.

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
