Soviet Proposals for an Interim Agreement on Berlin

An interim or "temporary" agreement on Berlin will probably be the focal point of the Soviet position in any future negotiations. The USSR introduced the idea of a temporary agreement on Berlin for the first time at the Geneva foreign ministers' conference on 10 June 1959. This proposal modified the original demand for a free city made in November 1958, in that it no longer called for an "immediate and complete abolition" of the occupation in West Berlin. Instead, Gromyko proposed that the West could retain certain rights for one year and that communications to Berlin would continue "in the present form." During this period the Western powers would reduce their troops in Berlin to "token" contingents, prohibit stationing of nuclear or rocket weapons in West Berlin, and prohibit subversive activities and hostile propaganda against the bloc; an all-German committee would be established to examine the questions of a peace treaty and unification. If this committee failed to reach agreement, the USSR would sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany, and Gromyko explained that this would terminate all Western rights in Berlin.

In response to Western counterproposals for an interim agreement, Gromyko on 19 June extended the Soviet plan to 18 months and modified it by proposing that at the end of this period the foreign ministers could resume consideration of the Berlin question but would have to give "due regard for the situation obtaining at that time." Gromyko was deliberately vague on the status of Western rights in Berlin after the expiration of the agreement. The 19 June proposal also dropped the provision for a guarantee of the interim status by the Big Four and East Germany.

On 28 July, shortly before the conference adjourned, Gromyko submitted another 18-month solution, incorporating previous provisions but aimed at "changing the existing situation in West Berlin." For the first time, the USSR formally spelled out a precise level for Western troops in Berlin--a combined total of 3,000 to 4,000. A four-power commission

13 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
