Soviet Bloc Shelter Programs; A Status Report

A US engineer who worked on the new US embassy in Warsaw from late 1959 through 1960 was informed by Polish builders that every building in Warsaw must have a shelter; upon seeing US-drawn plans for the new US embassy, the builders asked, "Where is the bomb shelter?" but did not insist on its inclusion. The engineer visited a number of Warsaw construction sites during the course of his stay in Poland and saw "many" which included the characteristics of basement air-raid shelters depicted in Soviet and Polish civil defense manuals.

The USSR has been building basement shelters for about a decade in new masonry buildings, including apartment houses. The principal satellites have also constructed basement shelters for several years. When fully equipped, these shelters offer good protection from fall-out but limited protection from the effects of blast. Other types of shelters which have been prepared in the Soviet bloc include light and heavy bunkers, subways, and tunnels. The heavier types of shelter should afford greater protection from high overpressures.

There is some evidence that the construction of basement shelters in Czechoslovakia as well as in the Soviet cities of Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, and Kharkov has been reduced or suspended. Possible explanations for such a step would include substitution of detached shelters because of increased use of prefabricated units built without basements, the limitation of basement shelter construction to small towns of low target potential, a sufficiency of basement shelters in certain areas, and greater reliance on partial evacuation of urban populations as a civil defense measure.

A reduction in basement shelter construction has not been conclusively demonstrated for all areas of the USSR and Czechoslovakia, and the recent reliable report from Warsaw indicates that Poland at least still considers the construction of basement shelters a valid civil defense measure.

13 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
