would supervise the agreement, and at the end of the period the Geneva Conference would reconvene if the all-German negotiation had failed. Moscow did not publish this proposal.

Shortly before the Paris summit meeting in May 1960, Moscow returned to the interim agreement. On 9 May the Soviet ambassador in Paris handed the French a new proposal also never published--extending the interim period to two years but describing the purpose of the agreement as preparing conditions for the "subsequent transformation of West Berlin into a free city." The new plan embodied the main features of the previous proposal: progressive reduction of Western garrisons, prohibition of nuclear or rocket weapons in West Berlin, and prohibition of subversive activity or hostile propaganda directed against the bloc. The agreement would "take account of declarations" by the USSR and East Germany to maintain access to Berlin in its present form, and these "engagements" by East Germany could take a form which would not signify diplomatic recognition by the West. The entire agreement would be supervised by a four-power committee.

At the end of the interim period, however, if an all-German committee failed to agree on the German question, the four powers would sign a peace treaty with the two German states, "or with one of them, as they would judge it desirable." Moreover, the four powers would be committed to take measures to create a free city in West Berlin. As in the proposal of November 1958, the USSR provided for some form of UN participation in guaranteeing the free city. Thus, unlike the previous proposal, this latest offer made a free city the explicit goal of the interim arrangements.

The only subsequent authoritative mention of an interim agreement was the USSR's 17 February memorandum to Bonn, which stated, "The Soviet position does not preclude the possibility of a temporary settlement of the West Berlin issue prior to the conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany, but on the condition that an exact date for the conclusion of this treaty is fixed." This reference to a peace treaty at the close of the interim period suggests that Moscow has in mind the unpublished proposal of 9 May 1960.

13 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
