[PAGE 01]
19 January 1960

Copy No. C 67

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
19 JANUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Moscow to finance second stage of UAR's Aswan dam. (1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iranian officials claim antiregime elements instigated recent Tehran student demonstrations. (2)
Iraqi political situation remains obscure as four groups seek licenses to operate as political parties. (3)
Nasir decides to withdraw UAR students from Bulgaria. (4)
Nepal considering Moscow's offers to participate further in construction of east-west trans-Nepal highway. (5)

III. THE WEST
West Germans call off their military talks with Spain. (6)
Cuban Government to start "legal" proceedings to expropriate large landholdings. (7)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
19 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-UAR: The UAR announced on 18 January that the Soviet Union has agreed to finance the second stage of the Aswan Dam on the same basis that Moscow agreed to participate in building the first stage of the dam.

The new agreement underscores Moscow's and Cairo's policy of continuing close economic relations despite recurring political frictions during the past year. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran: Recent student demonstrations in Tehran were inflamed by subversive elements and may represent the first serious subversive effort by Soviet agents since the beginning of the bloc's hostile propaganda campaign about a year ago. Several of the police present may have been cooperating with the instigators of the demonstrations.

Although the government warned publicly that it will take "forceful action," popular demonstrations by dissident groups are likely to occur from time to time, possibly to probe the effectiveness of security elements. (Page 2)

Iraq: The Iraqi political scene remains somewhat obscure. Since the legalization of political party activity on 6 January, four groups have applied for recognition as political parties--including two competing Communist factions. In addition, pro-Communist People's Court President Col. Mahdawi has declared his intention of forming a "People's" party with Qasim's blessing.

Intense party activity will continue at least until Qasim indicates which parties will be licensed. (Page 3)
[PAGE 05]
UAR-Bulgaria: Nasir has decided to withdraw UAR students now in Bulgaria. This decision stemmed from Sofia's refusal to allow the UAR Embassy to investigate attacks made on UAR students by Communist students from other Arab countries. This will probably accelerate the deterioration of UAR-Bulgarian relations, which already have been strained by Sofia's anti-Nasir propaganda.

Nepal-USSR: Katmandu is considering Moscow's offers to extend its present economic aid to include a more detailed engineering survey, and possibly construction, of the projected 500- to 700-mile east-west highway across Nepal. King Mahendra apparently is impressed by the preliminary aerial survey recently completed by Soviet technicians under the $7,500,000 aid program signed in April 1959, and is putting pressure on Prime Minister Koirala to agree to let the USSR go on with the job. Koirala, perhaps hoping to stimulate further US aid, told the American ambassador he was resisting the proposal, which would substantially increase the number of Soviet technicians in Nepal. Soviet officials probably will try to obtain Nepalese agreement to further assistance during President Voroshilov's state visit early in February. (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

West Germany - Spain: The West Germans have "indefinitely postponed" their conversations on military cooperation with Spain which were scheduled to take place in Madrid between 18 and 22 January. In making this decision, Bonn apparently has taken cognizance of warnings from General Norstad that such talks would have a "most adverse" effect at this time on Bonn's relationship with some of its allies.

19 Jan 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
Cuba: After eight months of extralegal takeovers of private lands, the Castro government has announced that it will start court proceedings on 19 January to expropriate large landholdings "legally." Hundreds of such actions are to be started simultaneously all over the island and will affect Cuban and foreign-owned property. The expropriations will increase the power of the National Agrarian Reform Institute, which already controls much of the Cuban rural economy.

19 Jan 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Agrees to Grant Cairo Additional Economic Aid

Cairo announced on 18 January that the Soviet Union has agreed to aid the UAR in building the second stage of the Aswan Dam, on the "same basis" as Moscow agreed to participate in the first stage of construction. The Soviet Union extended a $100,000,000, low-interest, 12-year credit to Cairo in November 1958 to cover the foreign exchange costs incurred during the first stage--essentially the construction of coffer dams and the digging of diversionary tunnels. Total foreign exchange costs of all stages of the $1.3 billion project have been estimated at about $400,000,000. Moscow now apparently will extend an additional credit to the UAR for equipment, material, and technical assistance for construction of the main or high dam itself.

The Soviet press has given extensive coverage to the ceremonies held at Aswan on 9 January officially inaugurating the start of construction on the first stage of the dam. While emphasizing the "selflessness" of the USSR's aid to Cairo, Soviet propaganda portrayed Soviet-UAR relations in a more friendly vein than has been noted in recent months.

In addition to underscoring Moscow's policy of extending economic aid to the UAR despite recurring political frictions during the past year, the Soviet commitment will virtually eliminate the possibility of Western participation in building the dam.

19 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iranian Student Demonstrations Exploited by Subversive Elements

The recent student riots in Tehran showed signs of having been instigated by nonstudent, antiregime elements, according to both Prime Minister Eqbal and the Iranian National Information and Security Organization (SAVAK). Eqbal claims it has been definitely established that subversive forces attempted to inflame and exploit student dissatisfaction. Forty-one adults were arrested on suspicion of inciting the riot, pamphlets distributed during the demonstration were signed by the "Central Committee of the Tudeh" (Communist) party and by the "Students' Underground Committee," and some policemen failed to attempt to restrain the demonstrators.

Eqbal also stated on 15 January that Soviet agents may have been involved and that this activity may represent the first serious subversive effort by the Soviet-backed Tudeh party since the bloc's radio propaganda campaign against the Shah's regime was begun about one year ago.

As stone-throwing student groups, sparked by dissatisfaction over increased academic standards, converged on the Parliament and Education buildings, they were dispersed by forceful police action. Some of the rioters were injured and government property was damaged. Continued government concern over the possibility of a new outbreak is indicated by heavy troop and police guards at all high schools whose students participated in the disturbances.

Because of widespread public dissatisfaction, there is a continuing danger in Iran that agitators can turn peaceful protests into violent outbreaks against the regime. Despite the Shah's attempts to carry out reforms over the past year, the basic causes of general discontent remain and could be exploited by dissident elements.

19 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 2
[PAGE 09]
The Iraqi Political Situation

Qasim's delay in granting licenses to groups which have applied for legal recognition under the political parties law of 6 January is increasing the rivalry between contending factions. Four groups, including two professing to represent the Iraqi Communist party, have applied for recognition. These parties include the socialistic National Democratic party (NDP); the United Democratic Party of Kurdistan (UDPK); an "orthodox" Communist faction led by long-time Communists Abd al-Qadir Ismail al-Bustani and Zaki Khayri, whose press organ is Ittihad al-Shaab; and a Communist splinter group under Daud Sayyigh, publisher of al-Mabda, a dissenter from Iraqi party leadership as far back as 1942.

Sayyigh's group, which professes to have Qasim's backing, appears to have suffered a setback by the withdrawal of six founding members. Sayyigh has accused the "orthodox" faction of "leftist deviation" and a departure from Arab nationalist principles, as well as a refusal to cooperate with other "democratic" but non-Communist elements.

Although the Communists remain the best organized party in Iraq, they appear to be unsure of Qasim's attitude toward them, fearing that his policy is to keep an equilibrium between opposing political factions in the country. Qasim's reported declaration to Sayyigh on 15 January that there must be only one Communist party in Iraq has resulted in an intensification by the "orthodox" Communist press to discredit the Sayyigh faction.

A new element introduced into the Iraqi political scene is the declaration by pro-Communist People's Court President Col. Mahdawi that he will form a "People's party" with the blessing of Qasim, probably after the termination of the current "treason" trials about the end of January.

19 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Nepal Considering Further Soviet Assistance on Major Highway

Nepalese leaders appear to be split over whether to accept further Soviet aid on the projected east-west highway across southern Nepal. Soviet technicians recently completed a preliminary ground and aerial survey under the $7,500,000 grant-aid agreement signed in April 1959.

King Mahendra apparently is impressed with the efficiency of the Soviet experts' study and is urging Prime Minister Koirala to agree to permit them to make a more detailed survey and possibly even undertake construction of the 500- to 700-mile road. Koirala, perhaps hoping to stimulate further American aid, told the US ambassador on 13 January that he and the minister of home affairs were resisting the idea. Koirala on several occasions has attributed his government's gestures toward the Soviet bloc to pressure from the palace. Katmandu in general has followed a policy of balancing its economic relations with Moscow, Peiping, New Delhi, and Washington in such a way as to gain maximum benefits from each.

Koirala apparently opposes further Soviet assistance on the road because it would require substantially increased numbers of Soviet technicians. Only a few have been admitted so far, to begin work on the power plant, sugar refinery, and cigarette factory to be built under last year's grant.

The Nepalese minister of industry and commerce meanwhile confirmed to the American ambassador that he was stalling on Peiping's offer to provide a cement plant under its 1956 aid agreement, apparently also because of reluctance to admit Chinese technicians.

19 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
