West Germany's Reinstated Interzonal Trade Agreement
With East Germany

West Berlin's Mayor Brandt has indicated that in the recently concluded negotiations reinstating the trade agreement between East and West Germany as of 3 January, the East Germans made concessions which put Bonn in a strong enough position in West Berlin to allow continuance of trade. The East Germans reportedly agreed not to implement the restrictions on West German travel to East Berlin which led Bonn last September to cancel the trade pact. Existing East German controls over traffic between West Berlin and West Germany are apparently also to be eased somewhat.

In return, Bonn has withdrawn its restrictions on West German firms participating in East Germany's annual Leipzig industrial fair next spring. The Western allies will probably also, although such is not part of the agreement, lift their restrictions--imposed as a result of Pankow's harassments of West Berlin--on East German officials traveling to the West.
In the course of the talks East Germany gained no added degree of diplomatic recognition and did not seriously try to prevent inclusion of West Berlin in the West German side of the agreement.

In both this agreement and the Soviet - West German trade pact, signed on 31 December, the Soviet bloc has avoided inflaming the Berlin situation for the time being, probably to impress the new US administration with its "reasonableness" and to prevent any slowdown in trade with West Germany which might inconvenience Soviet and East German economic plans.

Bonn has not yet informed its allies of the detailed formulation of the new agreement, although its chief negotiator has briefed a US official in Berlin on its various provisions. West Germany accepted weaker wording than it originally desired on several points. Although not to be implemented, the East German decree of 8 September restricting West German travel to East Berlin apparently has not been formally abrogated.

3 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
