Kenya

In the constitution of early 1960, British officials and Kenya nationalist leaders agreed that Africans would be given strong minority representation on the executive council in addition to a majority in the local parliament. The new system, which provided for 53 popularly elected members and 12 indirectly elected "national members," was put into effect following colony-wide elections last February. Of the 37 African seats in the 65-member parliament, KANU controls 20 seats and the smaller KADU 15; two seats are held by independents. The remaining 28 seats were allotted to the minority European, Asian, and Arab communities.

The constitutional arrangements in effect clearly indicated the early African domination of Kenya and the ending of white settler control over the colony's political life. The European community of some 66,000, in which a small group of large landholders has wielded influence disproportionate to their numbers, has for the most part reluctantly accepted the concept of ultimate African control. The Asian community of some 170,000--composed largely of commercial and small business entrepreneurs--is no longer a significant political force. The 37,000 Arab minority is conservative and will support efforts to form a representative government.

The leaders of KANU, president James Gichuru, general secretary Tom Mboya, Oginga Odinga, and Julius Kiano, are the most influential African nationalists in Kenya, and any government formed without their support would probably be short-lived. Ronald Ngala, the president of KADU, comes from the politically insignificant coastal area and has no important tribal backing. Most other KADU members represent minor tribes, and if in new elections constituencies were drawn strictly according to population, many KADU representatives would have little chance of being elected.

The release of Kenyatta and his early return to Kenya politics even in an advisory capacity would be of great significance to the nationalist movement. The Kikuyu tribe, the largest and
