Soviet Economic Aid for Syria

A high-level Soviet economic delegation and leading UAR officials of the Syrian region are holding talks in Cairo and Damascus which will probably lead to changes in the 1957 Soviet-Syrian economic cooperation agreement. The Soviet five-man delegation, headed by a deputy chairman of the USSR's committee on foreign economic relations, apparently has come to the UAR in response to complaints from Vice President Amir, Nasir's viceroy in Syria, that Moscow is not adequately fulfilling its economic aid commitments in Syria. Cairo in recent months has taken steps to speed up economic activity there in conjunction with Nasir's plans to coordinate the economic development programs of both regions of the UAR.

The original Soviet-Syrian agreement provided for an estimated $150,000,000 in Soviet long-term credits to be used to finance irrigation and hydroelectric power projects, transportation facilities, and geophysical surveys. The major project envisaged under the agreement is a dam, along with a power station and irrigation system, on the Euphrates River. Thus far, however, Soviet activity under the agreement has been limited largely to survey and planning work. Only about $20,000,000 of the Soviet credit has been drawn to date, in part because of inaction in Damascus.

The USSR's favorable response to a renegotiation of the Syrian agreement underscores Moscow's willingness to continue extending economic aid to the UAR despite political frictions. It is probably also intended to allay Nasir's suspicions that Moscow is behind Arab Communists' efforts to regain an independent status for Syria.

The revised agreement probably will cancel some of the formerly scheduled projects and provide for others, perhaps of an industrial nature. The Soviet Union may also be planning to offer new aid credits.

With the exception of almost $20,000,000 in economic aid from Czechoslovakia, other bloc economic credits to Syria have been of little consequence. The bloc has, however, supplied the Syrian region with more than $200,000,000 in military assistance.
