that he anticipated the arrest of as many as 1,000. The Ambassador comments that never before has he heard Phibun discuss the Communist threat with such deep concern.

there had been a considerable influx into Southern Thailand of Chinese "agriculturalists" from Bangkok who have no visible means of support.

Comment: Phibun's remarks seem to confirm the genuineness of the current Thai anti-Communist drive. On 5 December Police Director General Phao announced that a campaign would be launched against Chinese terrorists near the Malayan border, according to a Hong Kong press dispatch.

SOUTH ASIA

5. Afghanistan considers direct approach on Pushtoonistan:

Comment: This is the first indication that the Afghan Government might seriously consider negotiating the Pushtoonistan question in a direct, informal manner--an approach long urged by Western powers. It is also the first time that Afghanistan has displayed any sensitivity to world opinion on the Pushtoonistan issue. There is no evidence that the Afghan attitude has resulted from Soviet pressure.

Indications are that Pakistan would be willing to negotiate with such a mission.

6. Comment on political disorders in Indian-held Kashmir:

The Indian Government may be using current political disorders in Indian-held Kashmir as a pretext for reasserting its influence over Sheikh Abdullah's government, which is becoming increasingly independent, as well as to demonstrate the necessity for keeping strong Indian forces in the State.

The pro-Indian, Hindu-dominated Praja Parishad Party, which is responsible for the present disorders, is composed mainly of landlords who oppose Sheikh Abdullah's land reform policy of confiscation. It also favors complete integration of Kashmir with India.

The Praja Parishad was quickly suppressed by Abdullah's security forces early in 1952 in connection with unrest in the Jammu area. This time India ordered 186 policemen into Kashmir before there were any signs that the situation was out of control.
