Independent Cameroun Faces Serious Internal Problems

The French-administered UN trust territory of Cameroun becomes independent on 1 January, the first of at least five heretofore dependent African countries due to attain sovereign status during 1960. It is also the first trust territory to become independent, a fact pointed up by UN Secretary General Hammarskjold's trip to West Africa to attend the ceremonies which begin in Yaounde on 31 December. Several Soviet bloc delegations, including three from the USSR, will be present in response to the invitation extended to all UN members.

For the present at least, Cameroun will retain close ties with France. Prime Minister Ahidjo has initialed agreements providing for diplomatic, military, economic, and technical cooperation with Paris during the first six months of Cameroun's independence. It is clearly the hope both of Ahidjo and the French that these accords will then be put on a more permanent basis, but this hope is likely to be frustrated should more nationalistically inclined Camerounian elements gain power in the elections Ahidjo has promised for February or March.

The new state, an underdeveloped country slightly larger than California with a population of approximately 3,200,000 people, faces internal problems which pose a serious threat to its political stability and orderly development. A basic cleavage exists between the conservative Moslem traditionalists of the north and the Christian and pagan radicals who dominate politics in the south. More pressing, however, is the continuing and apparently increasing terrorist activity in southwestern Cameroun by elements of the important Bamileke tribe. Although this unrest among the Bamileke appears to be mainly social and economic in origin, it is nevertheless being exploited successfully by anti-Ahidjo extremists associated with the outlawed nationalist movement, the Union of the Cameroons Population. Countermeasures by the government have so far not proved effective, and the attacking bands, which are financed in part by Sino-Soviet bloc countries, appear to be growing in size.

31 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
