Situation in Laos

King Savang has signed an ordinance accrediting the Soviet ambassador and has scheduled an audience with him in Luang Prabang on 26 October. The King had stalled signing the ordinance for ten days, apparently in the hope that Souvanna's neutralist government would topple. Savang reportedly told that he had no alternative but to accept the Soviet envoy, even though he felt that this would open the door to Soviet infiltration, propaganda, and subversion, which, he said, "Laos is too weak to resist."

Souvanna reportedly left Vientiane on 22 October for a visit to Luang Prabang and two provincial capitals in northern Laos. He probably is attempting to shore up support for his government from General Ouane and other officers in Luang Prabang who, at least earlier, were close to breaking openly with Vientiane. Souvanna may also wish to consult with provincial officials on the Pathet Lao military effort in northern Laos.

With Souvanna and General Ouane out of Vientiane, Kong Le is free of any restraining influence. Reports indicate that Kong, who has been described as politically unsophisticated, has extensive contact with Pathet Lao sympathizers. On 22 October, he reportedly allowed Colonel Singkapo, a ranking Pathet Lao officer, to address a meeting of Laotian Army officers in Vientiane on the subject of neutrality. Rumors continue to circulate that Kong, possibly in cooperation with the Pathet Lao, may be planning an attack on General Phoumi's defense line in central Laos.

A Laotian Army patrol investigating the loss of a post in the southern province of Attopeu was attacked on 16 October by Pathet Lao troops wearing new uniforms. The Pathets, who previously have withdrawn in the face of Laotian Army probes, apparently had been resupplied and possibly reinforced. Troops under General Phoumi's control are considered capable of controlling only the principal towns in Attopeu Province, while the Pathets have freedom of movement throughout the
