[PAGE 01]
28 May 1960
Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
28 MAY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev in recent talks with East
German leaders refused to agree to any
timetable for signing separate peace
treaty.

Peiping steps up accusations against US
with "100th serious warning."

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey--Army in firm control following
military coup.

Anti-government elements in Iran may
be encouraged to act by developments in
Turkey.

Trust territory of Somalia faces govern-
ment crisis over invitation to Israel to
attend 1 July independence ceremonies.

India wants to purchase Sidewinder mis-
siles from US.

South Korea may experience more polit-
ical turbulence with approach of new Na-
tional Assembly elections this July.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
28 May 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: During Khrushchev's talks in East Berlin
the East German leadership pressed him
for some prompt action on a separate peace treaty but Khru-
shchev refused to commit the USSR to any specific timetable,
In an appar-
ent effort to placate the East Germans, Khrushchev agreed to
Ulbricht's suggestion that the peace treaty issue should be
raised through diplomatic channels. (Page 1)

Communist China - US: Peiping is using its "100th seri-
ous warning" to step up charges that "military provocations"
are a deliberate American policy. Linking the U-2 incident
with Peiping's own alleged grievances, a People's Daily edi-
torial on 27 May bitterly condemns the US. It makes no spe-
cific threat of retaliatory action but warns that "accounts will
be settled some day." (Page 2)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Turkey: The country remains quiet with the army in firm
control following the military coup on 27 May. Retired General
Cemal Gursel has emerged as the dominant figure. He is the
new commander of the armed forces and chairman of the "Na-
tional Unity Committee" which is to exercise control until elec-
tions can be held. The committee includes four other military
men and a retired colonel who is an official of the Republican
People's party (RPP). General reaction to the coup will prob-
ably be favorable in Turkey's larger cities, but the strongly
pro-Menderes peasantry, uninformed about the events leading
up to the coup, will probably be shocked by the sudden over-
throw. (Page 3)

[PAGE 05]
*Iran: The success of the military coup in Turkey might
encourage Iranians opposed to the Shah's personal rule to at-
tempt a similar action. There does not appear to be any civil-
ian group well enough organized to undertake a coup but some
army officers have been making tentative plans for a possible
move against the government and the Turkish developments
could precipitate action. The parliamentary elections sched-
uled for July, if they are as blatantly rigged as now appears
probable, will greatly increase public dissatisfaction with the
Shah and might also serve as a pretext for a move against the
government.

Somalia-UAR: The trust territory of Somalia, whose popu-
lation is predominantly Moslem, faces a government crisis. The
aggressive parliamentary opposition is attempting to exploit a
UAR protest against the invitation to Israel to attend Somalia's in-
dependence ceremonies on 1 July. The UAR, in a formal letter,
has requested cancellation of the invitation to Israel, intimating
that Cairo might prevail upon other Moslem and Arab nations to
join the UAR in boycotting the independence celebrations if Moga-
discio fails to comply.
ordered the
UAR consul general to try to arouse Somali public opinion on this
issue. (Page 5)

India: The government has requested that the United States
sell it Sidewinder air-to-air missiles. Previous reports had
indicated India was negotiating with Britain for the more costly
Firestreak missile, but as yet no agreement is known to have
been concluded. Indian interest in maintaining at least parity with
Pakistan in air defense systems, heretofore a compelling motive
in Indian defensive measures, may in this case be overshadowed
by growing Indian concern over Chinese Communist intentions fol-
lowing the failure of the Nehru-Chou talks in April.

South Korea: Acting Chief of State Huh Chung may find it dif-
ficult to maintain orderly processes of government with the approach
of new National Assembly elections which are expected to be held
this July. Although Huh appears determined to prevent irrespon-
sible retaliatory action against government personnel, exploitation

28 May 60 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
of popular resentments against the Rhee regime by political oppor-
tunists might force Huh to expand the purge of civil and military of-
ficials who are tainted by association with the old regime. Such ac-
tion would seriously hamper normal government activities, increase
army factionalism, and invite new political unrest. (Page 6)

28 May 60 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
Talks Between Khrushchev and Ulbricht in East Berlin

During Khrushchev's visit to East Berlin on 19-20 May,
East German party chief Ulbricht is said to have urged him
repeatedly to take prompt action on a separate peace treaty
with East Germany.
the East German lead-
er argued that a summit conference in six to eight months
was unlikely and there was therefore no point in maintaining
the status quo in the interim. Ulbricht reasoned that West-
ern agreement to a new summit would probably be conditioned
on positive assurances which would preclude a repetition of
the events in Paris. After assuring Ulbricht that no conces-
sions were made during his private talks with De Gaulle and
Macmillan, Khrushchev reportedly agreed with the East
German party chief's negative evaluation of the possibilities
for another summit. He refused, however, to commit the
USSR to a specific timetable on a separate peace treaty, and
agreed only to Ulbricht's suggestion that the Berlin and Ger-
man treaty questions be raised through diplomatic channels.

At a meeting of the SED and National Front leadership,
Khrushchev announced this agreement but remained "passive"
in the face of urgings to press ahead with an early "signing of
a separate treaty. At a farewell party Khrushchev reaffirmed
to Ulbricht that he would "not retreat from their agreed posi-
tion."

East German officials are reported to feel on the basis of
these talks that neither the German nor Berlin problem is like-
ly to be resolved at the summit level, and that Moscow now
will use normal diplomatic exchanges to propose separate
treaties with both German states. If the West rejects the So-
viet offer, the way would be open for a separate treaty with
East Germany. It is probable, however, that Khrushchev was
only attempting to placate the East German leaders and off-
set their visible disappointment over his public commitment
to maintain the status quo until another summit meeting could
be held in six to eight months.

[PAGE 08]
Peiping Issues "100th Serious Warning" Against US "Intrusions"

Communist China, to justify its bitter antagonism against
the United States, on 26 May summed up its long list of "seri-
ous warnings." Since 7 September 1958 when the first "warn-
ing" was issued, formalized protests charging "intrusion" by
US planes or ships have been routinely recorded in the Com-
munist press. On 26 May, however, the Chinese propaganda
media used the "100th serious warning," issued the day before,
as an excuse to consolidate the accusations and cite them as
"evidence" that the US follows a policy of deliberate military
provocation.

There has been no discernible pattern to the frequency
with which "warnings" have been issued and, on 26 May, a
Chinese commentator said the "intrusions far exceed the
warnings issued." The recent spate of complaints, however,
suggests the Chinese were anxious to reach the 100th com-
plaint in order to use it as a summation point while Peiping's
alleged grievances could borrow some air of credibility
from publicity surrounding the U-2 incident. A People's
Daily editorial on 27 May linked "intrusions over Soviet ter-
ritory" with similar "criminal acts against China" in an at-
tempt to document the Chinese position that the US "will never
change its character"—a line emphasized in recent criticism
of Khrushchev's policy toward the West. People's Daily
pointedly remarks that the Chinese people entertain no "un-
realistic illusions regarding US imperialism."

The People's Daily editorial makes no specific threat
of retaliatory action against US air or surface units nor
does it threaten Chinese Nationalist positions. "Accounts
will be settled some day," the editorial concludes.

[PAGE 09]
Turkish Military Coup

Turkey is quiet and apparently under tight military control
following the military coup on 27 May. The military commander
of Istanbul has lifted the daytime curfew, effective as of 1630 on
27 May, while continuing the night curfew from 2300 to 0400. In
Ankara, the 24-hour curfew remains in effect but the city is re-
ported calm.

General Cemal Gursel, who resigned as commander, Turkish
ground forces on 5 May, has emerged as the leader of the new
government. He is both chairman of the National Unity Committee—
the provisional government of the nation—and commander of the
Turkish armed forces. In a statement to the public, Gursel has
denied any desire to become a dictator, promising to prepare the
country for elections and then turn the country over to the winning
political party. Communiqués by the National Unity Committee
have emphasized that the coup was not directed against any person
or party and have promised that members of all parties will be
treated in accordance with the nation's laws.

Other members of the National Unity Committee are General
Cevdet Sunay, Lt. General Sahabettin Metel, Admiral Refet Arkun,
Lt. General Muzaffer Alankus, and retired Colonel Cemal Yildirim,
Istanbul leader of the Republican People's party (RPP). The posi-
tion of the leader of the RPP, Ismet Inonu, is not yet clear, but he
is believed to have been in contact with Gursel on the night of 26
May when the decision to attempt the coup apparently was made.

Nearly all of the political and military leaders of the previous
government have been taken into "protective custody." Premier
Menderes apparently was found near Eskishehir, where he had
addressed a rally on 26 May, and was escorted to Ankara. There
is an unconfirmed report that he was slightly wounded in the scuf-
fle which attended his arrest.

Both Istanbul and Ankara, where considerable anti-Menderes
sentiment had developed in recent weeks, apparently received the

[PAGE 10]
news of the coup with joy. The citizens of Ankara, while confined
to their homes, reportedly cheered passing army units. The new
government claimed a "festive mood" prevails in Istanbul. It may
be some time before the reaction of the rural areas, where Men-
deres enjoyed his greatest support, will be known, but it is unlikely
that any serious opposition to the military government will materi-
alize.

officials of the former govern-
ment were seized "fleeing to a foreign country by plane with all the
gold, money, and jewelry" of the Central Bank.

[PAGE 11]
Somalia Faces Government Crisis

Somali Prime Minister Issa's government faces a crisis
based on religious and political grounds as his country ap-
proaches independence on 1 July. The aggressive Cairo-
oriented opposition hopes to capitalize on hostility toward
Issa within the governing party by exploiting an 18 May UAR
protest against the invitation to Israel to attend Somalia's
independence ceremonies. The opposition, which has not
had an important issue to exploit since the government sud-
denly agreed last month to permit a union between Somalia
and British Somaliland, already has criticized the invitation
in speeches and pamphlets. It now reportedly plans to present
a motion in the Legislative Assembly urging cancellation of
the invitation.

The UAR followed up its protest by requesting Issa to
cancel the Israeli invitation and intimating that Cairo might
prevail upon other Moslem nations to join the UAR in boy-
In addition, Cairo ordered its consul gener-
al to try to arouse Somali
public opinion throughout the Horn of Africa on this issue.

Cairo's insistence on barring Israeli attendance at the
independence celebrations is in line with the Nasir regime's
growing diplomatic and propaganda campaign to undercut
Tel Aviv's economic and political efforts through Africa.
Nasir has called these efforts the "spearhead of imperialism."

The Somali cabinet decided on 24 May to permit the dis-
puted invitation to stand, although admitting that the decision
to invite Israel had been a mistake. The cabinet also agreed
that Issa should inform Cairo of its decision "as gently as
possible" and promise at the same time not to establish diplo-
matic relations with Israel.

[PAGE 12]
South Korean Situation

South Korean Acting Chief of State Huh Chung may find it in-
creasingly difficult to maintain orderly processes of government
with the approach of new National Assembly elections expected
to be held in July. Ambassador McConaughy in Seoul has noted
that raking up of old scandals involving persons formerly—and in
some cases still—prominent in the government has increased
and seems likely to grow. Although Huh appears determined to
prevent irresponsible retaliatory action against government per-
sonnel, exploitation by political opportunists of popular resent-
ment against the Rhee regime might force Huh to expand the purge
of civil and military officials tainted by association with the old
regime.

Encouraged by the new air of political freedom, a number of
small leftist and neo-fascist parties have sprung to life. As a re-
sult of public charges by the leader of one such group that Rhee
personally engineered the death of at least two past political op-
ponents, a leading newspaper has called for Rhee's exile. Offi-
cials of the conservative Democratic party have publicly stated
that Rhee should be tried if the charges are valid. An increase
in such muckraking with the approach of the elections could crip-
ple normal government activities, increase army factionalism,
and invite new political unrest.

Huh, recognizing the stabilizing role of the army, announced
in conjunction with the recent resignation of army chief of staff
Lt. Gen. Song Yo-chan that investigation of military commanders
involved in the 15 March election frauds would be discontinued.
However, alleged maneuvering by former National Youth Corps
leader Yi Pom-sok to win army support could provoke further
army factionalism. Yi, a neo-fascist, appears to have some
scattered support among military officers, and he may hope to
use the army to come to power in the event there is a breakdown
in civil government.

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
