[PAGE 01]
9 May 1959
Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 MAY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR planning to raise procedural
problems at opening of foreign min-
isters’ conference.

USSR might attempt to launch space
vehicle toward Venus in early June.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian rebels seek to counter mil-
itary setbacks by embroiling Tunisians
with French Army.

Qasim may be planning federal system
for Iraqi minorities.

Thailand plans Red Cross talks with
North Vietnam on repatriation of
Vietnamese refugees.

Laotian officials oppose continued
French control of Laotian army train-
ing.

South Korean Coast Guard attempts
seizure of Japanese fishing craft
outside “Rhee line.”

Chiang Kai-shek will retain
presidency beyond expiration of sec-
ond term next year.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Geneva foreign ministers’ meeting: Soviet preconfer-
ence tactics suggest that Moscow plans a number of pro-
cedural skirmishes at the foreign ministers’ conference be-
fore discussing substantive issues. The Soviet member of
the group making final technical arrangements for the con-
ference cited the absence of agreement on participation in the
conference, including the status of the two German delega-
tions, and said this should be settled by the ministers before
the first meeting. He argued that the German delegations
should be seated with the four great powers.
(Page 1)

Soviet space activity: There is some possibility that the
USSR will attempt a probe of the planet Venus in early June,
the time affording the most favorable conditions of the next
two years.
(Page 3)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian rebels - Tunisia - France: The Algerian rebels,
apparently beset by mounting military difficulties, show in-
creasing dissatisfaction with the support they are receiving
from Tunisia. Increasingly vigorous French Army operations
are occurring along the Algerian-Tunisian frontier, and Tuni-
sian forces have reportedly clashed on several recent occasions
with both French and Algerian rebel soldiers. A major incident
would require Tunisian President Bourguiba to make a sharp
diplomatic countermove, possibly involving the French base at
Bizerte and a resort to the Security Council.
(Page 4)
[PAGE 05]
Iraq: Iraqi Prime Min-
ister Qasim has held meetings with representatives of the
Assyrian minority to discuss the formation of a “federal re-
public” of Iraq composed of separate semi-autonomous minor-
ity republics. He is reported to have had similar meetings
with Kurdish and Turkoman leaders, all of whom are said to
have reacted favorably. Such a plan would conform with Qasim’s
already declared policy of affording a larger role to the minor-
ities in Iraq, and could serve as a device for creating unrest in
neighboring countries with similar minority problems.
(Page 6)

Thailand - North Vietnam: Thailand apparently has agreed
to direct talks between its National Red Cross organization and
the North Vietnamese Red Cross on repatriating the bulk of the
predominantly pro-Communist 50,000 Vietnamese refugees in
northeast Thailand. Such talks would represent an important de-
parture from Bangkok’s policy of avoiding any direct contact with
Communist North Vietnam and, if successful, would give Hanoi
a major propaganda victory at the expense of the Diem regime in
South Vietnam.
(Page 7)

Laos: Laotian officials appear adamant in their opposition
to continued French control of Laotian Army training, despite
French claims that the Laotians prefer French training. The
Laotian leaders identify the French Army with defeat in the Indo-
China war and also object to what they consider the “colonial arrogance”
and inefficiency of French officers. Paris, preparing for early
US-French talks on the problem, insists that any American role
be limited to “technical training,” with only French personnel
supervising combat training.
(Page 8)

South Korea - Japan: Seoul has resumed efforts to seize
Japanese fishing craft. A South Korean Coast Guard ship
reported an attempt—the first since January—to seize
a group of Japanese boats in the Tsushima Straits, well outside
the arbitrarily established “Rhee line.”
(Page 9)

9 May 59 DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
Nationalist China: Chiang Ching-kuo, son of President
Chiang Kai-shek, stated flatly on 6 May that his father would
retain his post as President after his present term expires
in 1960. There had been earlier indications that he would step
down. The constitutional ban against a third term presum-
ably will be overcome by a “juridical interpretation.” The
President’s intentions may be announced at the Kuomintang
central committee meeting scheduled to begin on 15 May.
(Page 10)

9 May 59 DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Tactics at Geneva

Soviet preconference tactics suggest that Moscow plans
a number of procedural skirmishes at the foreign ministers’
conference before opening substantive discussions. The
USSR apparently is attempting to force the ministers to meet
before the opening session to discuss outstanding procedural
questions including composition. The Soviet member of the
four-power group responsible for technical arrangements in
Geneva stated on 7 May that nothing could take place until the
ministers had decided who should participate in the first meet-
ing, and he flatly asserted that the Germans should be seated
at the table. He also rejected a square-shaped conference
table on the grounds that it would “prevent more than four par-
ticipating powers.” Already, Soviet propaganda has begun to
refer to the talks as “the round-table conference in Geneva.”

Soviet notes of 30 March had stated that the question of
Polish and Czech “participation” could be settled at the confer-
ence itself, and that the question of the “representation” of the
two German states was a “decided matter.” This vague word-
ing was accepted as indicating a desire not to obstruct the con-
vening of a foreign ministers’ conference by prior insistence
on the composition; it reserved the USSR’s right, however, to
bring this matter up as soon as the conference convened. There
have been hints that the USSR may intend to bring the nuclear
test cessation issue before the foreign ministers’ conference.

The Soviet delegate to the nuclear test talks asked the Brit-
ish delegate on 6 May for his views on the possibility of putting
some of the unresolved issues of test suspension before the for-
eign ministers. Again, on 7 May he stated that the question of
continuing sessions during the foreign ministers’ conference
would depend to a great extent on whether the ministers discuss
the test cessation issue. Soviet leaders may anticipate that,
by introducing the nuclear test issue at the foreign ministers’
[PAGE 08]
conference, they can obtain agreement in principle for their
present proposal at the Geneva nuclear test talks for a pre-
determined quota of annual on-site inspections of phenomena
suspected of having been nuclear explosions. They could then
maintain that the actual number of annual inspections would be
a suitable subject for discussion and agreement at the summit.

The counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Paris suggested
to a US official that the USSR would be willing to guarantee the
Berlin status quo in return for a reduction in Allied forces there,
and an agreement to cease subversive activities in both East
and West Berlin. Apart from Berlin, he said, the main points
for discussion should be a German peace treaty and force reduc-
tions in Central Europe, taking into account the 1954 Paris
agreements forbidding German development and possession of
atomic weapons. He added that all parties would have to recog-
nize the Oder-Neisse boundary.

the expected failure of the foreign ministers’ conference
would bring about an immediate summit meeting in which some-
thing can be achieved. He gave as examples a permanent ban
on atomic test; prohibition of atomic weapons for West Germany;
an atom free zone or disengagement in Central Europe; a read-
iness to discuss “some kind of peace treaty with the Germans.”
Agreement could also be reached to continue such discussions
in the future, but if the summit talks failed, the USSR would be
forced to sign a separate peace treaty.
[PAGE 09]
Soviet Venus Probe Attempt Possible in Near Future

Professor L. I. Sedov, prominent as a Soviet space re-
search spokesman, said during a recent visit to New Zealand
on a cultural exchange mission that the USSR plans to launch
a rocket toward Venus, and that he hoped it would occur soon.

The US has announced that it will not attempt a Venus
probe in early June, when the proximity of the earth and Venus
create favorable conditions which will not be duplicated for
about another two years. The optimum period for such a So-
viet shot would be 8 June, plus or minus four days. Sedov’s
statement suggests that the Soviet Union might make the at-
tempt at this time.

The present pattern of missile range activity
is not inconsistent with the general
patterns which have led up to the previous space shots; the ex-
tended practice, together with the absence of any actual space
attempts since January, suggests preparations for some type
of unusual shot. There may, however, be more than one test
in progress and preparations for a Soviet Venus probe attempt
would not necessarily rule out another earlier operation at
Tyura Tam.

A successful probe toward the planet Venus, the first
launch toward a companion planet in the solar system, would
demonstrate significant Soviet advances in propulsion, guidance,
and celestial mechanics. Following the progress of such a
space vehicle would require a remarkable capability in com-
munications and tracking.
[PAGE 10]
Prospects Increasing for Serious Incident in Algerian-Tunisian
Border Area

Prospects for a serious incident involving French action
against Algerian rebels on Tunisian soil are increasing as a re-
sult of vigorous operations by French units based in Algeria in
the Tunisian-Algerian border area. Such an incident, especial-
ly if it should involve Tunisian military or civilian personnel
could lead to a major crisis in French-Tunisian relations. Pres-
ident Bourguiba would probably feel compelled to make a sharp
diplomatic countermove, possibly including an appeal to the UN
Security Council and a demand for the evacuation of the French
naval base at Bizerte.

While border incidents involving violations of Tunisian
territory by French forces have been commonplace for some
time, they seem to be multiplying as French forces push rebel
troops in eastern Algeria closer to Tunisia, increasing the
temptation for French commanders to pursue rebel units which
cross the frontier. In one such recent instance the French mili-
tary killed more than 30 Algerians in Tunisia, according to the
French minister in Tunis. At least one direct clash between
French and Tunisian troops on Tunisian soil has also been re-
ported.

At the same time, the border-area situation appears to be
imposing a heavy strain on Tunisian relations with the rebels,
who have for some time been displaying increasing dissatisfac-
tion with the support they are receiving from Tunisia, and particu-
larly with Tunisian efforts to restrict rebel activities there.

Tunisian and rebel
troops had clashed on 1 May in northwestern Tunisia, and the
chief of staff of the Tunisian Army has admitted that Tunisian
National Guard units deployed in the border region are not on
good terms with the Algerians.

The subject of relations with the Tunisians will probably
figure prominently in discussions among top Algerian political
[PAGE 11]
and military leaders which are apparently about to get under
way in Tunis. Tunisian officials have already indicated to the
American Embassy in Tunis that they are being pressed by the
Algerians for more aggressive support, and that some Algerians
are urging the Tunisians to become co-belligerents.
[PAGE 12]
Reported Plan for Semi-Autonomous Minority States in Iraq

On 29 April Premier Qasim is reported to have expounded
to leaders of Iraq’s 25,000 Assyrian minority a plan for trans-
formation of the country into a federal republic. This would
allegedly consist of a central Arab republic and three separate
semi-autonomous republics for the Kurdish, Turkoman, and
Assyrian minorities. Each of the minority republics would
control its own internal affairs, create and staff its own local
government machinery, and police its own area. Each, how-
ever, would be federally united with the Central Arab Republic
in matters of foreign affairs, finance, and over-all national
defense. Members of the three minority groups who now live
in nearby countries would be invited to return to Iraq to take
up residence in the new semi-autonomous republics, a move
which might create trouble in Iran, Syria, and Turkey.

The Assyrian leaders reportedly think this scheme is
supported by the British, since it allegedly is similar to an
old British proposal. Moreover, influential groups in the
800,000 Kurdish minority have long been advocating this type of
system as the first step on their way to complete independence.
The 75,000 Turkomen, who are being assimilated into the Arab
majority gradually but more readily than most other minorities,
would nevertheless probably like the plan.

The many and formidable problems of implementing such
a plan would include reallocation of land and uprooting of peo-
ple on a major scale. There would be danger of increasing the
strong antipathies between these minority groups, as well as the
risk that, granted semi-autonomy, they would press for full
independence. Other large minorities and tribal confederations
might well seek autonomous status for themselves.
[PAGE 13]
Thailand Plans Red Cross Talks With North Vietnam on Refugees

The Thai Government has accepted Hanoi’s proposal for
direct talks between the Thai and North Vietnamese National Red
Cross chapters concerning the possible repatriation of the bulk
of the 50,000 predominantly pro-Communist Vietnamese refugees
in northeast Thailand, according to the Bangkok World, a usually
reliable English-language daily. This climaxes months of serious
consideration of the refugee problem by Thai authorities and on-
the-scene observation of the refugee communities by a represent-
ative of the International Committee for the Red Cross. Bangkok
reportedly will select its delegates to the conference next week,
but the location is still undecided, with North Vietnam apparently
favoring Geneva and Thailand arguing for a nearby neutral country.

Talks between the respective National Red Cross chapters
of the two countries would represent a departure from Thailand’s
policy of avoiding any contacts with Communist North Vietnam,
attesting to the importance Marshal Sarit attaches to solution of
this long-standing security problem. The Thais may also have
become convinced that current talks in Geneva of a similar nature
between the Japanese and North Korean Red Cross chapters have
provided them with a precedent which will minimize any adverse
reaction from Thailand’s Western allies.

There is some chance the talks may break down, particular-
ly over arrangements for screening the refugees; however, if they
should succeed, North Vietnam will achieve a major propaganda
victory at the expense of the Diem regime in South Vietnam, which
had earlier refused to accept the refugees.
[PAGE 14]
Laos Seeking Replacement of French in Military Training Role

On the eve of US/French negotiations in Paris on military
training responsibilities in Laos, Laotian leaders remain strong-
ly opposed to continued French control of army training, prefer-
ring American instruction instead. They identify the French Army
with defeat at Dien Bien Phu and object to what they describe as
the colonial arrogance and inefficiency of French officers. Laotian
delegations to South Vietnam, by way of contrast, have been
greatly impressed by the rapid progress of the Vietnamese armed
forces under US guidance.

France is willing to turn over logistical training of the
Laotian Army to the United States, but is strongly opposed to
American participation in combat training. This position stems
from France’s desire to maintain its influence in Laos through
its integral military role and from its concern over Communist
reaction to any such “flagrant violation of the 1954 Geneva agree-
ments,” which Paris insists are still valid in Laos. The French
apparently are confident that a bilateral accord reached with the US
at Paris can be imposed on Laos without difficulty.

Until this problem is solved, effective training of the 24,000-
man Laotian Army will continue to be delayed. The Phoui govern-
ment is counting heavily on the army to implement its anti-Commu-
nist reform program.
[PAGE 15]
South Korea Resumes Attempted Seizures of Japanese
Fishing Craft

South Korea has attempted to resume seizures of Japanese
fishing boats, apparently in a display of irritation over Tokyo’s
refusal to break off negotiations in Geneva with the North Koreans
over the repatriation of Koreans in Japan. Seoul has demanded
an end to the Geneva talks as a prerequisite for resuming dis-
cussions on the normalization of Japanese - South Korean relations,
but has offered no substantive concessions itself. The last seiz-
ure of Japanese fishing boats occurred last January. About 153
Japanese fishermen are being held by South Korea for violation
of the unilaterally imposed “Rhee line”--which extends as much
as 60 miles beyond the South Korean coast line.

Talks between Japan and South Korea in Tokyo were recessed
last February after Japanese Foreign Minister Fujiyama announced
that Japan would permit the voluntary repatriation of Koreans in
Japan to North Korea. Seoul has threatened strong retaliatory
measures should the repatriation actually take place.

Subsequent negotiations in Geneva between Japanese and North
Korean Red Cross officials to determine arrangements for the
repatriation appear to have made little progress thus far. Tokyo
is insisting that the International Committee of the Red Cross par-
ticipate in the repatriation program to assure that none of the Koreans
are repatriated involuntarily. Pyongyang claims that
petitions signed by some 117,000 Korean residents constitute suf-
ficient evidence of their intentions and that only technical problems
related to travel and finance need to be solved.

Despite the lack of progress in the Geneva talks, the Kishi
government is reluctant to break them off prior to the 2 June upper-
house elections because of the Japanese public’s strong support for
repatriation and continued hope for success in the talks. Tokyo is
willing, however, to resume negotiations with South Korea if the
latter indicates its willingness to negotiate seriously on the “Rhee
line” and captive Japanese fishermen.
[PAGE 16]
Chiang Kai-Shek Reportedly to Retain Chinese
Nationalist Presidency

There has been much speculation as to the President’s in-
tentions following his statement last December that he was
opposed to amending the constitution to permit a third term.
Supporters of Chen Cheng, the vice president and presumed
successor to the presidency if Chiang Kai-shek steps down,
have asserted that a third term would require a constitutional
amendment and that no such attempt would be made. It there-
fore seems likely that there has been an internal struggle be-
tween Chen Cheng and Chiang Ching-kuo over this point, with
Ching-kuo seeking to ensure his father’s re-election to block
the increasing power of Chen Cheng. Chen Cheng has probably
been seeking to uphold the constitution in a bid for the pres-
idency.

If Chiang Kai-shek intends to run again, it is pos-
sible that an announcement to this effect will be made at the
meeting of the Kuomintang central committee scheduled for 15
May. There was a report in late April that an attempt would
be made to line up support for a third term at this meeting.
[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 18]
