Formation of Majority Government Expected in Finland Shortly

President Kekkonen told Ambassador Sessions on 20 June that the formation of a majority government in Finland is "virtually assured." Agrarian Prime Minister Sukselainen has apparently agreed with various party leaders to form a center government which will exclude both the Communist-front SKDL and the regular Social Democrats. The Agrarians reportedly intend to retain four cabinet posts and give four to the dissident faction (Skogists) of the Social Democrats, three to the Conservatives, and the remainder to the minor parties.

This termination of an 18-month impasse appears to have developed largely as a result of maneuvering by Kekkonen, who reportedly is anxious to lay the groundwork for his re-election in 1962. There has also been pressure by business and industrial groups that are convinced that Finland must be associated with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Kekkonen has exploited this factor to persuade the Conservatives to abandon their tactical alliance with the regular Social Democrats. The expected inclusion of the Skogist Social Democrats appears to be a maneuver designed to weaken the regular Social Democratic party organization and points to a prolonged period of dissension within Finnish labor.

As far as is known, Moscow has not expressly warned Finland against joining the EFTA, but the Finns have carefully considered probable Soviet reaction to such association. The new government's first move may be a bill requesting parliamentary authorization to make the necessary economic arrangements covering association with EFTA. After the passage of such legislation, negotiations will probably begin with Moscow regarding most-favored-nation treatment--i.e., equal tariff reductions for the Soviet Union. The Finns apparently believe that their primary problem is to convince Moscow that Finnish-Soviet relations will not be adversely affected by Finland's association with EFTA.

22 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
