III. THE WEST

Erhard Likely to Succeed Adenauer as West German Chancellor

Ludwig Erhard, West German economics minister and vice chancellor, will probably become the next chancellor, following Adenauer's decision to move into the ceremonial office of President. Adenauer apparently preferred to bow out gracefully rather than risk a bitter intraparty struggle, apparently hoping thus to retain some influence in the formation of a new government. Although no changes in the chancellorship are expected before 15 September, when the presidential term expires, some reshuffling of cabinet posts is possible to avoid having a lame-duck administration during forthcoming East-West negotiations. The presidential elections are scheduled for 1 July, and Adenauer is assured of election.

Discontent with Adenauer's leadership has been gaining momentum within the CDU since the opening of the Berlin crisis. One CDU faction led by Bundestag President Gerstenmaier had differed sharply with Adenauer over foreign policy and has advocated a flexible approach to unification, European security, and negotiations with Moscow in general. Gerstenmaier also favored more cooperation with the opposition parties, including the possibility of a "government of national unity." Other CDU elements, meeting in February, considered Adenauer too old and rigid to cope with the Berlin crisis. The final factor setting off the revolt may have been Adenauer's instruction to Brentano during the NATO meeting, rejecting the new approaches to unification or European security that had been previously agreed upon. These instructions are reported to have been sent by Adenauer without consultation with the cabinet or party leaders.

Erhard, a professional economist, has been relatively disinterested in international political affairs and is considered to be substantively weak on foreign-policy questions not involving economic policy. He is decidedly more anti-French and less in favor of European integration than Adenauer, and he has opposed, on financial grounds, the increasing build-up of the armed forces.

The party will probably choose a foreign minister from among the party leaders who advocate a more flexible approach to East-West negotiations. Adenauer may retain some influence on government policy and in party affairs, but a review of foreign and defense policy can be expected. His retirement will probably have a serious impact on West Berlin opinion, which will interpret his removal as a major concession to Moscow.

8 Apr 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
