[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

10 January 1961

Copy No. C 74

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

Communist China: Food shortages on the Chinese mainland have become so severe that popular discontent is now taking the form of open antiregime activities in some localities. In late November and early December anti-Communist slogans were written on public buildings in both Dairen and Hainan Island.
food riots took place in Harbin in mid-December, with 70 persons arrested and summarily shot.

*Communist China - Burma: Following successful settlement of the Sino-Burmese boundary question, Communist China is embarking on a major effort to expand its economic and political ties with Burma. As a result of Chou En-lai's trip to Rangoon, where the instruments of ratification of the border treaty were exchanged, Peiping has agreed to extend large-scale economic aid to Burma. A joint communiqué issued on 9 January announced an economic and technical cooperation agreement under which the Chinese will provide an interest-free credit of about $85,000,000--the largest amount ever granted by Peiping to a non-bloc

i

[PAGE 04]
country. The Chinese will undertake the construction of unspecified industrial projects in Burma. The new aid pact, as well as a trade agreement signed in October 1960, will provide the basis for a much greater volume of Sino-Burmese trade--a goal the Chinese have been seeking for some time.

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Food Shortage Stirring Up Discontent in Communist China

Discontent strong enough to take the form of antiregime manifestations is reported in Communist China. The principal cause is the effect of protracted food shortages--now going into their third year. "Bad" living conditions and growing discontent were reported in late November on Hainan Island. Anti-Communist slogans were painted on the walls of official buildings in Paso, one of the island's port cities,
stevedores there could no longer carry heavy loads because of undernourishment.

A similar report has been received from Dairen, where signs believed to have read "More Food" and "Down with Communism" were being erased from public buildings in mid-December.
food riots occurred last month in Harbin and that 70 persons were arrested and summarily executed. There is considerable dissatisfaction among civilians in Dairen over the army's favored treatment.

While the regime's controls appear more than adequate to cope with the present scale of popular dissatisfaction, the near-famine conditions may have resulted in organizational changes in at least one and perhaps two provinces. According to the Peiping press, the north coastal province of Shantung was the hardest hit in last summer's drought. People's Daily announced on 8 December that four neighboring provinces were organizing a major relief campaign to assist the people of Shantung. Two weeks earlier the local press noted the ouster of the Shantung first party secretary, Shu Tung. His replacement declared that "all cadres should overcome the high and mighty bureaucratism and habit of excusing themselves by pleading special circumstances." The American Consulate General in Hong Kong reports that there is also some evidence of a shake-up in the Kwangtung party provincial committee. The number of refugees fleeing Kwangtung into Hong Kong because of the food shortage is increasing despite stringent border controls.

10 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 07]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET
