French Fear Further Violence in Algeria

The American consul general in Algiers notes that since the collapse of the insurrection, Europeans have become steadily more embittered as a result of intensified search of homes and hotels for arms and fugitives, greatly increased numbers of troops in the city, and a nine o'clock curfew. The curfew had kept the population confined during hot weather, and extensive roadblocks and check points have kept many people from getting to the beaches or countryside on week ends. Troops--largely draftees--patrolling the streets after the curfew hour have several times fired warning shots in exasperation at Europeans who have been banging pots and pans on balconies and even throwing bottles and other objects.

French security officials are concerned over evidence that the settler extremist Organization of the Secret Army is still plotting violence. They point out that this organization emerged from the insurrection virtually intact, and probably in possession of many thousands of arms--some reports say 15,000--which have disappeared from government stocks. Security forces have not been able to prevent the circulation of incendiary tracts threatening dire measures, such as, "The time of plastic bombs has passed--it is now the hour of the machine gun."

French officials also are concerned over growing unrest among urban Moslems, who have indulged in two violent demonstrations so far this week--one of which resulted in three Moslem deaths when security forces fired on the demonstrators. Although European activists apparently had nothing to do with these incidents, they might attempt to provoke further clashes between Moslems and security forces. The French feel that both the Secret Army and the Moslems are capable of provocations against each other that could produce violent disorders.

The top French civilian and military officials in Algiers have issued warnings that demonstrations on the 13 May anniversary or on 20 May, the scheduled date for the opening of negotiations, will not be tolerated. Police reinforcements

13 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
