[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

18 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER WILLING TO TALK WITH CHOU

4. POSITION OF HUNGARIAN PARTY LEADER RAKOSI APPEARS THREATENED

5. PREMIER MOLLET CONCERNED OVER ANTI-AMERICAN
SENTIMENT IN FRANCE

* * * *

18 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER WILLING TO TALK
WITH CHOU

Prime Minister Hatoyama told an upper
house committee on 15 March that he is
willing to meet Chinese Communist pre-
mier Chou En-lai to discuss the estab-
lishment of closer relations between Tokyo and Peiping,
which "everyone desires." Hatoyama emphasized that the
"difficulty" is Japan's treaty with Nationalist China, a prob-
lem which he said could be removed by Chinese Communist
"recognition" of Taipei.

A Foreign Ministry official has informed
the American embassy in Tokyo that Peiping probably would
respond quickly to Hatoyama's remarks, possibly by making
some "major proposition" just prior to Secretary of State
Dulles' visit to Tokyo.

Comment

A spokesman for the Peiping regime re-
newed on 16 March the Chinese Commu-
nist offer to discuss the normalization of relations, although
he did not mention Hatoyama's remarks. Chou En-lai may
soon follow up this offer, and, in order to engage the Japa-
nese prime minister in such talks, Chou may refrain tempo-
rarily from denouncing Hatoyama's proposal for two Chinas.

Virtually all Japanese believe that if
Japan is to achieve economic independence and assume its
rightful role as a power in the Far East, normal diplomatic
relations with Communist China are necessary. Tokyo's
desire for relations with Peiping is strengthened by its be-
lief that the Chinese Nationalist regime will not last more
than two more years and certainly will not survive Chiang
Kai-shek's death.

18 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. POSITION OF HUNGARIAN PARTY LEADER RAKOSI
APPEARS THREATENED

Reported dissension within the Hungar-
ian party's central committee over the
status of ex-premier Imre Nagy indi-
cates that Party Secretary Rakosi is
still having difficulty in asserting his leadership.

Nagy has petitioned the
central committee to withdraw the charges against him
which led to his conviction for "rightist deviation" a year
ago. The request prompted "heated discussion" within the
committee at its meeting on 12 and 13 March.

Reportedly Istvan Kovacs, Nagy's chief
supporter in the central committee, argued that Rakosi's
proposal to ignore Nagy's request was impossible in view of
statements at the Soviet congress. Kovacs, a politburo
member who accompanied Rakosi to the Soviet 20th Party
Congress, insisted that Rakosi had no right to decide the
matter alone. Rakosi apparently attempted to defend him-
self on the ground that the Soviet congress had endorsed
his policies as leader of the Hungarian party.

The defensive statements contained in
Rakosi's report on the congress tend to support reports of
division within the central committee and to indicate that
the recent Soviet party congress has strengthened the oppo-
sition of nationalist elements within the party. Since he
ousted Nagy, Rakosi has had difficulty in controlling nation-
alist elements within the party despite Moscow's support
of his leadership. Even a gradual rehabilitation of Nagy
would seriously threaten Rakosi's leadership of the party.

18 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. PREMIER MOLLET CONCERNED OVER ANTI-AMERICAN
SENTIMENT IN FRANCE

In a conversation on 10 March, Premier
Mollet told American UN delegate Lodge
that he was disturbed by the anti-American
sentiment the Algerian situation has stim-
ulated in France, not merely among the
Communists but also among certain elements of the French
right which sought to find a scapegoat "abroad" for their trou-
bles in Algeria.

Mollet protested that although he had no
cause for complaint over the official attitude of the United
States government, he did complain that many American busi-
nessmen and working-level officials had caused friction by
giving unsolicited advice. Another factor in French-American
misunderstanding was the "blanket stand" taken by the Ameri-
can press against what it calls "colonialism." He said the
most hard hitting passages in its editorials are picked up and
reprinted by the French press.

Comment

Other reports suggest that anti-American
sentiment in France is considerably more
widespread than Mollet indicated. It stems in part from the
French belief that American influence in Vietnam has sup-
planted France without regard to French interests there, and
that a similar pattern is in the making in North Africa.

According to a 17 March press report, the
French Secretary of State for Operations in Algeria criticized
the United States' "long silence" and said he expects an "un-
equivocal" declaration of its solidarity with France on the
Algerian crisis.

18 Mar 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7

[PAGE 09]
