of US favors by supporting the House bill, which provides wheat to India solely on a loan basis. The final terms of a US loan may be the determining factor governing an Indian decision to accept US or Communist offers.

FAR EAST

5. Communist China seeks rubber from Indonesia:

The Government of Indonesia is considering Communist China's offer to purchase 50,000 tons of rubber. In conversations with the US Ambassador in Djakarta, Indonesian Foreign Minister Subardjo stated that the Chinese were offering rice and tungsten in payment for the rubber.

Comment: This approach to Indonesia, together with a similar offer to Ceylon, is testimony to the strong efforts of the Chinese Communists to find new sources of rubber supplies as an alternative to Malayan supplies. In view of Indonesia's declared willingness to sell rubber to Orbit as well as non-Orbit countries, Indonesia is more likely to accept the Chinese Communist offer than Ceylon. In any case, Indonesia lacks the administrative machinery to prevent Orbit purchases of privately-owned rubber, which constitutes the overwhelming bulk of its rubber output.

NEAR EAST

6. Iran rejects UK request for arbitration of oil issue:

The UK request to Iran for arbitration of the oil issue was formally rejected by the Iranian Ambassador in London on 8 May. He informed the British Foreign Office that Iran will proceed with its oil nationalization program and will not submit to international arbitration. According to the UK Embassy in Tehran, the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company's demand for arbitration was inspired by a message from the Shah indicating that Iranian Prime Minister Mossadeq would welcome such a demand because it would enable him to procrastinate. Mossadeq is understood, however, to have expressed astonishment at the demand for arbitration.

Comment: Mossadeq's rejection of the UK demand for arbitration is consistent with his previous stand. It was probably conditioned by the consideration that Iran could not accept arbitration under the terms of the 1933 concession and still maintain that the concession was invalid. Whether the UK action was taken at the Shah's instigation or not, it will probably have the effect of forcing
