Comment: Before complete agreement is achieved on a new political status for Germany, understanding must still be reached not only on the security safeguards mentioned by Schuman, but on the Western "programs" such as decartelization and restitution, West Germany's share in defense costs, and the rights of Allied troops in Germany. At least another month is expected to be consumed in these negotiations.

7. Failure of anti-Adenauer demonstration reveals French Communist weakness:

The fiasco of the Communist-sponsored demonstration during Chancellor Adenauer's visit to Paris proved the party's increasing isolation and inability to elicit militant support to carry out Soviet foreign policy objectives, even on such important political issues as German rearmament.

Comment: During the past year French Communists have consistently failed to make an effective political demonstration against the government. Although the party planned this manifestation in compliance with Moscow's directive, the leaders evidently were unwilling to risk arrest by challenging the government's ban on demonstrations. Party leaders may also be losing their enthusiasm for such activities, particularly since recent successes of their labor policy show that popular support can be more readily obtained for economic than for purely political objectives.

8. French Christian Workers favor closer ties with international Communist groups:

The executive committee of the French Christian Workers Labor Confederation plans to send a delegation to the proposed Moscow economic conference in April and has resolved to recommend to the Christian Labor International that it accept an invitation of the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions for joint discussions.

The leader of the Christian Workers left wing believes that the International will react coolly toward both of these projects. According to this spokesman, his confederation was about to announce a breaking off of negotiations with the Communist-led General Labor Confederation because of the latter's current campaign to unify organized labor under Communist leadership.

Comment: The Christian Workers Confederation is the most aggressive non-Communist labor group and has heretofore usually been willing to join in unity of action with the Communist-led confederation. Its gestures toward closer international cooperation for labor's benefit may be intended to offset its new policy of rebuffing the dominant Communist-led confederation in France.
