4. ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER PROMISES NEW TEST OF
RIGHTS ON GULF OF AQABA

Israeli foreign minister Meir informed
Ambassador Lawson on 25 April that
an Israeli-flag vessel would probably
test Israel's right to innocent passage
through the straits of Tiran to the
Israeli port of Eilat in a week or ten
days. Mrs. Meir urged that the United
States tell King Saud to refrain from
public threats to halt Israeli vessels
by force and to give Israel private as-
surances that he does not intend to
interfere with Israeli shipping.

At present no Israeli-flag merchant-
man is known to be within a week's distance of the straits south
of the Suez Canal. The Pandora, a Costa Rican vessel which
Israel used under Israeli flag and under the name of Queen of
Sheba last winter to carry cargo between East Africa and Eilat,
transited the Suez Canal northbound on 22 April. The Atlit,
an Israeli-flag vessel which departed Haifa early in April for
Eilat via the Cape of Good Hope, presumably is still off the
West African coast and reportedly is not expected at Eilat un-
til early June. The Israelis still have two frigates and armed
launches in the Gulf of Aqaba, however, and it is possible that
a test would consist of using these vessels, either alone or as
protection for a foreign-flag vessel.

The American-owned tanker Kern Hills,
which is under time charter to the Israeli government fuel cor-
poration, has again loaded 15,000 tons of crude oil at Bandar Ma-
shur, Iran, despite the Shah's "order" to halt such shipments.
The Kern Hills departed Bandar Mashur on schedule on 19 April,
almost certainly headed for Eilat via Djibouti. It would reach
Eilat about 28 April. Like the first cargo which it discharged at
Eilat on 6 April, the Kern Hills' second loading was for the ac-
count of the National Iranian Oil Company and was consigned to a
firm located in Switzerland. The ship declared for Cape Town.
The Kern Hills' first passage to Eilat was protested strongly by
Saudi Arabia and the other Arab states.
