Communist China - Korea: The withdrawal of six
Chinese Communist divisions completes the first phase
of Peiping's announced intentions to retire from North
Korea. Elements of two North Korean army corps are
occupying the positions in the central sector of the
demilitarized zone vacated by two Chinese armies.
The withdrawal of the troops would reduce total Com-
munist ground force strength in North Korea from
653,700 to 561,700 (224,300 Chinese Communists and
337,400 North Koreans.) (Page 1) (Map)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: With the Central Sumatran campaign in
its final stages, the central government is rapidly shift-
ing its attention to North Celebes.
An attack on Gorontalo is planned, probably in coordination with am-
phibious attacks along the northern coast with Menado as an ultimate objective. Djakarta has ordered the quick
return of the commander of the naval commando corps from Central Sumatra, almost certainly in connection with opera-
tional planning for the Celebes campaign. (Page 2) (Map)

France-NATO: Defense Minister Chaban-Delmas' 17
April presentation of the order of priority of French armed
forces missions publicly dropped the long-standing first
place accorded to "respect for international engagements,"
including NATO. Now heading the list as two "nearly
simultaneous" missions are "assuring the French presence
overseas for a long period" and "equipping France with
‘total’ weapons." The significance of this statement for
future French policy may be considerable if Chaban-Delmas'
successor shares these views and if the firmly pro-NATO
chief of the Armed Forces Staff, General Ely, is replaced
by an officer who supports the view that Algeria must be
saved at all costs. Ely is due to retire this summer.

Colombia: Liberal leader Lleras Camargo's final
acceptance--after protracted negotiations--of the joint
Liberal-Conservative nomination for the 4 May presi-
dential election virtually assures Colombia's return to
constitutional rule as agreed by the military junta which
ousted the Rojas dictatorship last May. Lleras, one of
the most highly respected statesmen of Latin America,
is considered pro-US and anti-Communist.
