reserves in four years, poses a threat to Prime Minister Ikeda's political position and his expansionist economic program. Conservative political and financial elements have for some months been uneasy about Ikeda's program, and pressures are now increasing for deflationary measures. Ikeda is expected to oppose these pressures at least until after his visit to the United States late this month. A continued deterioration is likely to prompt the prime minister's rivals in the ruling Liberal Democratic party to attack him by raising the specter of a financial crisis. Despite the decline in May, which amounted to only $72,000,000, Japan's foreign exchange reserves still total about $2 billion.

UAR: The fourth consecutive year of adverse weather has again severely limited Syrian wheat production. Earlier estimates of a crop approaching 900,000 tons have now, as the harvest approaches, been cut in half. Syria's annual consumption requirement is about 700,000 tons. The shortage is a setback to Cairo's hopes for improving Syria's lagging economy and may add to the Syrian discontent that has plagued the Nasir regime since formation of the UAR in 1958. Cairo has been counting on a Syrian surplus to assist in meeting Egypt's needs for grain. The shortfall in the Syrian crop will necessitate imports of wheat into Syria as well as Egypt, and Nasir will now probably seek a continuance of US PL-480 shipments to both regions of the UAR.
(Backup, Page 4)

Zanzibar: Rioting in this British protectorate following the closely contested 1 June legislative elections has already claimed some 50 lives. The situation as of 5 June reported was rapidly deteriorating and disturbances were spreading from Zanzibar town to outlying areas in a full-fledged racial conflict between minority Arabs and the more numerous Africans. Air-borne reinforcements from Kenya and Tanganyika have bolstered the island's security forces to about 1,500 men. Ali Muhsin, Arab leader of the Communist-infiltrated Zanzibar Nationalist party which, with its

6 June 61 DAILY BRIEF v
