extension of earlier Indian plans for exercises with British and Malayan naval units in Malayan waters, will coincide with the much-heralded arrival in Netherlands New Guinea of the Dutch carrier Karel Doorman and other naval units. Indonesia can be expected to play up the Indian visit as a demonstration of friendship and support by another Asian power against "Dutch imperialism." (Page 3)

Laos: The escape from jail on 24 May of Prince Souphannouvong and 15 other leaders of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat party will give the Pathet Lao insurgency movement a strong boost. Souphannouvong, the rallying point of anti-government "patriotic" elements throughout Laos, will probably try to go to the Pathet Lao command post, believed located in the Laos - North Vietnam border area. His escape will give the Communists added leverage in their political and subversive efforts against the government, and may be followed by a step-up in guerrilla warfare. (Page 4)

Turkey: The continued strict enforcement of the new and tighter martial law restrictions imposed on 22 May suggests that Turkish government officials remain seriously concerned over internal security despite their statements that the internal situation is now returning to normal. The government is still collecting information to "prove" that the opposition Republican People's party has abandoned "democratic procedures" in its drive for power. A group of junior army officers is reported developing clandestine communications and searching for leadership in preparation for possible future action against the government. (Page 5)

Guinea: Guinea's education minister stated on 20 May that his government has embarked on a "crash" program to recruit teachers wherever possible, including the Soviet bloc. This results from the decision by most of the 215 French nationals now teaching in Guinea to leave after the current term. The education minister formally requested American and British assistance in the recruiting effort so that Guinea would not become "wholly dependent on the bloc." Earlier this year the USSR reportedly offered to provide teachers, and a few Soviet nationals may already be employed in Guinean schools. (Page 6)

III. THE WEST
