Guinea Seeking Placements for Departing French Teachers

Guinea has instituted a "crash" program to recruit by next fall about 300 teachers from wherever they can be obtained--the Soviet bloc included--according to Guinean Minister of Education Barry Diawandou. In a conversation on 20 May with the American ambassador in Conakry, the minister indicated that the urgency of the recruitment effort stemmed from a decision by some 180 of 215 French nationals now teaching in Guinea's schools to depart permanently after the current term. This exodus can probably be attributed in part to the concern of French nationals in Guinea over the possible effects of the Touré regime's recent establishment of its own monetary system. In part it is also a by-product of the general tension and antagonism which have prevailed between Paris and Conakry since Guinea opted for independence in 1958. Diawandou claimed that some of the teachers were leaving as a result of "pressure" from the French Embassy.

Asserting that Guinea did not want to be "wholly dependent on the bloc" in this field, the minister expressed the hope that the United States would be able to send some teachers and suggested 40 as an appropriate number. These instructors apparently would be in addition to the 25 American secondary-school teachers the nonofficial African-American Institute has undertaken to recruit as part of a US-financed educational program. The minister subsequently transmitted a similar request to the British charge.

Considerable evidence of Soviet interest in placing personnel in Guinea's educational system has accumulated over recent months.

Guinea's ambassador in Moscow
23 teachers were to leave for Conakry that month.

On 12 April, ten Soviet secondary-school instructors reportedly arrived in Guinea. In addition, Moscow agreed earlier this year to build and staff in Conakry a polytechnic institute for 1,500 students. This project, one of several being undertaken by the USSR under the $35,000,000 credit extended to Guinea last August, is scheduled for completion by 1963.
