9. British officials plead for renewed efforts toward current NATO objectives:

British NATO representative Eric Roll has made a strong plea for genuine efforts to improve NATO members' 1953 defense programs. He stressed the bad effects which a poor 1952 Annual Review report would have on the American aid program.

Another British NATO representative recently stated that, since the introduction of new type weapons will not permit the reduction of conventional NATO forces until after 1956, the 1953 Annual Review can be undertaken without waiting for a revision of the current NATO military requirements.

Comment: Lord Ismay's paper last fall commenting on the desirability of smaller forces equipped with new type weapons and Prime Minister Churchill's loosely interpreted statements that the threat of war has receded have led some NATO members to believe that Britain favored a reduction in the 1953 NATO build-up.

Churchill's statement on 9 February that Western rearmament is the principal deterrent to Soviet aggression and these statements by British NATO officials probably reflect the British Government's desire to reaffirm in the appropriate quarters its support for current NATO objectives.

LATIN AMERICA

10. Uruguay may ask United States support against Argentina:

The Uruguayan Ambassador to the United States has been instructed to seek an interview with Secretary Dulles shortly, apparently to gauge the extent to which Uruguay could count on United States backing it if took countermeasures against Argentine economic pressures. Uruguay is considering an appeal to the Organization of American States, withdrawal of its ambassador from Buenos Aires, and complete suspension of diplomatic relations.

The Uruguayan Government apparently feels compelled by domestic public opinion to take some action, but fears that any negotiated settlement would subsequently be disregarded by Argentina.

Comment: Uruguayan-Argentine relations have been strained since Uruguay expelled two Argentine labor attaches last September. Uruguay has been consistently unwilling to conciliate the Argentines by restricting the activities of Argentine emigres or controlling the anti-Peron press in Montevideo.
