The promotion of three young and inexperienced officers of the Revolutionary Command Council to important cabinet posts represents another step in the steady consolidation of authority by the military regime and can be expected to result in a further decline in administrative efficiency.

The arbitrary abolition of the monarchy and appointment of the president without reference to the previously announced plebiscite are susceptible to attack by opposition elements which have emphasized the extra-constitutional character of the military regime.

An ominous aspect of the new development is the even stronger position now held by Colonel Nasr and his immediate supporters. Nasr, who has on occasion been reported in conflict with Nagib, is considered the leader of the less moderate faction within the council and the real power behind the army group. He has become vice premier and minister of interior. Two of his supporters now head the ministries of National Guidance and War; and his close associate, 33-year-old Major Hakim Amir, has been appointed commander in chief of the Egyptian armed forces. The army, police and propaganda are thus directly under the control of the Nasr faction.

7. Libyan prime minister plans to take firm line with king:

Libyan prime minister Muntasser intends to take a firm line with King Idriss on the question of the latter's interference in political affairs. Muntasser told the British Foreign Office, before leaving London, that he expects, with the cabinet's backing, to send Idriss a strong representation against royal meddling.

In subsequent discussion with the king, the prime minister will stress that continued interference in the government will result in the disintegration of the federal state of Libya and the abolition of the throne.

Comment: Prime Minister Muntasser, now en route to Tripoli, has the respect and confidence of the Western powers. He is returning home because the king has arbitrarily removed important local officials.

- 6 -
