rapid evolution of self-government in the Belgian Congo, has further weakened the shaky Social Christian - Liberal party coalition of Premier Eyskens. Friction within the coalition over various issues has been growing since its formation in November 1958, and Eyskens adjourned Parliament in early July to avert a coalition crisis. The opposition Socialist party, which favors a more liberal Congo policy, is trying to exploit the resignation and may decide to push for new parliamentary elections.
(Page 5)

LATE ITEMS

*USSR: Available intelligence indicates that on 8 September, for the second time in two days, the USSR unsuccessfully attempted to launch a space vehicle from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range. This attempt followed a smooth eight-hour countdown and had an intended launch time of about 0240 GMT (2240 EDT, 7 September). Although the operation proceeded to "readiness one minute," the vehicle apparently did not leave the pad, and the range secured shortly thereafter.

In this operation, as with the attempt on 6 September, the intended time of launch coincided with the time estimated for the Soviets to launch a lunar probe vehicle. These two coincidences, together with the rapidity with which the operation was canceled when trouble developed, strongly indicates that a lunar probe, which requires precise launching time, was intended. Some past launchings at Tyura Tam, not apparently requiring a precise launching time, have taken place after eight to nine hours of delay.

The similarity of the most recent operation to that of 6 September, together with the fact that the earlier operation was abruptly canceled two to three hours before intended launch time, indicates that the same vehicle was engaged in both operations. There will probably be another attempt to launch in the next few days.

*Laos: Laotian Government officials have issued conflicting statements about the situation in Sam Neua province. However, there are numerous reports from other sources that Communist

8 Sept 59  DAILY BRIEF  v
