[PAGE 01]
27 June 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

6.  Comment on sultan's status in Morocco (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7.  Gruber gives account of his recent conference with Nehru (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
Page Denied

Next 2 Page(s) In Document Denied
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
6.  Comment on sultan's status in Morocco:

Fear for his throne or his life, rather than the lack of a French government, allegedly was the reason for the sultan of Morocco's 20 June postponement of his visit to France.

the Khalifa of Tetuan, the sultan's representative in Spanish Morocco, is tacitly supporting the campaign against the sultan led by El Glaoui, chieftain of the southern tribes. gains credibility from the khalifa's failure to make an expected statement supporting the sultan. The khalifa would be one of the leading contenders for the throne, if the sultan were deposed.

Eight of the principal pashas and many lesser officials in Morocco have come to the sultan's defense. While there is no important support for the sultan among the French in Morocco, in Paris some influential intellectuals and liberals are pressuring the government to oust Resident General Guillaume as the first step toward a conciliatory solution of the Moroccan situation.

Barring a fanatical attempt to assassinate or dethrone the sultan, the present tension may subside somewhat with the installation of the new French government. A generally calmer atmosphere is unlikely, however, until the French residents in Morocco abandon their present attitudes and tactics and a workable program of administrative reform is instituted.

WESTERN EUROPE

7.  Gruber gives account of his recent conference with Nehru:

Foreign Minister Gruber has informed the American embassy in Vienna that he discussed the Austrian situation with Indian prime minister Nehru in Switzerland last week and in the hope that India would be willing to sound out Soviet intentions concerning an Austrian treaty. Gruber gained the impression that India would seek an opportunity to raise the question, but would not press the discussion unless Soviet representatives were willing.
[PAGE 07]
Nehru was particularly interested in the Austrian neutrality issue, and Gruber stressed to him Austria's inability to accept any treaty provision concerning neutrality which would be likely to satisfy the USSR. Gruber pointed out that the most his government could agree to would be a provision for a "carefully-worded" declaration by the Austrian parliament against military alliances, and that the government could agree to this only if it were essential for Soviet consent to sign a treaty.

Comment:  The Western powers have consistently opposed including any statement on Austrian neutrality in the state treaty.
