[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
19 December 1957

Copy No. 138
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. USSR TO TRANSFER VISA AUTHORITY TO EAST
GERMANY

2. ROLE OF SOVIET PARTY SECRETARIAT ENHANCED

6. INDICATIONS OF BRITISH SHIFT TOWARD US POSITION
ON COMMUNIST CHINA

10. THE SITUATION IN CUBA
[PAGE 04]
1. USSR TO TRANSFER VISA AUTHORITY
TO EAST GERMANY

The German Democratic Republic is
to have complete visa authority by
1 January 1958 over American, Brit-
ish, and French nationals--official as
well as nonofficial--entering or crossing East Germany
except "troop personnel and materials" of the Allied Berlin
garrisons. This decision was reached during talks between
East German officials in Berlin and Soviet Deputy Foreign
Minister Zorin from 25 to 28 November, according to a re-
port believed credible by the American mission in Berlin.

Personnel of the Western embassies in
Warsaw and Moscow who normally cross East Germany
traveling to and from their posts would be directly affected
by this procedure, as would the personnel attached to Allied
military missions in Potsdam. Additionally, a narrow def-
inition of "troop personnel" could be used to compel Allied
civilian officials traveling between the Federal Republic and
West Berlin to accept documentation and processing by East
German rather than Russian officials.

Enforcement of such visa requirements
would not only establish a precedent for further restrictions
on Allied travel in East Germany but would also strengthen
the Communist claim of East German sovereignty. In the
event that the Allies retaliate by banning Soviet military and
all East German travel in West Germany, Soviet Zone author-
ities are said to be prepared to stop all Allied travel through
East Germany except for personnel of the Berlin garrisons.
[PAGE 05]
2. ROLE OF SOVIET PARTY SECRETARIAT ENHANCED

The secretariat, executive organ of
the Soviet Communist party under
Khrushchev as first secretary, may
now replace the presidium as the
executive seat of power in the USSR.

The plenum of the Soviet party central committee which
took place on 16 and 17 December added three party pre-
sidium members to the party secretariat, raising the
membership of that body to eleven.

The three new secretaries, Nuritdin
Mikhitdinov, Aleksey Kirichenko, and Nikolay Ignatov,
who are considered Khrushchev partisans, will presum-
ably relinquish their provincial party posts for full-time
work in Moscow.

Khrushchev may have maneuvered three
additional men into the secretariat in order to increase the
power of that group. Since 10 of the 15 full members of the
party presidium, the top-level policy-making body, are now
members of the secretariat, the move may have the effect
of bypassing nonmembers of the secretariat--among others,
Bulganin, Voroshilov, and Mikoyan. At the same time, the
diffusion of responsibility among a greater number of secre-
taries will limit the opportunity of any one secretary, such
as Suslov, to rival First Secretary Khrushchev effectively.
Suslov is widely considered in
East European Communist circles to be a "Stalinist" rival
to Khrushchev.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. INDICATIONS OF BRITISH SHIFT TOWARD US POSITION
ON COMMUNIST CHINA

British Foreign Secretary Lloyd and
numerous Conservative members of
Parliament appear to have changed their
opinions and
oppose wider
recognition of Communist China.

In discussions this week with Ambassador
Whitney, some 40 Conservative Members of Parliament ex-
pressed satisfaction that the United States has not yielded to
earlier British persuasions but has continued to recognize and
support Taipei. As reasons for the shift, Whitney suggests--
among other things--concern over the growing influence of the
Asian-African bloc in the UN which might be reinforced if Com-
munist China became a member, appreciation of the need for
Overseas Chinese--particularly those in Malaya--to have a
counterattraction to Peiping, and the growing disillusion over
prospects for increased trade with China.

Whitney doubts, however, that there will
be any public change in Britain's policy toward Peiping in the
near future and believes the Conservative MP's will continue to
maintain publicly that Britain was right in recognizing a de facto
situation on the mainland. The Labor opposition's commitment
to Chinese Communist representation in the UN--which is
strongly endorsed by British public opinion--indicates the dif-
ficulty the Macmillan government would encounter in any attempt
to change its long-standing China policy.
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
10. THE SITUATION IN CUBA

Cuban rebel leaders are believed to
have completed plans to step up rev-
olutionary activities against President
Batista during the last days of Decem-
ber. Action, possibly planned for Christmas week, may
include attempts to assassinate military leaders. Rebel
leader Fidel Castro's limited success in his campaign to
burn sugar fields and his apparent inability to instigate a
"general revolutionary strike" are probably at least partly
responsible for the decision to increase terrorism.

Castro's capability for antigovernment
operations has grown since he opened his guerrilla cam-
paign a year ago. He now has greater popular support,
especially in Oriente Province, and his forces have in-
creased and now are better organized and equipped. With-
out the active support of the armed forces, the labor move-
ment, and other important elements, however, it is unlikely
he can unseat the government.

President Batista continues to keep an
iron grip on the political situation. He suspended constitu-
tional guarantees on 15 December for another 45-day period--
the seventh such suspension in a year.
