[PAGE 01]
11 October 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE

West German sentiment favors all-German unity discussions
(page 5). New Soviet approach to France reported (page 5).
French receptive to Soviet overtures (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

West German sentiment favors all-German unity discussions:

A recent public opinion poll conducted by HICOG in West Germany shows that two out of three of those polled supported East-West German discussions on unity. Six out of seven approved of the Bonn decision to receive the East German Volkskammer delegation on its recent visit.

Nearly half of those polled were not entirely convinced of American sincerity on the question of German unification.

Comment: This support for all-German talks is further evidence of eleventh-hour West German reluctance to abandon hope for unification. It also suggests greater public receptivity to the stepped-up Communist unity offers, and contradicts earlier reports of public apathy toward the Volkskammer delegation visit.

New Soviet approach to France reported:

The American Embassy has been reliably informed by a high French Foreign Ministry official of an interview between Soviet Foreign Minister Vyshinsky and French Ambassador Louis Joxe upon the latter's recent departure on leave from Moscow. Joxe was told that Moscow's "greatest wish" was to reach a general understanding with France as the prelude to a detente between East and West. The French Foreign Ministry is thinking of instructing Joxe to say upon his return that talks, if any, should be held in Paris rather than Moscow.

The American Embassy comments that the French Foreign Office seems well aware of the current Soviet desire to divide the West.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: French Ambassador Joxe, although anti-Communist, is reported to have definite leftist tendencies, and to be impressed by Soviet sincerity regarding the dangers implicit in "aggressive" American intentions.

Prime Minister Pinay's recent rejection of the American note on military expenditures and the universal press approval for his independent stand with regard to American "interference" indicate that the French Government, given sufficient encouragement by the USSR, may strike out on a course of its own with respect to such policies as EDC and rearmament.

French receptive to Soviet overtures:
[PAGE 07]
Comment: The current climate of opinion in France seems sympathetic if not receptive to Soviet overtures for a renewal of four-power negotiations looking to a settlement of the "cold war." The present rumor campaign further jeopardizes the chances for ratification of the EDC treaty in the National Assembly.
