[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

8 January 1960

[PAGES 02]

[PAGE 03]
8 JANUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Flow of Tibetan refugees into Nepal increases; rumors of Chinese Communist incursions continue.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Balanced composition of new provisional government should ease strains among various non-Communist groups.
Burmese premier rejects invitation to Peiping for border negotiations.
Afghan premier accepts Iranian invitation to discuss Helmand waters dispute.
Libya may press for major change in American base agreement.

III. THE WEST
Italian premier's resignation this month predicted by prominent Christian Democrats; Gronchi postpones visit to Moscow.

LATE ITEM
USSR makes first public announcement of planned rocket flight tests within specific time period.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 January 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Nepal: The flow of Tibetan refugees into Nepal has increased markedly during recent weeks, possibly as a result of reported Chinese troop movements westward along the undemarcated frontier. Rumors of sporadic Chinese incursions continue. Prime Minister Koirala is thinking of sending a note to Peiping protesting two Chinese intrusions in western Nepal; the Nepalese Government, however, continues publicly to deny any incursions and to minimize the threat from China, apparently hoping to avoid involvement in the Sino-Indian border dispute.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The balanced composition of the provisional government appointed by the King on 7 January should ease the strains among the various non-Communist groups. The new premier is respected elder statesman Khou Abhay; he is the brother of Nhouy Abhay, who had been named by the King to select a new cabinet.
The cabinet comprises four independents, three old-guard politicians, and three members of the young reformist group (CDNI). The primary mission of the new government is to prepare for general elections later this year. (Page 1)

Burma - Communist China: Burmese Premier Ne Win on 3 January rejected Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai's recent invitation to come to Peiping to negotiate the Sino-Burmese border issue, reiterating that Burma had already made its maximum concessions.
Ne Win added, however, that if "China would accept in advance Burma's proposals of last June, he would be willing to come to Peiping this month to initial a border agreement. Although the Chinese

[PAGE 05]
probably will again reject the June "package plan" and insist that "further negotiations" are necessary, they have played down differences between the two countries.
Chou En-lai, in an apparent effort to underscore China's desire for Burmese good will, attended the Burmese Embassy's independence day reception this week in Peiping, his first appearance at a non-Communist reception for some months.

Afghanistan - Iran: Afghan Prime Minister Daud has accepted Iranian Prime Minister Eqbal's invitation to discuss the dispute over the division of the Helmand River waters. Daud intends to stop off in Tehran for three or four days on his way to Europe for medical treatment, probably sometime after mid-January. Daud's willingness to leave the country probably indicates that he feels the unsettling effects of the Kandahar riots and of the recent death of the influential Shah Mahmud have been overcome. (Page 2)

Libya: The Libyan undersecretary of finance has informed an American official in Bengasi that Libya will seek substantial modification of the American base agreement if necessary to get "satisfactory" payment for American use of Wheelus Air Base. As an alternative to the present aid program, he proposes assessment of customs duties on Wheelus Base imports which he claims would bring in some $28,000,000 per year. If the US refuses this, he said, Libya could then go to the UN and ask that US forces be moved out of the country. While it remains to be seen how strongly the government may follow through on the undersecretary's proposal, there is strong dissatisfaction in the Libyan Government with present American aid commitments. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Italy: There are increasing signs of conflict, within the Christian Democratic party and between it and its allies, which

8 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
threatens the tenure of the Segni government. Prominent Christian Democrats are predicting that Segni may resign before the end of January. President Gronchi is deeply involved in the current political maneuverings, and the last-minute postponement of his trip to Moscow, which had been scheduled to start on 7 January, may have been occasioned by his concern over the possibility of a cabinet crisis rather than by illness, as publicly announced. (Page 4)

LATE ITEM

USSR: The TASS announcement on 7 January that flight tests of a more powerful rocket booster for space vehicles would be undertaken between 15 January and 15 February 1960 is the first public Soviet announcement that such tests would be made within specified dates. The reported impact area covers about 45,000 square miles of the Pacific with the center about 550 miles south of Johnston Island and 400 miles west-northwest of Palmyra Island. The USSR says Soviet ships will be in the impact area, and asks other governments to refrain from sending ships or aircraft into the area during the specified time period.

On 7 January, three of the four Soviet Sibir-class instrumentation ships were observed stopped in the water about 400 miles southwest of Midway, some 1,200 miles northwest of the reported impact area. The fourth ship was located about 560 miles west-northwest of Midway. These ships participated in a practice exercise with the Tyura Tam rangehead on 6 January.

The validity of the Soviet statement that the projected tests will be in development of a more powerful rocket system for space vehicles cannot be determined at this time. The center of the impact area is about 6,500 miles from the Tyura Tam rangehead. Current estimates give the Soviet ICBM a range of 5,500 to 7,500 miles depending on the weight of the nosecone. The Soviets are considered capable of testing to this range during the time period specified, or before, if they so choose.

8 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Situation in the Caribbean Through 1960. SNIE 80-1-59.
29 Dec 1959.

8 Jan 60 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

New Government in Laos

The balanced composition of the provisional government appointed by the King on 7 January should ease the strains between the various non-Communist groups. Khou Abhay, the new premier, is a respected elder statesman whose most recent position was as president of the King's Council. In addition to Khou, three other political independents are in the cabinet, including Khou's brother, Nhouy Abhay, who reportedly selected the cabinet and who will serve as deputy prime minister and minister of education. The remaining six portfolios are split evenly between the reformist Committee for Defense of National Interests (CDNI), which will control the key ministries of foreign affairs, defense, and finance, and former Premier Phoui's Rally of the Lao People (RLP) which will control, among other posts, the interior ministry. Minister of Defense General Phoumi, an important CDNI leader, is the only military figure in the cabinet.

The cabinet appears to be a generally capable one and is probably the best that could have been obtained under present political conditions in Laos. Its main function will be to prepare the country for general elections later this year. In the process, there is likely to be considerable jockeying between the CDNI and the RLP, but in view of the CDNI's enhanced power position, it will probably have the predominant voice in choosing the candidates for the anti-Communist slate.

Many of the new cabinet members are close to the King, who may play a more active, if still indirect, role in governmental affairs.

8 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 09]
Afghan Prime Minister Daud to Visit Tehran to Discuss Helmand Dispute

Afghan Prime Minister Daud has accepted Iranian Prime Minister Eqbal's invitation to discuss the dispute over the division of the Helmand River waters. Daud intends to stop off in Tehran for three or four days on his way to Europe for medical treatment, but he has asked that there be no official ceremonies. No date for the visit has yet been set. Daud will probably wait until after the visit of his brother, Foreign Minister Naim, to Pakistan beginning 10 January.

The Iranian Government has long been concerned that Helmand delta lands in Iran may be deprived of minimum water requirements by the development of irrigation projects along the Helmand River within Afghanistan. Tehran has repeatedly urged negotiations in an effort to secure a guarantee of a satisfactory volume of Helmand water for Iran. Iran's concern has apparently been heightened by Afghanistan's recent expressions of interest in building a new diversion dam near the border.

The talks may improve relations between Afghanistan and Iran, but a settlement of the dispute seems unlikely at this time. Tehran wants a guarantee of 35 cubic meters of water per second and has already turned down a neutral commission's recommendation of 22 meters in 1950 and a subsequent offer of 26 by the Afghan King.

Daud's postponement of his trip to Europe, originally set for December, was presumably attributable to the recent riots in the city of Kandahar. His new plans suggest that he believes the threat of further defiance of government authority is passing.

8 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 10]
Libyan Pressures For More US Aid With Fewer Controls

Libyan officials are continuing their pressure for more US financial aid and fewer controls on expenditure as the price for American air-base rights in Libya. Libyan Undersecretary of Finance Shaglouf has informed an American official in Bengasi that, as an alternate to the present aid program, he proposes assessment of customs duties on Wheelus Base imports, which he claims would bring in some $28,000,000 per year--all of it completely under Libyan control. Shaglouf feels that if the United States should refuse to modify the base agreement to permit this, the Libyan Government should then go to the United Nations and ask that US forces be moved out of Libya.

The Libyan-American base agreement, valid until 24 December 1970, was signed in 1954. In November 1958, however, the Libyan Government initiated negotiations for revision of the financial clauses of the agreement, seeking larger US aid funds completely at the disposal of the Libyan Government. Total US aid to Libya was about $25,000,000 in each of the Libyan fiscal years 1957 and 1958 and will amount to more than $32,000,000--including emergency drought assistance--in the current fiscal year ending 31 March. The Libyan Government had a completely free hand, however, in the expenditure of only a small part of this aid.

The prime minister and other leading Libyan officials have registered strong dissatisfaction with American aid proposals for fiscal 1960, which are similar to those of the preceding years. It is not clear how much governmental support Shaglouf has for the change he proposes, but the Libyan Government is almost certain to make new demands in connection with its consideration of the draft budget immediately after the 17 January parliamentary elections.

8 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Threats to Segni Government

Premier Segni's minority Christian Democratic government may soon face a crisis over whether it should seek support from the left or the right and over what stand it should take on controversial legislation. The last-minute postponement of President Gronchi's trip to the USSR, publicly attributed to illness, may have been the result of pressure from right-wing elements who support the government, or from restive left-wing Christian Democrats who desire its fall.

Continued alliance with the right--Liberals, Monarchists, and neo-Fascists--threatens to damage the showing of the Christian Democratic Party (CD) in the nationwide local elections planned for spring, and leaves the government vulnerable to attack by former Premier Fanfani's Christian Democratic left wing. Fanfani is reported to have said the government would fall in February; several prominent Christian Democratic senators have predicted its January demise.

The Christian Democratic right wing and the rightist parties supporting Segni fear a CD alliance with the Nenni Socialists. Party Secretary Moro recently proffered a hand to the Nenni Socialists in Sicily and publicly affirmed the anti-conservative nature of the CD, thus alarming the government's rightist allies.

Current issues on which either side could bring about a cabinet fall are: a controversial antitrust bill; the nuclear energy act, which some Christian Democrats feel would permit private control of energy development; and the "green plan" for agriculture, which will require $800,000,000 in financing. An additional source of friction is Segni's proposal to remove the editor of Il Giorno, a newspaper financed by oil tycoon Mattei, who favors the left wing of the Christian Democratic party.

8 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
