[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

8 April 1952

Copy No. 43

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET


[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

5. France intimates willingness to repatriate Chinese Nationalists in Indochina (page 5).
6. Indonesian Government uncovers plot to capture West Java capital (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Severe crisis afflicts Trieste pro-Cominform party (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -


[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt


[PAGE 04]
5. France intimates willingness to repatriate Chinese Nationalists in Indochina:

According to the Chinese Nationalist Foreign Minister, France has intimated that as a quid pro quo for Security Council support on the Tunisian question it would send to Formosa the Chinese Nationalist troops interned in Indochina.

Comment: France has persistently refused to repatriate interned Chinese Nationalist forces to Formosa for fear of provoking the Chinese Communists to increased support of the Viet Minh. The maintenance of these troops has been a substantial drain on French resources in Indochina, and they represent a considerable security problem. France recently indicated a willingness to discuss their eventual repatriation.

6. Indonesian Government uncovers plot to capture West Java capital:

the Indonesian army and police uncovered and thwarted a plot of the insurgent Darul Islam to seize Bandung, the capital of West Java, on the night of 3-4 April. Captured documents indicated the penetration of local army and air force leadership by these fanatical Moslem rebels and the smuggling of large quantities of arms and ammunition from government armories over a period of several months.

The United States Army Attache comments that although isolated events during the past four months had pointed toward Darul Islam penetration of the military forces, this report constitutes the first positive evidence of such a development.

- 5 -


[PAGE 05]
Comment: The Darul Islam is the largest, best-organized insurgent group in Indonesia. It has long been attempting to establish, by force of arms, a theocratic state in West Java, and more recently has sought to extend its influence throughout the entire island.

7.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Severe crisis afflicts Trieste pro-Cominform party:

A crisis has reportedly developed in the ranks of the pro-Cominform party in Trieste as a result of the mildly pro-Italian stand taken by party leaders during the recent demonstrations.

- 6 -


[PAGE 06]
Party chief Vittorio Vidali's "irredentist" speeches in southern Italy have added to the dissatisfaction, and efforts by party leaders to dissipate it have been unsuccessful.

Comment: The Trieste pro-Cominform party, as opposed to its Italian counterpart, has been supporting the plan for an independent Trieste under four-power control. There are indications, however, that Vidali is preparing the ground for a shift to a policy compatible with that of his "Italian brothers,"

Although the small Slovene minority in the party may be vulnerable to a Yugoslav attempt to exploit Vidali's alleged abandonment of the independent cause, the preponderant Italian majority and the old-line Communists will probably give full support to Vidali's leadership.

9.

- 7 -
