[PAGE 01]
6 June 1960

Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
6 JUNE 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Probable ICBM launched from Tyura Tam to usual Kamchatka impact area.

Chinese Communist artillery fires on Nationalist vessels in Chinmen area on 4 June; Peiping steps up propaganda charges of US-created "tension" in Taiwan Strait.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Ghana's Nkrumah publicly calls South African Government "alien" and "temporary"; he is working to form a South African government-in-exile" in Accra.

III. THE WEST

Cuba likely to seize three American-owned refineries when firms announce, as they now plan, refusal to process Soviet crude.

Cuba cancels long-planned underdeveloped nations conference; move seen as public acknowledgment of plan's failure to attract much support either in Latin America or among Afro-Asian nations.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
6 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: At approximately 1149 EDT on 4 June, a probable ICBM test vehicle was launched on the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range. This operation followed an unsuccessful launch attempt on 3 June. To date, 20 probable ICBM test vehicles have reached the Kamchatka impact area; six others have impacted at various extended ranges in the Pacific. In addition, five, or possibly six, probable ICBM test vehicles have failed in flight.

Taiwan Strait: Chinese Communist artillery on 4 June fired about 500 rounds at Nationalist naval escort vessels engaged in a troop-rotation operation in the Chinmen area. Since the firing was at Nationalist vessels rather than at the offshore islands, it did not constitute a change in the Chinese Communist pattern since the fall of 1958 of firing at the islands on odd days only. From a reassessment of information on Communist flights into the coastal area between 29 May and 4 June, it now appears that about 55 aircraft may have been involved rather than the larger numbers reported earlier. Chinese Communist propaganda assertions that the US is deliberately creating "tension" in the Strait have increased in the past two days, but the "liberate Taiwan" theme has not appeared.

(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Ghana: Ghana's Prime Minister Nkrumah appears to be preparing new initiatives to increase pressure on the government of South Africa and to project himself as the foremost champion of black Africans in that country. Nkrumah last week publicly called
[PAGE 05]
the present South African Government "alien" and "temporary" and called for the meeting of independent African states scheduled for Addis Ababa from 14 to 25 June to consider a total boycott of South Africa.

Nkrumah was "working to form in Accra a government-in-exile" composed of political refugees from South Africa.

(Page 3)

III. THE WEST

Cuba: The Cuban Government is likely to seize the three refineries owned by US companies in Cuba when these firms announce, as they presently plan, their refusal to comply with the formal Cuban order to process Soviet crude. The US Embassy in Havana believes the Cuban Government may seek Soviet assistance in providing technicians to replace displaced US citizens. Soviet petroleum experts may already be among the numerous technicians who have recently arrived in Cuba to help implement the Soviet-Cuban trade and credit agreements signed in February.

Cuba: The cancellation of the Conference of Underdeveloped Nations which the Castro regime had assiduously promoted since last December is, in effect, Havana's public acknowledgment of the paucity of official support in Latin America and the Afro-Asian bloc for Castro's sponsorship of such a meeting. In announcing the cancellation in Brazil on 2 June, Cuban President Dorticos said there would be "consultations among several countries" instead.

6 June 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Taiwan Strait

Chinese Communist batteries on the Weitou Peninsula fired about 500 shells at four Nationalist escort vessels in the Chinmen area on 4 June. The Nationalist naval units were escorting landing vessels carrying troops relieving a garrison division on Chinmen. The troops were landed safely, but one of the escort units was slightly damaged and four members of the crew injured; Nationalists did not return the fire. The Ministry of Defense will decide on 6 June whether to rotate the remainder of the Chinmen garrison. Initial Nationalist press reactions to the incident have been conservative.

From a reassessment of information on the Chinese Communist fighter aircraft movements into the Taiwan Strait area from 29 May to 4 June, it appears that about 55 aircraft were involved rather than the larger numbers--up to 100 aircraft--which had been reported earlier.

Chinese Communist military communications activity has generally been at normal or near normal levels.

Since 2 June increased flight schedule activity has been observed on a naval air net serving all naval headquarters in North, Northeast, and East China. This activity may be related to the recent air movements into the Strait area.

Communist Chinese claims that the US is deliberately creating "tension" in the Taiwan Strait have increased in the past few days and Peiping has denounced the continued "intrusions," despite repeated "serious warnings," of US naval and air units along the China coast. There has been no appearance of a "liberate Taiwan" theme in Chinese propaganda, and the official line fed to Communist newsmen in Hong Kong on 30 May indicated that while the

6 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 07]
liberation of Taiwan still forms a part of Peiping's policy, the regime now has no intention of resorting to "military measures" to accomplish this objective.

The standdown of the North Korean Air Force, possibly related to the recent activity in the Taiwan Strait, continues.

6 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 08]
Nkrumah Exploiting South African Situation

Ghana's Prime Minister Nkrumah appears to be preparing new initiatives to increase pressure on the government of South Africa and to project himself as the foremost champion of black Africans in that country. On his return to Ghana last week from the recent Commonwealth prime ministers' conference, Nkrumah publicly berated the present South African Government for its "fascist" apartheid policy and its refusal to place the mandated territory of South-West Africa under UN trusteeship. He said he regarded that government as an "alien" one "temporarily" functioning on African soil and urged discussion by the growing bloc of independent African states of a total boycott of South Africa.

Nkrumah's blast almost certainly foreshadows a militant approach to South African issues on the part of his representatives to the second conference of independent African states scheduled for 14 to 25 June in Addis Ababa.

expected the conference to devote most of its time to the South-West African question, apartheid, and two other issues, these four as matters which now have reached "critical stages requiring decisions."

Meanwhile,

Nkrumah has recently been "working to form in Accra a government-in-exile" composed of political refugees and exiles from South Africa.

the idea was being opposed by spokesmen for the militant Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), one of the African political organizations suppressed as a result of the recent racial disorders in South Africa. The PAC's attitude was said to be based largely on its opposition to the multiracial character of the free government Nkrumah apparently has had in mind and to the movement's inevitable domination by Ghana. Despite this rebuff, Nkrumah may continue to explore the idea with other exiled South African elements. In April it was estimated that over 100 exiles were already in Ghana, and Nkrumah has subsequently made a major effort to bring others to Accra.

5 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 09]
Cuba Cancels Underdeveloped Nations Conference

Cuban President Dorticos announced on 2 June that the conference of underdeveloped countries Cuba had scheduled for next September will not be held. Speaking in Brazil, which he was visiting, on his current good-will tour, he said that instead there will be "consultations among several countries."

Cuba had tried hard to promote this conference in Latin America and the Afro-Asian bloc. However, Venezuela, Mexico, and Panama were the only Latin American countries to accept invitations, and their acceptances were qualified. The only other nations to accept were the UAR and Indonesia. Most of the countries accepting invitations later showed doubts as to the wisdom of going through with the conference.

efforts by the UAR and Venezuela to persuade Cuba to substitute informal meetings at the UN General Assembly. The Cuban UN delegation now may attempt to expand and strengthen the "neutralist" bloc at the General Assembly.

There may still be a conference in Havana of unofficial representatives from Latin America and the Afro-Asian countries which could be more easily manipulated to serve Castro's propaganda aims than could a formal international conference.

The underdeveloped-nations conference had been a major objective of Cuban foreign policy ever since it was first announced last December. The cancellation tends to add further substance to recent rumors that Foreign Minister Raul Roa may soon be replaced.

5 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
