I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Hinting Unilateral Suspension of Nuclear Tests

In early March Khrushchev told a Western ambassador that the Soviet Union was going to stop producing and testing thermonuclear weapons since its present bomb design "functioned perfectly" and it already had enough to "blow up the world." He added that tests of "normal bombs" would be continued. The Soviet party chief, in a speech on 14 March, predicted that public pressures will eventually force governments to undertake unilateral stoppage of weapons manufacture. The Soviet ambassador to Austria recently told Chancellor Raab that the USSR will make a unilateral declaration suspending nuclear tests.

While such statements might be deliberately designed to "soften" the current Western position on disarmament, there are certain factors including impending United States tests including thermonuclear weapons which make a unilateral Soviet suspension of thermonuclear tests particularly timely. The current series of Soviet thermonuclear tests has been conducted at a rapid pace, and achievement of the immediate objectives of the USSR's thermonuclear weapons development program may be imminent. The Kremlin probably estimates that the public impact of its demonstrations over the past six months in the field of weapons systems would eliminate any appearance of military weakness which a unilateral action might otherwise suggest.

A major advantage, from the Soviet point of view, of a unilateral declaration in the nuclear weapons field would be to undercut Western efforts to enforce a suspension of tests or weapons manufacture through an inspection system. Soviet leaders probably believe that a test suspension would also have a heavy impact in Britain, where the Labor party is advocating a temporary test suspension and some of its members are publicly demanding a complete halt in nuclear weapons production.

Such a declaration would require a dramatic setting. The most obvious occasion would be the convening of the new Supreme Soviet, which has been hurriedly called for 27 March.

24 Mar 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
