7. Government moves to bar Spanish lead sales to Soviet bloc:
The Spanish Government reportedly has issued an order on 4 July suspending all lead export licenses. Henceforth, export sales applications must be accompanied by a certificate of ultimate destination. It is rumored among Spanish lead producers and dealers that US approval of end-users will be required. Meanwhile, 1,000 metric tons of lead consigned to the Societe Financiere Economique of Vaduz (SFEE), Liechtenstein, were shipped from Cartagena, Spain, on 28 June and are believed destined for the Soviet bloc.

Comment: The SFEE is the most active intermediary for Soviet satellite buyers of Spanish lead. The Spanish Government's order follows closely upon the visit to Spain of SFEE's owner, M. Antonioli. He personally placed the order for an additional 500 metric tons of lead sheet, and frankly admitted to Spanish officials that the lead was destined for Czechoslovakia -- the first clear proof that the SFEE is engaged in this type of East-West trade. The Spanish Government to date has allocated lead export licenses either under compensation barter agreements for scarce materials or to buyers offering the highest price; it has met all US objections concerning lead shipments by disclaiming knowledge as to their ultimate destination.

8. Comments on Saar Issue:
Acrimonious debate over the Saar question, generating ill-feeling between Germany and France, is bound to continue until a German peace treaty or other agreement makes a final disposition of the territory. This much has been made clear again in the renewed debates over the Saar in the West German Bundestag, and in a recent speech by Jakob Kaiser, the Federal Republic's Minister for All-German Affairs, calling for self-determination for the people of the Saar.
While the basic question involved in the dispute is whether the area will again become part of Germany, the immediate question raised in the latest phase of the debate is that of democratic practice in the Saar. This phase began in May when the Saar Government banned the Democratic Party (DPS) on the grounds that its agitation for reunion with Germany aimed at upsetting the present order. Chancellor Adenauer reacted by asking the Allies to restore democratic freedom in the Saar.

There is little room for doubt that the French discourage the free development of the will of the Saarlanders. A US representative in France estimates that 80 to 85 percent of the people would vote in favor of complete reintegration with Germany if a plebiscite were held. Yet even the possibility of holding a plebiscite is a forbidden topic of discussion in the Saar press. Still, it is ironic that, as part of its campaign for democratic practice in the Saar, the Bonn Government should find itself defending the DPS, which experienced a very undemocratic putsch last summer and has been identifying itself more openly with the interests of former Nazis. The DPS appears to have received a subsidy of 800,000 Deutsche Marks from Jakob Kaiser.

Chancellor Adenauer has expressed the hope that initiation of the Schuman Plan will automatically solve the Saar problem, but it is precisely this problem which at the moment threatens German acceptance of the Plan just as it threatened German acceptance of membership in the Council of Europe last year.
