[PAGE 01]
28 March 1953
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Highlights of Tito-Churchill discussions (page 3).
2. Japan proposes quadripartite consultations to wean China from Russia (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
3. Additional Soviet fighter division located in Austria (page 4).
4. American reconnaissance plane intercepted off Chukotsk peninsula (page 5).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
5. Semiofficial Rangoon newspaper denounces the United States (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Bulgarian payments to Soviet Engineering Directorate suggest increased military imports (page 7).

WESTERN EUROPE

LATIN AMERICA
9. Preparations for an invasion of Guatemala reported (page 8).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Highlights of Tito-Churchill discussions:

Marshal Tito and Prime Minister Churchill agreed during their London talks that Yugoslav-Western military planning should proceed on the assumption that an attack on Yugoslavia would be part of a general attack in Europe.

Tito was categoric in stating he had no desire to join NATO. He made no mention of a bilateral treaty with the British, and made no specific requests for additional military aid.

The Yugoslav leader reacted strongly against suggestions of a temporary solution to the Trieste issue, and showed no signs of being willing to give up any substantial part of Zone B to the Italians. He agreed to leave the Albanian situation undisturbed.

The British consider that the discussions dispelled Yugoslav suspicions of British policy toward the Balkans, and expect as a result that Yugoslavia may be more cooperative in future military talks.

2. Japan proposes quadripartite consultations to wean China from Russia:

The French Embassy in London has informed the British Foreign Office that Japan had approached France with a proposal for quadripartite consultations on measures to wean China away from Russia, according to Ambassador Aldrich. The Ambassador notes that a Japanese proposal for similar talks was presented to the British Foreign Office on 19 March.

Comment: The Japanese Foreign Minister approached Ambassador Murphy in early March for tripartite discussions.
[PAGE 04]
Japan's leaders believe that Communist China's ties with the Soviet Union can be weakened by increasing free world trade relations with China, within the limitations imposed by the Korean war. Britain and France are concerned over Japan's commercial competition in Southeast Asia and the Japanese probably feel they can count on British and French support for this approach.

SOVIET UNION

3. Additional Soviet fighter division located in Austria:

Formation of the unit apparently began in October 1952 when Soviet Air Force personnel were observed on Deutsch Wagram airfield ten miles northeast of Vienna. Since February 1953, a small number of MIG-15's have been reported there.

Comment: This is the second fighter division to be added to the 59th Air Army in Austria and Hungary in recent months and raises the total to four, two of which are deployed in Hungary. A fighter division was transferred in January from the Western USSR to Hungary and is now based near Budapest.

Estimated strength of Soviet and Satellite jet fighter units deployed throughout East Europe has increased over the past year by about 580 aircraft to a present estimated total of about 1700 planes.
[PAGE 05]
4. American reconnaissance plane intercepted off Chukotsk peninsula:

Two Soviet MIG-15's intercepted an American photo reconnaissance plane about 22 miles off the Chukotsk peninsula on 27 March. The MIG's did not open fire.

The pilot states that he did not violate the restrictions placed on his flight which were to approach no closer than 20 miles from the Siberian coast.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Semiofficial Rangoon newspaper denounces the United States:

In a virulent editorial on 26 March, the semiofficial New Times of Burma charged that the United States was primarily responsible for the "growing strength" of the Chinese Nationalists in Burma and suggested that the government should seriously consider the offer of the Communist insurgents to aid in the fight against the Chinese "aggressors." Two references were made to Burma's "friendly neighbor," Communist China.

The American Embassy comments that this editorial reflects the views of high government officials who favor a stronger statement on American involvement than Premier Nu has permitted. The Embassy also fears that internal pressures may actually force the government to accept the Communists' offer, should the current military campaign against the Nationalists prove unsuccessful.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: Burmese leaders have occasionally spoken of Americans being with the Nationalists, but have not linked them with the United States Government.

The editorial indicates that the Burmese Government may soon publicly assert that the United States is involved.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
[PAGE 07]
EASTERN EUROPE

Bulgarian payments to Soviet Engineering Directorate suggest increased military imports:

During January payments totalling more than $3,000,000 were made by Bulgaria to the Engineering Directorate of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Trade. The payments were made by the Ministry of National Defense and the Bulgarian State Enterprise for Import of Metals and Machines on the account for 1952.

Comment: These remittances bring known Bulgarian payments to the Engineering Directorate, an agency believed to handle some Soviet exports of military materiel, to a total of $15,500,000 for the calendar year 1952. The known payments during 1950 and 1951 totalled only $500,000 and $2,000,000 respectively.

The Bulgarian armed forces have for several years been rated first among the Satellites in terms of combat potential.
[PAGE 08]
WESTERN EUROPE

LATIN AMERICA

9. Preparations for an invasion of Guatemala reported:

Army reserves of El Salvador are being called to active duty for an invasion of Guatemala from El Salvador by the Salvadoran, Nicaraguan and Honduran armies

The US Military Attache in San Salvador has visited Salvadoran army barracks but found no indications of preparations for such action, though rumors and speculation are rife.
[PAGE 09]
Comment: An invasion of Guatemala within the next three months is unlikely. The armies of El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Honduras, totalling about 8,500 troops, are not now capable of sustained offensive action and their absence from national territory would endanger the stability of home governments.

The Guatemalan Government suspects the other governments of plotting against it, but has kept its best troops within the capital city, probably for fear of a domestic uprising there. Such an uprising, or defections within the Guatemalan Army officer corps are the only events, which would give an invasion from El Salvador a fair chance of success. The Guatemalan Army of 6,000 appears still loyal to its government.
