I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Views on Future US- Soviet Relations

Private comments by Soviet diplomats, together with the line taken by a public lecturer in Moscow, are designed to emphasize that the breakdown in the Paris talks does not herald a far-reaching revision of Soviet policy toward the West. At a lecture on the international situation on 25 May, the speaker spelled out this approach along the lines established by Khrushchev in his Berlin speech on 20 May. The lecturer emphasized that the current increase in tensions was of a temporary nature and assured his audience that the "basic forces" leading to relaxation of tensions were still operative.

The lecturer claimed that, in contrast to "consistent failure" prior to Stalin's death, subsequent Soviet efforts to reduce tension had been successful; as the summit approached, however, it became clear that no progress could be expected on Berlin, and the US announcement on 7 May of plans to conduct nuclear tests to improve detection techniques "scuttled" the sole issue with good prospects for agreement.

According to an American Embassy officer attending the lecture, the speaker was on the defensive in justifying Khrushchev's stand at Paris and in minimizing the adverse consequences. The comments and questions of the audience revealed skepticism over the objectives to be gained by the Soviet actions in the Security Council. The audience also appeared concerned over the possible effects on US- Soviet relations of a trial of Francis Powers and the conclusion of a separate East German peace treaty.

Soviet diplomats apparently have instructions to offset the shrill public attacks on the United States by taking a conciliatory line in conversations with Americans. A Soviet official in Belgrade expressed the belief that US- Soviet relations would improve soon and that new negotiations could be held "at any time." He added that Khrushchev had the "highest regard" for President Eisenhower. In Vienna, a Soviet Embassy officer told the New York Times correspondent that there would be no "basic change" in Soviet policy toward the West.

27 May 60 Page 1
