Mali Planning Diplomatic Relations With Bloc

The Federation of Mali, consisting of the West African states of Senegal and Soudan, plans to establish an embassy in Moscow following Mali's attainment of independence within the French Community on 20 June, according to Senegalese leader Leopold Senghor, who is expected to become president of the new state. Initial diplomatic missions also are planned for Paris, Washington, London, and four African capitals, including Conakry. Mali will be represented elsewhere by France, under the terms of a diplomatic accord signed last month.

In a conversation on 23 May with the American consul general in Dakar, Senghor indicated that he personally had favored delaying for a year or two any exchange of representatives with the USSR, but that the Soudanese had insisted on taking such action immediately. Many Soudanese leaders are strongly influenced by Marxism and predisposed toward friendly ties with Communist countries. Their influence seems certain to predominate within independent Mali's foreign ministry as a result of a recent deal allocating that portfolio to Soudan and the presidency and defense ministry to Senegal.

Senghor stated he had been "categoric" in resisting Soudanese arguments to send an ambassador to Peiping as well as Moscow. At the same time, however, he voiced a preference for recognizing "both Chinas" and indicated that Mali intended to support the admission of Communist China to the UN. Mali itself expects to become a UN member this fall, along with a number of other new African states. Earlier, Senghor had told a correspondent for the North Vietnamese news agency that Mali favored the establishment of relations with "all states of Indochina, including the Democratic Republic of Vietnam."

Peiping, which succeeded in 1958 in obtaining recognition from Morocco, the Sudan, and Guinea, recently has been faced with lively competition from Taipei, which established diplomatic relations with both Cameroun and Togo earlier this year. A pending request by Nationalist China to open a consulate in Dakar, the Mali capital, has reportedly been approved by Senegal but seems likely to be

27 May 60 Page 6
