Political Agitation in Panama

Activities of the powerful Arias Madrid family are causing political uncertainty and instability in Panama which could split President Chiari's weak coalition and threaten his month-old administration.

Through Finance Minister Gilberto Arias, who represents the family's strong influence in the coalition, many strategic government posts have been filled by known leftists and seditious elements. Although he denied on 28 October that he was advocating revolutionary overthrow of the government, Roberto Arias has been ranting about the inevitability of social revolution to Panama's restless students and lower classes since his return from political exile a few weeks ago. Roberto led an abortive revolt against former President de la Guardia--whose ambassador in London he had been--which coincided with a Cuban-sponsored expedition against Panama in the spring of 1959. He is closely associated with irresponsible pro-Cuban revolutionaries, boasts of his friendship with Fidel Castro, and is known to be in contact with the Cuban Embassy in Panama.

Behind his sons is powerful lawyer, publisher, and businessman Harmodio Arias, himself a former president who for 40 years has plotted with and used any group he considers useful to his determination to dominate the country.

Also recently returned to political activity is Harmodio's half brother Arnulfo, a demagogic political strong man who retains strong popular appeal despite having twice been ousted from the presidency. Although Arnulfo usually operates as a lone wolf, he has worked with Harmodio when it suited their purposes.

The activities of the Arias group are strengthened by ownership of three newspapers and some radio stations which they use for all-out campaigns such as the current one to oust National Guard Commandant Bolivar Vallarino, who has in recent years used his power to maintain Panamanian political stability.

President Chiari may soon be forced to break with the Arias forces, although such action might bring down his government. He will probably postpone his plan to reorganize the unpopular Guard and to transfer Vallarino, for fear of losing his strongest support.
