[PAGE 01]
9 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Gromyko evades Arab plea for further support to Algerian rebels.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Vientiane lacks recent reports from Sam Neua front.
Indian Communist party general secretary to discuss border situation with Peiping.
Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey to push for US adherence to CENTO.

III. THE WEST
Castro to take further action against American private interests in Cuba.

LATE ITEM
USSR unsuccessful in attempt to launch space vehicle for third time in four days.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Algeria: Moscow, apparently in order to avoid offending France, is continuing to restrict its support of the Algerian rebels, despite concerted pressure from the Arab states. Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, in the most authoritative expression of Moscow's policy toward Algeria to date, told a delegation of Arab ambassadors in Moscow that recognition of the rebel government and giving "material aid" are "difficult matters which will require time for study," according to a message of 2 September from the UAR ambassador. Gromyko promised, however, to support the Algerians again in the forthcoming UN General Assembly debate and to offer "moral aid." The evacuation in late August by Soviet ship of rebel wounded from Tangier for free treatment in the USSR has been Moscow's most direct involvement on the side of the rebels to date.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Laotian intelligence officials admit ignorance of the present military situation in Sam Neua Province, stating they have no recent messages from the field. High-ranking military representatives from Argentina, Italy, Japan, and Tunisia, members of the UN Security Council's subcommittee on Laos, are expected to leave later this week for Vientiane. The group has no authority to make recommendations but will report its findings to the council as soon as possible. The Communist bloc continues to denounce the prospect of UN action on the Laotian question. Peiping and Hanoi have termed it "illegal" and a pretext for American intervention.

(Page 1)
9 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF i

[PAGE 05]
India: The Indian Communist party, suffering serious political reverses as a result of the recent Sino-Indian border friction, has reportedly ordered its general secretary, Ajoy Ghosh, to review the situation with Chinese leaders. Ghosh, now in Moscow discussing domestic party matters and scheduled to visit Peiping, is to inform the Chinese of the difficulties their actions have created for the Indian Communist party. The Indian party has felt compelled to issue a statement deploring the recent border clashes, stating that Indian territorial integrity must be safeguarded, and hoping that matters can be solved by negotiation. The Indian Communist party is also plagued by continuing dissension over the question of retaining its reliance on parliamentary tactics instead of adopting "revolutionary" methods.

(Page 2)

CENTO (Baghdad Pact): Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey are apparently planning a concerted effort to obtain US adherence to the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), formerly the Baghdad Pact. They are holding a series of preliminary talks and probably intend to raise the question as a key issue at the Washington meeting of the CENTO ministerial council in October. London, meanwhile, does not appear ready to increase its own modest material support for CENTO, and a Foreign Office official recently expressed fear that Iran might go neutralist if the Shah does not receive the aid he feels necessary.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel Castro indicated to US Ambassador Bonsal on 3 September that his government plans a review of American private interests in Cuba, with emphasis on those which obtained their concessions under Batista, and that he is determined to continue action against many of them. Castro and Foreign Minister Roa both indicated that they will press demands for massive US economic aid to Cuba and Latin America.

(Page 4)
9 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: For the third time in four days the USSR unsuccessfully attempted to launch a space vehicle from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at 0340 GMT on 9 September. The attempt followed a smooth five-hour countdown. Although the countdown was completed and the timing signal was initiated, the characteristic break from a solid tone to a pulsating tone did not occur. This indicates that vehicle "lift-off" did not take place. Still another attempt to launch the same vehicle could be made within the next few days. The next favorable time is about 0445 GMT, 10 September. Using the same guidance system, the probability of precise injection of the space vehicle with proper velocity and direction at the appropriate point in space decreases slightly with each day of delay of launch from the optimum date of 6 September 1959. The repeated coincidence of projected launch times at optimum times for a lunar mission lends increasing support to the assumption that a lunar mission is intended.

9 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos

There continue to be conflicting reports from Laos on the status and location of the main Communist forces which may pose a threat to the town of Sam Neua. The Laotian army G-2 admitted to the American army attache on 7 September that he had had no specific information on the situation in Sam Neua Province for two days. In speculating that some enemy forces may have withdrawn to North Vietnam, he emphasized that this was merely a possibility and remained unconfirmed. He said that he had ordered patrols out in an effort to determine the true situation.

Meanwhile, fresh Communist troops of about battalion size have been identified in southeastern Phong Saly Province, according to General Ouane, the Laotian Army chief of staff. Such an augmentation of Communist strength would further complicate the defensive problems of the already overtaxed Laotian Army.

High-ranking military representatives from Argentina, Italy, Japan, and Tunisia are expected to leave later this week for Vientiane, under UN Security Council auspices. As many as 15 men from each country may eventually make up the group because of the difficult terrain in Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces which must be observed. The group has no authority to make recommendations but will merely report its findings to the council "as soon as possible."

A possible new line in North Vietnam's propaganda appeared on 8 September when Hanoi publicized an alleged Neo Lao Hak Zat statement which asserted that the only solution to the Laotian problem was negotiation between the two parties concerned--the Royal Government and the Pathet Lao forces. Heretofore, bloc propaganda has proposed revival of the ICC in Laos and strict observance of the Geneva and Vientiane agreements as the "only" solution to the situation. The new willingness to negotiate on the part of the NLHZ may reflect confidence that the rebellion has achieved sufficient success to provide a basis for negotiation.

9 Sept 59 Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Indian Communist Party Consults Moscow and Peiping
On Friction Between India and China

The dilemma in which the Indian Communist party (CPI) has been placed by the recent friction between India and Communist China over border problems is emphasized by its order to party secretary Ajoy Ghosh to review the situation in talks with Chinese as well as Soviet leaders.

Ghosh left for Moscow on 26 August under CPI instructions to inform Khrushchev of the embarrassing position in which Indian Communists find themselves as a result of recent Chinese action toward India. Ghosh was to point out that CPI sympathizers in India were turning anti-Chinese and the party was being isolated because of its inability either to join in the criticism of Peiping or to come out in open support of the Chinese. The CPI, in these circumstances, requested the "advice" of the Soviet party on what stand it should take.

In a subsequent letter to Ghosh in Moscow, the CPI executive reportedly directed him to discuss these difficulties with top Chinese Communist leaders during his scheduled visit to Peiping. The CPI had already sent a formal letter in mid-August to the Chinese Communist party explaining its position and recommending that Peiping confine its use of such terms as "Indian expansionists" in propaganda material to specific anti-Communist elements in India.

Ghosh is not likely to find the Chinese sympathetic to the CPI's plight. Chinese diplomatic officials in India reportedly have criticized Indian Communists for bungling the situation in Kerala and also questioned the CPI's public statement welcoming the Eisenhower-Khrushchev meeting. The Chinese leaders with whom Ghosh talks probably will insist that Peiping has no choice but to defend what it claims as Chinese territory. They will almost certainly suggest that the CPI support Peiping's formal position favoring "peaceful negotiations" on border problems.

In addition to discussing the border situation, Ghosh was empowered to convey to Moscow the "true facts" behind New Delhi's

9 Sept 59 Page 2

[PAGE 09]
intervention in Kerala State. The CPI apparently wanted to be certain that there was "no misunderstanding"--particularly in Khrushchev's mind--about Nehru's being personally responsible for the Communist government's dismissal. In this connection, Ghosh was to recommend that the present level of Soviet aid to India not be increased; that Moscow should stop and study the "rightist" trend thoroughly. This line reflects the view privately held by some Indian Communist leaders that Soviet aid to Nehru's Congress party government undercuts Communist objectives in India.

9 Sept 59 Page 3

[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Castro Discussion With US Ambassador

Fidel Castro indicated to US Ambassador Bonsal on 3 September that his government plans a review of American private interests in Cuba and that he is determined to take action against many of them. During the discussion Castro mentioned companies which received concessions from the Batista government, referring specifically to the contract with the Cuban American Nickel Company at Moa Bay, which he said had been opposed by the Cuban National Economic Council. Moa Bay, where production is just getting under way, is expected to become Cuba's largest nickel producer and has a guaranteed market in the United States until 1965.

Ambassador Bonsal does not believe Castro plans to handle these matters personally. They will probably be the responsibility of a new agency or ministry which will reportedly be established with complete control over industries and the revolutionary government's plans for industrialization. It apparently will be headed by Major Ernesto Guevara, who returned on 7 September from a successful three-month "good will" mission to Asia and Africa. The bitterly anti-US Guevara is a close associate of Castro. His statements and actions in the past have significantly furthered Communist objectives in Cuba.

Castro may be planning to request a substantial public loan from the US. Both he and Foreign Minister Roa stressed to Ambassador Bonsal the need for massive US economic assistance for industrialization in Cuba and in Latin America.

In political as well as economic matters Castro seemed completely preoccupied with the details of agrarian reform and military activities. His belief that his economic and social theories are superior to either capitalism or Communism has evidently convinced him that the East-West struggle is not his concern. He accepts support of local Communists because it helps him politically and in labor circles.

9 Sept 59 Page 4

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
