Comment: There have been persistent
reports of Viet Minh pilots training in China but no firm evidence
that China has assigned planes to a Viet Minh air force.

The French have been obliged for several
years to carry out their military planning and operations under the
threat of air and troop intervention from China.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

8. Confusion in Syria may bring leftist leader to the fore:

Neither of Syria's old-line political parties
dominates the cabinet coalition,
both may make concessions to the radical
Arab Socialist Party, thus bringing its
leader, Akram Hawrani, to the fore.

The army attaché in Damascus reports that
announcements and congratulatory telegrams
read on the Aleppo radio reflected strong
leftist tendencies, echoing the lines of Hawrani
and even of the Communists. One of the leaders of the current revolt,
Captain Mustafa Hamdun, is reportedly a follower of Hawrani.

Comment: Hawrani is an extreme leftist
with strong anti-Western sentiments. He broke with Shishakli over the
latter's failure to implement a strong land reform program. A year
ago he merged his party with the Arab Resurrectionist Party, an
extremist, pan-Arab group.

9. Extremist factions emerge following return of Nagib:

Ambassador Caffery in Cairo reports that the
"monolithic front" of the Revolutionary Command
Council is no longer intact and that Major Khalid
Muhieddin, young leftist member of the council,
and a group of junior cavalry officers are currently prominent as a result
of their part in the restoration of General Nagib.

Both Moslem Brotherhood and Communist
organizers have been reported as active in the demonstrations supporting Nagib's return. Salah Ashmawi, expelled extremist of the outlawed
Brotherhood, appeared publicly with Nagib as he was being welcomed
back. Caffery believes that both the Brotherhood and the Communists
will use the present unsettled situation to enlist Nagib's support for
their ideas.

Comment: In the renewed struggle for power
in Egypt, extremists and old-line politicians may attempt to form alliances
with current government leaders. Their temptation to accept such support
is now increased.
