6. US Embassy Rangoon considers Communist threat to Burma serious:

US Embassy Rangoon reports that there is no doubt that "positive and effective" Chinese Communist assistance to insurgent Burmese Communists is imminent, if it has not already begun. The Embassy believes this development poses a threat to Burmese security which the government is unable or unwilling to meet, and cites as reasons for its belief (1) the failure of the "dry season" military campaign even to contain insurgent activities, (2) the government's inability to enforce effective border controls, and (3) the refusal of Burmese political leaders to relate Burma's domestic insurgency to international Communist expansionism. In view of these considerations, the Chinese Communists appear to be capable of steadily infiltrating northern Burma and smuggling guerrillas and supplies in sufficient quantities to turn the military tide in favor of the insurgents. The Embassy concludes that such Chinese intervention in Burmese affairs "bids fair to attain Communist objectives in Burma."

Comment: Recent reports clearly indicate that the Chinese Communists intend to assist the Burmese Communists, and that such assistance may already have been made available. Burmese forces are so heavily engaged and dispersed in lower Burma that only a relatively small effort would be necessary to bring most of Burma north of Mandalay under de facto Communist control in a short period of time. These reports also mention plans of the Communists to establish a "liberated area" in the north, from which they intend to mount a political and military offensive against the rest of Burma.

7. French Government continues to play down possibility of Chinese intervention in Indochina:

In commenting on the recently reported incursion of a Chinese force into the northwest region of Vietnam, the French Foreign Ministry and the Associated States Minister have stated that the French military in Indochina have neither reported any contact with this force nor confirmed that it is Chinese Communist. Furthermore, these French officials believe that if the Chinese Communists
