[PAGE 01]
30 August 1953
Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

3. Comment on possible Viet Minh transfer of regular troops to south Vietnam (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Comment on heightened Italian-Yugoslav tension (page 5).
6. Comment on 28 August Soviet notes on Austria (page 5).

No articles selected

- 2 -

30 Aug 53

[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Comment on possible Viet Minh transfer of regular troops to south Vietnam:

The Viet Minh in mid-July reportedly ordered the evacuation of the civilian population from several villages in the Plaine des Joncs area, about 75 miles southwest of Saigon in south Vietnam. The area to be cleared is one of the few in the Plaine des Joncs capable of accommodating a large military force.

The Viet Minh has in the past relied largely on local guerrillas to carry out its relatively limited objectives in south Vietnam. The transfer of large numbers of regular Viet Minh troops from the Tonkin area so far south would be difficult, but would seriously complicate the French military effort.

30 Aug 53

[PAGE 04]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Comment on heightened Italian-Yugoslav tension:

Italian prime minister Pella's unprecedentedly sharp reaction to a Yugoslav reiteration on 25 August of claims to the entire Free Territory of Trieste reflects Italy's growing fears that developing American-Yugoslav military cooperation will jeopardize its prospects for regaining Trieste.

Pella's call of an emergency cabinet meeting, his reported threat to move troops to the Yugoslav frontier, and the violent reaction of the Italian press to the Yugoslav statement all suggest that the Rome government will now take a more aggressive stand in relation to Trieste. Joint Italian-Yugoslav cooperation, which is a prerequisite to strengthening NATO's southern flank, has become more remote.

There is no evidence to support rumors current in Italy that Yugoslavia intends in the near future to annex Zone B or to settle the Trieste issue by force.

6. Comment on 28 August Soviet notes on Austria:

The Soviet government's 28 August reply to the Western invitation to a meeting of the Austrian treaty deputies again underlines the Soviet desire to discuss the Austrian question only in connection with the broader German problem. Moscow repeated its

[PAGE 05]
charge of 25 May that the state treaty discussions are not within the competence of the deputy foreign ministers, but added that a solution of the German problem could contribute to an Austrian settlement.

The Kremlin's renewed demand for a complete and unconditional withdrawal of the abbreviated draft treaty is probably designed to generate additional British, French, and Austrian pressure on the United States for acceptance of the earlier long draft treaty as the only basis for discussion.

- 6 -

30 Aug 53

[PAGE 06]
