[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

2 June 1959

Copy No. C 62

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
2 June 1959
DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudan: Brigadiers Shannan and Abdullah, the two senior army officers who forced their way into the Supreme Council in March and were the leading personalities behind the abortive coup on 22 May, have been arrested along with a number of junior officers. This action would appear to indicate that General Abboud and his supporters are more determined and more confident of their strength than before the army commanders' conference held late last week. Clashes between loyal and dissident troops are still possible, however.

i
[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

Nicaragua: President Somoza's imposition on 30 May of a modified state of siege is designed to cope with current invasion attempts and with a general strike threatened, in an unusual show of unity, by opposition groups ranging from Communists to wealthy landowners.

A Costa Rican airliner, said to be carrying 50 to 60 revolutionaries to Nicaragua, was shot down by the Nicaraguan air force on 1 June. The Costa Rican Government reportedly has seized the airliners employed for this flight in an effort to put an end to air incursions into Nicaragua from Costa Rica.
(Page 5)

2 June 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudanese Internal Situation

The Abboud government, after a period of investigation and cautious maneuvering, has undertaken strong measures against the perpetrators of the 22 May coup attempt. Former Supreme Council member Brigadier Erwa, whom Abboud sent to investigate the dissident movement in the Eastern Command, returned to Khartoum with his report on 28 May. On 29 May a meeting of army commanders and Supreme Council members took place in Khartoum.

Nine officers of the Eastern Command had been arrested, including the two in charge of the movement of troops toward Khartoum on 22 May. Several leaders of the junior officers' movement in the Northern Command and in the Khartoum area had previously been placed in custody. The government has announced that these officers--15 in all--are shortly to be sent to detention camps in the southern Sudan.

Brigadiers Shannan and Abdullah, members of the Supreme Military Council and the leading personalities behind the coup attempt, are known to have been placed under arrest early in the morning of 1 June. Thus, while there is still some possibility of a clash between dissident and loyal military units, it appears that Abboud and his supporters have successfully reasserted their authority.

This period of military jousting has not prevented the Abboud government from forceful action against Sudanese Communists, who apparently tried to take advantage of the situation to step up their activities. At least 24 prominent Communists and Communist-front leaders have been arrested and sent to a detention camp in the southern Sudan.

2 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Opposition to Somoza Government is Widespread

Efforts by Nicaraguan President Luis Somoza to provide a transition period of increasing political freedom following his father's long dictatorship have not satisfied the many groups which oppose him and his brother, National Guard commandant General Anastasio Somoza, Jr. A recently formed civic action association representing widely disparate economic and political groups inside the country threatened on 29 May to call a general strike to press demands for concessions by the government.

President Somoza is evidently bitter over the repudiation of his policies and says he now realizes the truth of his father's frequent warning that "you can't feed too much meat to a baby." His decision to declare a state of siege and to arrest numerous opposition leaders was taken at the urging of military and other advisers who have feared that Luis' moderation posed a threat to their control over the government.

2 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 12]
