Comment: At President Quirino's invitation, representatives from most South and Southeast Asian countries met at Baguio in the Philippines a year ago to discuss the possibility of a Pacific Pact. The only tangible results were agreements to consult with each other on matters of mutual interest and to develop closer economic and cultural relations.

India is interested in developing regional pacts in Asia, but its whole-hearted participation will be obtained only if it is assured a preeminent position. Pakistan, while concerned over regional security, recently has been promoting a Near Eastern Moslem alliance. Indonesia, Burma and Thailand would be receptive to a pact proposal, while Japan, when eligible, would be anxious to sign one.

3. German support of Allied stand in Berlin trade crisis seen weakening:

US officials in Berlin cite evidence of weakening local German support of the Allied position in the current Soviet restrictions which have resulted in a choking off of much of West Berlin's export trade. Certain large firms and many smaller firms in West Berlin, hard hit by the restrictions, have been ignoring West German and Allied directives and complying with Soviet demands.

The French Commandant in Berlin feels that the West Berliners will not support the Allied position and that no one has been able to indicate what the Allies will do if West Berlin trade is stopped and Allied countermeasures, including the proposed move to hold up implementation of the new interzonal trade pact between East and West Germany, fail to cause the USSR to back down. He adds that the USSR could afford one or two years delay in the East German Five Year Plan if its objective to force the Allies out of Berlin is achieved.

Comment: The dragging out of the current Soviet restrictions appears to have succeeded in further dividing the Allies and West Berliners on this issue. Shortly after initiating the restrictions, the Soviet authorities encouraged West Berlin firms to by-pass Allied

- 4 -
