[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
6 September 1951
Copy No. C1-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Army, DIA and DOS
review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

USSR

2. Yugoslavia expects Soviet proposal for Five Power Pact at UN General
Assembly (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Viet Minh army morale reportedly declining (page 4).

NEAR EAST

4. British relax military alerts prior to Iran's ultimatum (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Irish request US assistance in military purchases (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
USSR

2. Yugoslavia expects Soviet proposal for Five Power Pact at UN General
Assembly:

The Soviet Union will propose a Five Power Pact
as its main theme at the 6th UN General Assembly
Session this November, in the opinion of the
Yugoslav UN delegate. The Yugoslav delegate
thinks the USSR will present a completely drafted project at the meeting and
has urged his government to develop a counterplan.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Viet Minh army morale reportedly declining:

Viet Minh forces are reported to be undergoing increasing
hardship from lack of food and medicines. Thirty
to sixty percent of the troops in large units are
unable to fight due to sickness. The result has been a decline in troop morale,
an increase in desertions, and failure to fill recruitment quotas.

Comment: This indicates that the Viet Minh is increasingly hard-pressed to meet the
material needs of the population within its zone and that civilian morale has
consequently declined. Viet Minh armed forces are suffering a similar lowering of morale.

NEAR EAST

4. British relax military alerts prior to Iran's ultimatum:

The US Army Attache in London reports two
military indications of reduced British tension
over the Iranian situation. The units involved

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
in the contingent plan for protecting and evacuating British citizens in Abadan
have now been placed on a 72-hour alert. In addition, although naval craft in
the area must remain in the vicinity of the Persian Gulf, all except one cruiser
are now allowed to leave Abadan.

Comment: On 24 August, the day after the oil
negotiations finally broke down, the military units involved in the plan had
been placed on a six-hour alert.

It is not yet known how British military activity
will be affected by Prime Minister Mossadeq's 5 September ultimatum that
the 350 technicians still at the Abadan refinery must be withdrawn unless the
oil negotiations are resumed within fifteen days. Though British citizens
were voluntarily withdrawn from the oilfields, the British Government has indicated its intention to keep the remaining technicians at Abadan as long as
possible.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Irish request US assistance in military purchases:

Irish External Affairs Minister Aiken has approached one of General Eisenhower's American political advisers in Paris with an informal request for assistance in purchasing American military equipment, promising in return very limited cooperation with NATO in military staff talks on defense plans. Aiken indicated that the new Irish Government was much concerned about the problem of defense and wanted a small amount of up-to-date military equipment for training purposes.

Aiken gave his personal view that there was no possibility of Ireland's joining NATO or other collective defense arrangements at this time.

Comment: This is the first reported approach to the US for military assistance on the part of the DeValera government which came into power in June. Though introducing a military budget about 25 percent higher than its predecessor's, the DeValera government has publicly reaffirmed Irish neutrality, and has given no countenance to any suggestions that Ireland might in effect be willing to trade bases for military assistance. The form of the present approach, which easily lends itself to official denials, further suggests that DeValera is not yet ready to challenge Irish neutrality sentiment to obtain US military equipment.

- 6 -
