Pijade thought that since no one approaching Stalin's ability remained on the scene, either a clique within the Politburo (now replaced by the Presidium), or the Politburo itself, would govern collectively. Concerning rivalries within the Politburo, he emphasized that there were no hard facts to go on and that opinions frequently expressed on this point were purely speculative.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Bao Dai opposes follow-up of recent Vietnamese elections:

In a recent discussion with Ambassador Heath, Bao Dai asserted that the successful candidates in the municipal elections of 25 January were opponents of the government who would unwittingly serve Viet Minh ends. He accordingly argued against the formation of provincial legislatures and a national assembly.

Comment: The January elections were hailed by French, Vietnamese, and American observers as "a blow against the Viet Minh." They brought many of Vietnam's "fence-sitters" into the country's political life for the first time and demonstrated that those candidates who opposed French policy and the present Vietnam Government made the strongest popular appeal. Such political enthusiasm as was engendered by the elections would be dissipated by a failure to announce definite plans for the formation of a national assembly.

Bao Dai's opposition to the further development of representative government stems from his well-founded fear that his position would be threatened.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Mossadeq maintains position on oil and Point IV:

On 4 March, Prime Minister Mossadeq told Ambassador Henderson that if the United States were interested in Iran's security, it would not support Britain in the oil blockade. Mossadeq stated that the Soviet Union has protested against Point IV activities in northern Iran and the protests embarrass the Iranian Government. He added that as long as Point IV personnel interest themselves in agricultural rather than development projects the Soviet Union would consider them spies.

Comment: The Prime Minister's latest statements to Henderson are no different from those of the past. He may still hope to persuade the United States to help settle the oil dispute on his terms. When he relinquishes that hope, a less friendly attitude may be anticipated.

Soviet pressure to oust American advisers was most recently reported some weeks ago in conjunction with the Soviet-Iranian negotiations over the Caspian fisheries concession.
