[PAGE 01]
12 November 1953

Copy No.

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. & NAVY reviews completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

2. Finnish vessel reportedly delivers Satellite guns to Communist China (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Israel believed strongly opposed to US-proposed Jordan River project (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

12 Nov 53
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

2. Finnish vessel reportedly delivers Satellite guns to Communist China:

in Canton's port of Whampoa in October he observed a Polish and a Finnish vessel unloading six-inch guns.

the guns were from Czechoslovakia's Skoda works.

- 3 -

12 Nov 53
[PAGE 04]
Comment: This Finnish shipment, if correctly reported, is in violation of assurances given the United States by Helsinki earlier this year that it would not permit its vessels to carry items of direct military use to Communist China. These assurances followed protests concerning the Finnish tanker Wiima's unsuccessful attempt to deliver kerosene to China from the Black Sea.

- 4 -

12 Nov 53
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Israel believed strongly opposed to US-proposed Jordan River project:

American charge Russell in Tel Aviv believes that the real Israeli attitude toward the American-sponsored Jordan River "TVA" project is represented by the widespread Israeli press criticism of the Johnston mission to the Near East rather than by the government's apparently open-minded attitude in its discussion with the special envoy. The government's show of cooperation probably reflects a tactical decision based on the belief that Arab opposition to the plan is sufficient to block it.

Russell states that there is little chance of obtaining a firm Israeli decision on the Jordan project unless Arab acceptance seems probable.

Comment: Because of Israel's desire to use the Jordan River to irrigate the Negev desert, opposition to the American proposal, which allocates more water to Jordan than to Israel, has been expected.

In the present tense atmosphere, no Arab agreement to the plan seems likely.

- 5 -

12 Nov 53
[PAGE 06]
