I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Chinese Communist Views on International Developments

Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi recently told
Japanese Liberal-Democratic party adviser Matsumura that
Peiping had "accepted the results" of the Eisenhower-Khrushchev
talks, "but only after giving Khrushchev certain conditions which
had to be met." Matsumura refused to reveal these conditions,
but their nature is reflected in Peiping's reluctance to moderate
its propaganda attacks against the US or to accept the apparent
Soviet view that the period of "peaceful coexistence" requires
a relative reduction of "struggle" tactics. The Chinese appar-
ently are willing to back Khrushchev's policies only on a few is-
sues. They accept the propaganda call for "complete disarma-
ment," they have dropped any mention of the use of force to "lib-
erate" Taiwan, and they feel that a meeting at the summit
cannot be avoided.

Premier Chou En-lai told Matsumura--who had suggested that
Communism and the free world "have many similarities and can
coexist"--that he sincerely believed "capitalism and Commu-
nism can never coexist."

On the matter of United Nations membership for the Peiping
regime, Chen Yi became "very agitated" and stated if Japan
would not make an effort to help China enter the UN, it should
"shut up and stop trying to prevent" Chinese Communist entry.
Chen's bitter criticism on this point gave Matsumura the impres-
sion that the Chinese leaders want UN membership "as soon as
possible."

The Chinese leaders indicated that they will make an all-
out effort to arouse opposition to Kishi or to force a change in
his "wait and see" policy toward China. They made it clear that
current efforts to isolate Kishi would be based on invitations to
all party members "except Kishi's group" and on a continuation
of the trade embargo until the Japanese prime minister "changes
his present attitude." The Chinese displayed considerable anxiety
over the revised US-Japanese Security Treaty. Chou En-lai
claimed that the treaty is a "great threat to China" and is an
even greater concern than Taiwan to Peiping.
