[PAGE 01]
17 May 1953

Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
INFORMATION

SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Peiping states Communists will "never" accept immediate release of Korean prisoners (page 3).
2. Continued Chinese Nationalist air supply to Li Mi's forces reported (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE
3. New information substantiates earlier report of Satellite policy conference in mid-April (page 4).
4. Comment on Czech release of Oatis (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Outlook brighter for European Political Community (page 5).
6. EDC further delayed in French Assembly (page 6).
7. French urge prevention of return of Otto Strasser to Germany (page 6).

* Summary: 17 may seen by President.

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Peiping states Communists will "never" accept immediate release of Korean prisoners:

A long editorial in the official organ of the Chinese Communist Party on 16 May emphasizes that the UN Command's proposal to release with an armistice all Korean prisoners unwilling to be repatriated "can never be accepted." Less emphatic language is used in objecting to other UN proposals regarding the work of the neutral commission, arrangements for Communist access to the unwilling, and the release after 60 days of those who remain so.

Comment: The Communists are undoubtedly encouraged by the unfavorable comment from other UN allies on the first proposal, and they will almost certainly persist in rejecting it. They appear disposed to compromise on other points, although there is still no evidence that they are prepared to accept any arrangement which would be likely to result in nonrepatriation of a substantial number of prisoners.

2. Continued Chinese Nationalist air supply to Li Mi's forces reported:

A four-engine plane of the Chinese Nationalist Air Force is making regular air drops to supply Li Mi's force in Burma,
[PAGE 04]
Comment: It has generally been believed that supply flights to Li Mi's force had been completely suspended during the past few months of negotiations regarding its evacuation.

Chiang Kai-shek does not intend that Li Mi's troops shall be removed. If air supply is continuing, and the Burmese become aware of it, their suspicion that Taipei is not acting in good faith will be confirmed. Under such conditions there would be virtually no chance of success for the Mixed Committee which is to attempt to arrange for removal of the Nationalists.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. New information substantiates earlier report of Satellite policy conference in mid-April:

Recent reliable information that the Czech and Bulgarian premiers were absent from their respective countries in April adds credibility to a previous report that a meeting of Satellite leaders was held in Moscow sometime during the week of 12 to 18 April. told the American legation at that time that they were fairly certain that Hungarian Deputy Premier Gero was attending such a meeting.

On 21 April the Bulgarian foreign minister told that Premier Chervenkov "was back from his trip." A Czech Foreign Ministry official told Ambassador Wadsworth on 12 May that Prime Minister Siroky had been "away part of the time" during the past month. During this period, the Polish and Rumanian premiers made no public appearance in their respective countries.

The meeting would presumably have been held to inform Satellite leaders on recent developments in Soviet policy and possible organizational changes planned for the Satellites.
[PAGE 05]
4. Comment on Czech release of Oatis:

The pardon of AP correspondent William Oatis is one more conciliatory Communist gesture to the free world without cost to the USSR. The quick follow-up in Pravda and the fact that the pardon was granted within four days after Ambassador Bohlen's approach to the Soviet foreign minister on the question are clear indications of Moscow's participation in the decision. It is probably timed to take advantage of differences now developing among Western countries over negotiations with the Soviet bloc.

In addition to contributing to the Kremlin's "peace offensive," the Czech government probably considers that this pardon will lead to the restoration of its overflight privileges over western Germany and the reopening of the American market to Czech exports. The American embargo in late 1951 virtually eliminated Czechoslovakia's dollar income and seriously curtailed its ability to obtain strategic commodities from the West.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Outlook brighter for European Political Community:

According to Ambassador Bruce, Chancellor Adenauer and Premier de Gasperi were gratified at the progress made by the foreign ministers of the six "Little Europe" countries at their recent European Political Community meeting, which was an unexpected success. They attribute this to the improvement in Bidault's attitude since their meeting last March in Strasbourg.

The final communique on the meeting was the first outright commitment of the six foreign ministers to the creation of a political community as called for in the EDC treaty.
[PAGE 06]
6. EDC further delayed in French Assembly:

Chancellor Adenauer's refusal to sign the EDC protocols is delaying French parliamentary consideration of the treaty, according to the American embassy in Paris.

The French, who regard the protocols as an integral part of the treaty, say they must be signed by the foreign ministers of the six EDC countries, following the precedent set in May 1952. Adenauer maintains that signature by the respective ambassadors would obviate submission of the protocols to the Bonn Parliament for approval.

French spokesmen are not optimistic that Adenauer will sign now, despite Bundesrat approval of the treaty.

Comment: A Foreign Ministry spokesman recently admitted that the EDC has been "temporarily shelved," and increasing pressure for four-power talks has aroused new hope for an East-West understanding on a neutralized Germany.

Adenauer now plans to submit only a verbal summary of the protocols for Bundestag approval. The procedure of signing the protocols by the foreign ministers may cause a parliamentary demand for formal ratification which would give the Social Democrats another opportunity to defeat the treaty.

7. French urge prevention of return of Otto Strasser to Germany:

American officials in Bonn report that French High Commissioner Francois-Poncet is disturbed over the possible return of Otto Strasser, renegade Nazi leader now in Canada. A German court recently decided in favor of his readmission. Francois-Poncet feels that the Allied High Commission should take action to keep him out if the Bonn government is not able to do so.
[PAGE 07]
The West German Ministry of Interior intends to appeal the Strasser ruling but must await a cabinet decision, which is expected next week. The government is particularly interested in preventing Strasser's return prior to elections.

Comment: Because of his prominence as leader of the proletarian faction of the Nazi party and his flight from the Hitler regime after the 1934 purge, Strasser is regarded by some Germans as a legendary representative of the "good" in National Socialism and might serve as focal point for discontent with the present regime.
