India Requests US Assistance in Nuclear Power Development

The chairman of India's Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) has requested American assistance in developing nuclear power stations, thus reversing India's past position against accepting American aid in nuclear energy matters. The AEC is seeking Indian Government approval of an extremely costly and ambitious program for 1,000,000 kilowatts of nuclear power by the end of the Third Five-Year Plan (1961-66) based on natural uranium reactors. Such a program would be considerably beyond the ability of India's scientific base to support and would require extensive use of Western scientists and technicians. The Indian Planning Commission has already approved a minimum goal of 250,000 kilowatts. It may approve the higher goal, since nuclear power costs compare favorably with conventional power costs in several important regions of India.

The AEC is seeking substantial assistance so that at least one of the nuclear power stations could be based on enriched uranium or plutonium which--in contrast to natural uranium--India does not produce. The AEC chairman proposed an agreement along the lines of the US-EURATOM agreement, and hopes that the United States will bear the foreign exchange costs for construction of the reactors.

In the past India has received most of its assistance from Commonwealth countries, and apparently viewed the US-sponsored Asian Regional Nuclear Center in the Philippines as a rival.

India's atomic energy program, which is modest by Western standards, is the largest in Asia and is based on an abundance of essential raw materials, including the world's largest known thorium deposits. One research reactor is in operation and two more are scheduled to begin operation by the end of 1959. The AEC also has a monazite processing plant, a plant for extracting uranium and thorium salts from monazite, and a uranium metal plant; a heavy water plant is to be completed by 1960. India has launched a substantial program to overcome its lack of scientists and technicians and is constructing a major research center near Bombay.

27 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
