Communist unions. Employers have firmly resisted unity-of-action committee demands, and the failure of wage negotiations in the metallurgical industry has given the Socialist-oriented union an excuse to withdraw from the unity-of-action committee. This union now plans a non-Communist association of Paris-region metal industry unions.

Comment: The Communists have carefully nursed local unity-of-action committees since last spring in the hope of gaining complete control of French labor by working from the bottom up. Failure in the key Paris metal industry is a serious blow to their plans. This may be the turning point leading to an end of dominant Communist influence in critical sectors of French labor, particularly if the French Government successfully promotes a national economic conference excluding the Communist-controlled union.

6. Soviet representatives in Vienna show concern over US strategy:

According to Austrian Foreign Minister Gruber, a conversation on 31 October between high Austrian officials and two Soviet political advisers revolved around the theme of Soviet concern for US strategic defense plans throughout the world. The Soviet representatives said they were prepared to make concessions to stop dis US "aggression," and remarked that in view of Churchill's return to power, a four-power conference could be held from which favorable results might be expected.

Gruber found the Soviet representatives to be "sensitive" and "on the defensive" on the subject of an Austrian state treaty. They attempted to connect the treaty question with alleged remilitarization in the Western zones of Austria, the refusal of the West to consent to an investigative commission, and with the stationing of British and US troops in Trieste. Gruber feels that the Soviet representatives will employ these same objections in a new meeting of the Austrian treaty deputies.

Comment: Soviet officials in Western Europe have recently alleged that the USSR would make concessions to obtain a change in US strategy. In early 1951 prior to the unsuccessful Deputy Foreign Ministers' Conference, there was a series of similar reports that the USSR would make concessions to stop German rearmament. In the last series of Austrian treaty talks, the USSR used the Trieste issue as a means of blocking agreement. In recent weeks the repeated Soviet charges of remilitarization in western Austria have appeared to be laying the foundation for further objections to an end of the Austrian occupation.
