Situation in Laos

King Savang has designated National Assembly President
Souvanna Phouma to form a new government, according to the
rebel-controlled Vientiane radio. This action follows Savang's
acceptance on 14 August of the resignation of the Somsanith
government, which had received a vote of no confidence the pre-
vious day from the National Assembly in Vientiane. The assembly's
"unanimous" vote apparently had been forced by the rebel Kong Le
group controlling Vientiane, and Premier Somsanith and other
government leaders in Luang Prabang initially dismissed it as
illegal. Subsequent negotiations in Luang Prabang between the
government and a rebel delegation, however, resulted in "complete
understanding,"

These developments occurred when the government seemed to
be gaining the upper hand over Kong Le, who had been unsuccessful
in extending his control beyond Vientiane and only had about 1200
troops at his disposal. The king presumably acted in the interests
of national unity, since a military showdown was becoming in-
creasingly likely with the failure of repeated efforts to negotiate
a settlement with Kong Le. Lao Defense Minister Phoumi, chief
advocate of direct action to settle the revolt, had already initiated
psychological warfare activities against the rebel paratroop units
in Vientiane with the introduction of Lao special agents and teams,
and was proceeding rapidly with attack plans.

When informed of the king's decision to accept the resignation
of the Somsanith government, Phoumi is reliably reported to have
expressed surprise. He said that he refused to accept the decision
and indicated that he intends to go ahead with his plans to salvage
the situation by military means from his command post at
Savannakhet in southern Laos. It is doubtful, however, if a uni-
lateral move against the king's wishes could succeed.

The king's course may have been influenced by fear that Kong
Le might defect with his troops to the side of the Communist Pathet
Lao dissidents if he couldn't derive satisfaction from the government
for his demands for policy reforms. Kong Le has sharply accused the
United States of interfering in Laotian affairs, and advocates friendly
relations with all nations including the Communist bloc.
