Adenauer-Macmillan Major Shift in Policy on European Integration

In his recent discussions with Prime Minister Macmillan,
Chancellor Adenauer apparently indicated that he has decided to
postpone indefinitely further steps toward the supranational in-
tegration of Europe in favor of an accommodation between the
European Common Market and the British-led European Free
Trade Association or Outer Seven.

This subject was the major problem discussed by Adenauer
during Macmillan's visit to Bonn on 10-11 August, and while no
decisions were made, this major shift in Adenauer's
postwar policies was "confirmed."

In deciding to delay indefinitely his ideal of an integrated
Europe, Adenauer probably was motivated by both domestic and
foreign policy considerations. The decision earlier this year to
accelerate the institution of the Common Market's agricultural
policy has confronted the West German farmer with a prospective
reduction in prices, and Adenauer fears he may in consequence
lose votes in the 1961 Bundestag elections. Adenauer evidently also
sees an urgent need for European unity on basic policy and pos-
ture toward the USSR, and he stressed again in his talks with Mac-
millan his concern that Washington may not be able to act firmly
during the American elections.

A bid by Adenauer for Six-Seven unity may cause trouble be-
tween Bonn and Paris. It is doubtful that De Gaulle would welcome
London in the European confederation he has hoped to develop under
French leadership. Even though Adenauer's shift toward a looser
form of European integration would be in line with De Gaulle's views,
British Foreign Office sources have the impression that Adenauer
is "piqued" with the French leader, and he may fear that in a "Gaul-
list" Europe Bonn would be reduced to a satellite.

The Bonn Foreign
Ministry is extremely uneasy that in the course of talks with De
Gaulle on 29 and 30 July Adenauer may have undercut the Common
Market's institutions. Similar expressions of concern have been
heard from other Common Market countries.
