The Situation in Japan

Takeo Miki, a leading party rival of Japanese Prime Minister Kishi, has made public a proposal for a Diet recess to provide a cooling-off period for President Eisenhower's visit. Miki's plan would require: the opposition Japanese Socialist party to acknowledge the validity of the extension of the Diet session and the lower house's approval of the US-Japanese security treaty; all parties to agree to resume participation in the Diet sessions; a general election after upper-house approval of the treaty, but before the US and Japan exchange ratifications; and Kishi to resign as soon as the Diet approves the treaty.

In a move parallel to Miki's proposal, an independent group in the upper house has renewed negotiations with the major parties for a ten-day "unconditional" truce covering the period of the President's visit. The proposal is designed to avoid the violence that is likely to result from a final vote in the upper house on the treaty--violence the independents feel would adversely affect the climate for the President's arrival.

The Japanese Socialists have said they will again use force to prevent an upper-house vote on the treaty. The government party may call for such a vote sometime between 14 and 17 June. Ambassador MacArthur, however, reports there are indications that the Socialists desire to de-emphasize antitreaty activities and concentrate on Kishi. While they may see in the maneuvers for a compromise an opportunity to retreat from their mass-resignation proposal, which will not affect ratification of the treaty, the party has not yet made any firm decisions on modifying its campaign of continuing demonstrations.

The largest Japanese labor organization, the pro-Communist Sohyo, is planning general strike action on 15 June. Sohyo is calling for 24-hour strikes by private industry unions and two- or three-hour work stoppages by public service workers, including transportation and communications employees. Union leaders hope the strikes will exceed the large-scale action of 4 June, but there is

13 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
