[PAGE 01]
20 June 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist Bloc: Khrushchev arrived in Bucharest on 18 June with a strong delegation to attend the Rumanian party congress, which opens on 20 June. The European satellites, with the exception of Albania, will be represented by their party first secretaries, while China and the Asian satellites have sent politburo-level delegations. Peng Chen, the top Chinese representative, is closely associated with the leadership and has considerably more stature than the Chinese observer to the Warsaw Pact meeting in Moscow last February. The composition of the delegations indicates that Khrushchev will utilize the time to meet with bloc leaders in order to discuss future Soviet policy. In private talks Khrushchev will undoubtedly discuss Sino-Soviet differences and probably seek to work out the essentials for an eventual compromise, at the same time reaffirming Soviet leadership in the bloc.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Belgian Congo: Leftist leader Patrice Lumumba apparently has suffered a distinct loss of prestige as a result of his failure to form a national government. Joseph Kasavubu, president of the Abako party and leader of a loose anti-Lumumba coalition, claims to have succeeded in his effort to obtain a majority in the national assembly. However, Lumumba, with the largest single bloc of assembly seats,

[PAGE 04]
threatens to disrupt the work of any government from which he is excluded. Political fragmentation is continuing at the provincial level, with a state of emergency proclaimed in two of the six provinces and minority parties attempting to set up governments in four provinces.

20 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Cuba: The resignation of two under secretaries in the Cuban Foreign Ministry, announced on 17 June, is probably the precursor of a general shakeup of top officials in the ministry, including the removal of Foreign Minister Roa, who has been held responsible for the failure of various aspects of foreign policy. One of the newly appointed under secretaries is regarded as a Communist; the other has recently voiced strong anti-US sentiments on a tour of Latin America. Both may have been selected by Raul Castro, suggesting that he and the Communists are likely to extend their influence over foreign policy.

20 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Continuing Crisis in the Belgian Congo

Leftist leader Patrice Lumumba apparently has suffered a sharp drop in prestige as a result of his failure to set up a national Congo government, according to the consul general in Leopoldville. Lumumba's authority to form a government was withdrawn on 17 June by Belgian Resident Minister van der Meersch, who then asked Joseph Kasavubu to attempt the task.

Kasavubu, president of the Abako party and Lumumba's chief rival, derives his support from the Cartel of the National Union, a loose coalition of several parties united chiefly by their opposition to Lumumba. The cartel seems to control a majority in the National Assembly, and on 19 June Kasavubu claimed that he had succeeded in forming a coalition government which he hoped to present to the assembly for approval later this week. However, Lumumba, with the largest single bloc of assembly seats, has a strong minority position and has threatened to disrupt the work of any government from which he is excluded. Following a meeting with Kasavubu on 19 June, Resident Minister van der Meersch flew to Brussels for further consultations on the Congo situation.

Meanwhile, political fragmentation is continuing at the provincial level. A state of emergency has been declared in Katanga and Kivu provinces, and minority parties are attempting to set up their own governments in Katanga, Leopoldville, Kasai, and Equateur provinces. Lumumba's stronghold in Orientale Province is the only area which has so far escaped this trend. Violence has already been reported at scattered locations, and the security situation may deteriorate further as rival groups continue their struggle for power.

20 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
