frontier area. Pakistani authorities are strengthening police forces and arresting more dissident tribesmen.
(Backup, Page 6) (Map)

UAR- USSR: The UAR is now conducting an intensive propaganda campaign in retaliation for recent Soviet criticism of the UAR's suppression and alleged mistreatment of local Communists. At a press conference in Damascus on 5 June, Riyad al-Turk--one of the Communists Moscow claimed had died by torture--attested to his "good treatment" in prison, treatment which the Cairo press commented was better than that received by "inmates of Siberia." The UAR official newspaper Al Jumhuriyah on 6 June stated that Moscow's propaganda is putting the USSR in the "imperialist camp" and added that if Soviet leaders believe they can impose their views on the UAR through agreements, "they feed on delusions." (Backup, Page 7)

Sudan: Pressure against the Abboud government is likely to be severe during the next few weeks. Siddiq al-Mahdi, head of the powerful Ansar religious sect and leader of the civilian group which has been agitating against the military regime, has sent a new note to General Abboud protesting a recent police action against two members of the Mahdi family. In the note, which was apparently intended for wide circulation, the Ansar leader accused the military government of religious persecution, and reiterated his demand for a return to civilian government. Siddiq al-Mahdi has also reportedly brought into Khartoum approximately 1,000 of his Ansar followers, in order to resist any government harrassment. The opposition group may be planning a civil disobedience campaign in conjunction with a strike planned by the Sudan Railway Workers Union for 16 June.
(Backup, Page 8)

Communist China - Nepal: Peiping is seeking to capitalize on King Mahendra's suspicion of India and his growing political and economic difficulties. Communist China's chief of state, Liu Shao-chi, has reportedly sent a confidential letter to the King endorsing his regime and calling for speedy utilization of the $30,000,000 in Chinese aid already committed to Nepal under

7 June 61 DAILY BRIEF v
