Repercussions of Alleged Saudi Plot Against Nasir

Cairo and Damascus continue to elaborate on their charges that King Saud plotted to overthrow the UAR and assassinate Nasir. Saud is also being charged with financing a monarchist plot against the Egyptian regime, and a witness at the current trial of the Egyptians implicated said "There is no bigger fool than Saud." The Egyptians have launched a press campaign designed to split Saudi ranks by claiming that Saud sold out to the United States in the Dhahran airfield agreement against the advice of his pro-Egyptian brother, Crown Prince Faysal. Saud has offered to meet Nasir, either in Riyadh or Cairo, in order to refute the charges against him. In Damascus, about a hundred Saudis have demonstrated against Saud.

Egypt has ordered "all subjects of the UAR working in Saudi Arabia" to leave as soon as possible after 8 March. It is unclear whether this affects the many thousands of Egyptians and Syrians employed in the government and in private enterprises. Their withdrawal would probably gravely affect the functioning of the Saudi economy and government. Saud, in retaliation, has ordered the recall of Saudi military and naval students now training in Egypt. He has requested that the US military mission submit plans for taking over their training. The chief of the Saudi UN delegation, Shuqayri, representing Saud at the Geneva Maritime Conference, has informed Nasir of his disgust with Saud and his intention to resign.

In Iraq and Jordan there is widespread belief in the plot charges, but the governments are backing Saud fully. Many informed Arabs believe that the plot charges will result in division of the Arab world into monarchist and republican camps, with the latter growing consistently stronger. Previous reports that Iraqi troops had moved westward toward Jordan late in February appear to be substantiated by a Syrian message which states that two battalions entered Jordan at that time.

10 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
