Baathist Leader Plans Coup in Jordan

The coup plans of Dr. Munif Razzaz are in effect an up-
dating of longer range plans that Baath party leaders have
discussed with other dissident parties for eventually over-
throwing King Husayn's regime. Razzaz reportedly feels
that the major problem will be to overcome deep-seated fear
and general inertia among Jordanian subversives caused by
the failure of various previous coup attempts. He believes
the government is capable of forcibly suppressing anti-regime
demonstrations and therefore does not favor them. He con-
siders that some dramatic action--such as an "accident" for
the King--is "the most effective way to set things in motion,"
after which it will be "easy" to mobilize nationalist and popu-
lar support for necessary further action against pro-regime
elements.

The National Socialist and the Qawmiyin al-Arab (Arab
Nationalist) parties are the other groups with which Razzaz
expects to cooperate. The National Socialists include sev-
eral prominent former Jordanian leaders--e.g., former
Prime Minister Fawzi Mulqi--and they probably have the
greatest potential popular base of support. The Baathists,
on the other hand, have developed an apparently effective
clandestine apparatus which receives arms infiltrated from
the UAR and the pan-Arab Baathist leadership.

Jordanian Baathist activities have been hampered by in-
ternal factionalism during at least the past year and a half.
These differences resulted in 1959 in the expulsion of party
leader Abdullah Rimawi, a former Jordanian cabinet minis-
ter. The UAR's Nasir, who has suppressed Baathist activi-
ties in Syria, subsequently backed Rimawi as leader of a
splinter Baathist group in an apparent attempt to usurp con-
trol of the party and its assets and activities throughout the
Arab world.

Nasir's plan does not appear to have been very success-
ful. Dr. Razzaz, in discussing Baathist factionalism, now
claims that Rimawi is "finished" and that the rival factions
in Jordan have drawn closer together again. He expects the
10 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
