[PAGE 01]
28 March 1961

Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
28 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Congo: Nehru implies movement of Indian troops to Congo may be held up unless UN regains control of Matadi. (Page ii)

4. Iraq: Antiregime demonstrations in Baghdad. (Page ii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Congo: Prime Minister Nehru has implied that the continued movement of Indian troops to the Congo may be delayed unless UN control of the key port city of Matadi is assured. Speaking to the Indian Parliament, he urged that the port be reoccupied by UN troops as soon as possible--by force if necessary. About 2,300 Indian troops are tentatively scheduled to leave Bombay on 29 March by sea for Matadi, where they could arrive about 16 April.

Liberian President Tubman has rebuffed Tshombe's efforts to visit Monrovia, alleging that Liberian bitterness over Lumumba's death makes the visit inadvisable from a security standpoint. Tubman apparently fears that a meeting with Tshombe would leave him open to international criticism as a servant of "imperialist" interests.

*Iraq: A strike of Baghdad taxi and bus operators, protesting a new gasoline tax, is being exploited by anti-Qasim nationalists as well as Communist elements to develop a general demonstration of popular hostility against the regime. Security forces have taken no action against the strikers in the absence of Qasim, who left the city on 26 March for a visit to Basra. Qasim would appear to have been placed in a situation where he must either back down or use force in an unpopular cause.

28 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 08]
