CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 April 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Yugoslavia: Recent Soviet efforts to force the Yugoslavs to capitulate on ideological issues have resulted in the most serious crisis in Yugoslav-Soviet relations since the death of Stalin. As the public argument continues, both Moscow and Belgrade are attempting to keep their ideological dispute from harming intergovernment relations, but the past record makes the success of these efforts doubtful. In anticipation of a deterioration in Yugoslav-Soviet ties, more than the usual number of friendly references to the West have been included in the major speeches made so far at the Yugoslav party congress.

(Page 1)
Poland's refusal fully to endorse the USSR's position in the Yugoslav-Soviet ideological dispute is a flaw in the bloc unity on which the Russians have based their stand and may disrupt Poland's relatively amicable relations with the USSR. Although Poland has registered its "serious reservations" over passages of the Yugoslav party program which the Soviet Union has criticized, it has agreed with Yugoslavia on the basic principle of party independence and autonomy. The other bloc countries so far heard from--Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Communist China--have supported the Soviet position.

USSR-Japan: Soviet negotiators have obtained a fishing agreement with Japan for 1958, which achieves the major Soviet objective of excluding the Japanese from salmon fishing in the Sea of Okhotsk beginning next year. Although the agreement contains provision for further discussions following a joint survey of resources in the Sea of Okhotsk, Moscow has been able to thwart the implementation of similar provisions in previous agreements. Japanese negotiator Akagi has termed the agreement unsatisfactory, although the best obtainable under the circumstances, and there have been strong public objections in Japan, which could cost Kishi badly needed support in national elections on 22 May.

(Page 3)

France: Solution of the government crisis seems still distant. Democratic Resistance leader Rene Pleven now is trying to form a coalition, but the necessary compromises by the major parties seem unlikely to be reached at least until after the runoff local elections on 27 April.
