[PAGE 01]
22 May 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

22 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Geneva:
said the time has come
to go into secret sessions to establish a framework for settle-
ments on Berlin and nuclear tests which could be approved at
a summit meeting. He repeated earlier statements that Khru-
shchev would expect to discuss other matters, including the
Middle East and the Far East at a summit meeting, particularly
in private talks with President Eisenhower.

*East Germany: Party boss Ulbricht reportedly plans to
confer with Khrushchev in the near future on Geneva develop-
ments and on future strategy moves. The meeting could take
place in Moscow prior to Khrushchev's departure for Tirana on
25 May, or in Albania where Premier Grotewohl is now vacation-
ing. (Ulbricht will probably try to impress on Khrushchev the
eventual necessity for stern measures in dealing with the West
Berlin problem, including sealing off the city from all Western
contact if necessary.)

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Britain-USSR: Britain's trade mission in Moscow is
finding the Soviet negotiators "unexpectedly difficult" largely
because of demands that the UK provide for increased purchases
of Soviet goods by granting the USSR most-favored-nation
status in regard to British import quotas. London apparent-
ly believes that despite the USSR's sweeping demands, an agree-
ment will be reached providing for the modest increases in
trade which Britain seeks.)
(Page 6)

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Soviet Spokesmen Urge Secret Talks at Geneva

In both public statements and private talks, Soviet spokes-
men at Geneva are stressing that the time has come for
serious private negotiations to seek common ground for com-
promise agreements on the most important issues. In his
formal speech on 18 May, Foreign Minister Gromyko under-
scored his readiness to consider Berlin and European security
as separate and independent subjects for negotiation.

foreign ministers should get down
to secret sessions now that both sides have introduced their
formal "package" proposals. He suggested there should be
private talks aimed at working out a framework for arrange-
ments on Berlin and cessation of nuclear tests which could
be "approved" at a summit meeting. He repeated earlier re-
marks that Khrushchev would expect to discuss other matters,
including the Middle East and the Far East, at a summit con-
ference, particularly in private talks with President Eisenhower.)

These statements reflect both the USSR's constant probing
for differences among the Western powers and its desire to
create an impression of progress toward agreement on key
issues which can be used to justify a heads-of-government
meeting.

22 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Anglo-Soviet Trade Negotiations

Britain's official trade mission which arrived in Moscow
on 12 May is having an "unexpectedly difficult" time with So-
viet negotiators, according to British Ambassador Sir Patrick
Reilly. At the beginning of the negotiations the USSR requested
a large amount of direct government credits. It is most in-
sistent now, however, that Britain grant it most-favored-nation
treatment in regard to British import quotas. This in effect
would expand the market for a wide variety of Soviet goods,
earnings from which would enable Moscow to step up purchases
of British machinery and chemical equipment.

British officials say that these demands are out of the ques-
tion and that London is interested only in a moderate increase
in trade--possibly raising British imports of Soviet timber,
grain, and furs by some $50,000,000, roughly equal to the USSR's
favorable trade balance with the UK in its best year. This would
enable the USSR to purchase more machinery in the sterling area.
Additional purchases might be financed by government-guaranteed
five-year credits to British exporters.

London apparently believes that some such official trade
agreement will be reached. The British delegation thinks the
USSR is employing its usual tactics of exaggerating trade pos-
sibilities but will finally settle for an agreement of much more
modest proportions.

22 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, the Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 11]
