[PAGE 01]
17 June 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. THE TOGLIATTI INTERVIEW

3. ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER ANNOUNCES RESIGNATION

4. CHINESE COMMUNISTS ANNOUNCE RELEASE OF TWO AMERICAN PRISONERS

5. CHINESE 1956 BUDGET DESIGNED TO OVERFULFILL FIRST FIVE-YEAR PLAN

6. FLOODS IN EAST CENTRAL CHINA

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. THE TOGLIATTI INTERVIEW

Available excerpts from Italian Commu-
nist leader Togliatti's interview with a
non-Communist Italian journalist on the
question of Khrushchev's repudiation of
Stalinism point up Togliatti's desire to
emphasize the independence of his party
from foreign control. His statement does
not, however, constitute a repudiation of
his loyalty to Moscow and to the international Communist
movement.

Togliatti's remarks are an accurate reflec-
tion of the new international Communist line admitting differ-
ent roads to state socialism, which received its doctrinal un-
derpinnings at the 20th Soviet Party Congress. His statement
is thus a blueprint for the Italian Communist Party in carry-
ing out this general line and is designed to strengthen Italian
Communist efforts to form a popular front with non-Commu-
nist parties.

The references to the autonomy of the na-
tional Communist parties suggest that Togliatti wanted to re-
assert his leadership of the entire Italian left which had been
called into question by the 27-28 May local elections in which
the Communists lost votes to their Nenni Socialist allies.
Togliatti had laid the ground work for the autonomy theme
by several recent moves, notably his public praise for the
dissolution of the Cominform in April and his dramatic recon-
ciliation with Tito on 29 May. This theme may receive further
emphasis at the long-postponed national congress now sched-
uled for October.

Various reports in recent months have
stated that the repudiation of Stalin at the 20th Party Congress
left many Italian Communists confused and angry but the extended
discussion of the subject was postponed until after the 27-28
May elections.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
3. ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER ANNOUNCES RESIGNATION

The announcement on 17 June by Israeli
foreign minister Moshe Sharett that he
would resign on 18 June suggests a
new and possibly tougher approach in
Israeli foreign policy. Mrs. Golda
Myerson, first Israeli minister to the USSR and now min-
ister of labor, is scheduled to become the new foreign
minister.

Sharett did not explain his reasons for
resigning other than to state that he "considers it impossi-
ble to continue in the post." There have, however, long
been reports of differences between Sharett and Prime Min-
ister Ben-Gurion over foreign policy, particularly toward
the Arab states. Ben-Gurion favors a tough line toward the
Arabs while Sharett has sought to give priority to diplomatic
action.

Sharett's resignation may also be con-
nected with Israel's failure to obtain what it considers an
adequate supply of arms from the West. Furthermore,
Israel was bitterly disappointed over the recent UN Security
Council resolution on the Hammarskjold mission which it
considered "pro-Arab."

By placing Mrs. Myerson in Sharett's
post, Ben-Gurion will have a trusted exponent of his "ac-
tivist" line in the Foreign Ministry, and will thus be able
to exert close direction of Israeli foreign policy. While she
was in the USSR, Mrs. Myerson reportedly was not in favor
with the Soviet government because she maintained close per-
sonal contacts with members of the Jewish community in
Moscow.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
4. CHINESE COMMUNISTS ANNOUNCE RELEASE OF
TWO AMERICAN PRISONERS

The release from prison on 15 June of
two American priests reduces to 11 the
number of Americans in Chinese Commu-
nist jails. The Chinese Communists re-
leased and deported nearly 30 Americans in late 1955, but
continued to hold the remainder in prison, apparently retain-
ing them as hostages to improve Peiping's bargaining position
in the ambassadorial talks at Geneva.

Peiping's declaration that the prisoners
had "served their terms" is apparently intended to suggest
that their release does not necessarily signify the early re-
lease of all the Americans still in Chinese prisons. At least
one of the prisoners still being held is serving a life sentence;
another is serving a 20-year term. On 1 June, however, Chou
En-lai told a Reuters correspondent that American prisoners
might be released before the expiration of their sentences "if
their behavior was good."

some of the Americans held by the Chinese have been get-
ting better treatment during the past six months. It has been
common practice for Peiping to improve the lot of prisoners
a few months before their release.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]
5. CHINESE 1956 BUDGET DESIGNED TO OVERFULFILL
FIRST FIVE-YEAR PLAN

The new $12.5 billion Chinese Commu-
nist budget gives primacy to heavy in-
dustry and aims at fulfillment of the First
Five-Year Plan (1953-1957) ahead of
schedule. Describing 1956 as the year of "fastest develop-
ment," the Chinese are allocating 65 percent of total expend-
itures to economic construction, of which heavy industry
will receive almost 90 percent. Funds for water conservancy,
and for agriculture which is the key to industrial growth and
chief source of state revenue, are to be increased nearly 50
percent. Light industry, which produces a quick return on
investment, has been granted an 86 percent budget increase,
although it will still receive only about 10 percent of economic
construction allocations.

Almost 20 percent of national expenditure
will be for defense but the allocation shows a reduction of
$140,000,000 from last year. Despite this reduction, however,
the defense burden on China itself will be greater than last
year because the 1955 Chinese budget included a Soviet mili-
tary credit of over a half billion dollars, which apparently
will not be repeated in 1956.

Although First Five-Year Plan investment
in the transport sector of the economy has now been largely
fulfilled, transport investment will continue at a high rate.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 08]
6. FLOODS IN EAST CENTRAL CHINA

The Peiping press has announced that,
in a number of instances in the past
two weeks, the rivers of East Central
China had exceeded the peak water levels
recorded in 1954 when 10 percent of
China's cultivated lands were inundated.
Floods could seriously disrupt the normal June planting of
the second crop and the harvesting of the first crop, which
provides 30 percent of China's total grain production.

Despite the extensive measures taken to
protect against a recurrence of the 1954 flood, Peiping has
suggested that the current flood situation may become in-
creasingly serious as "conditions exist for the occurrence
of heavy rains" in the Yangtze Valley and along its tributaries
during the normal rainy season of July and August.

Continued heavy rains could result in
widespread famine and reduced state revenues from agricul-
ture. The final statistical report on the 1955 budget, an-
nounced on 15 June of this year, revealed that Communist
China's first failure to meet planned revenues resulted from
the heavy flood damage of 1954.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 09]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 17 June)

The acting chief of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization told American officials in Tel
Aviv on 14 June that, despite previous authorization to make
an inspection on 12 June, he had been denied entry into the area
of the demilitarized zone near Banat Yacov where Israel was re-
ported on 10 June to be building tactical defensive positions.
The UN official believes that the Israeli army has issued no-
entry orders for UN truce personnel because whatever work they
have undertaken in the area is too extensive to be concealed. The
truce officials had twice previously been forcibly prevented from
approaching the area.

A Syrian foreign ministry official reiterated
to Ambassador Moose on 14 June that Syrian troops in the Banat
Yacov area have standing orders to open fire the moment Israel
resumes work on the diversion of the Jordan river. He said
that while Syria's official position is to refer the matter to the
United Nations before taking military action Syrian authorities
believe that public opinion will demand immediate reaction by
the armed forces. Any Syrian government, the official said,
which failed to react immediately and effectively would be brought
down by mob action.

17 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11
