Soviet Overtures to Turkey

the USSR would double its earlier $200,000,000 offer of credit to Turkey, and if that were not enough, Moscow "could make it $450,000,000 or $500,000,000." The credit would carry an interest rate of 2.5 or 3 percent with payment over a 15-year period.

Following the military coup in Turkey in late May, Moscow took a cautious attitude toward the provisional government, expressing hope for improvement in Soviet-Turkish relations while at the same time repeating standard Soviet warnings of the danger to Turkey from its Western alliances and foreign bases on its territory. Since early July, concurrent with Soviet overtures--including two personal letters from Khrushchev to Gursel--Moscow's propaganda toward Ankara has grown more friendly in tone.

As part of their efforts to encourage neutralist tendencies in the new regime, top Soviet leaders, in talks with the new Turkish ambassador who arrived on 6 August, have stressed the USSR's desire that Turkey return to the neutralist, good-neighbor policies of the Ataturk regime. They have specifically urged exchanges of visits by leading political figures and by scientific and commercial delegations.

Turkey's attitude toward the Soviet Union remains unchanged, but commented that the Turks do not wish to "provoke unnecessary reactions" from the USSR.

Turkey had expressed appreciation for the offer without accepting it. He added, however, that when Ryzhov returns "we will see how things develop."

The economically hard-pressed regime in Turkey may be more receptive than its predecessor to low-interest credit or loan offers. In addition, there is apparently a faction within the government which favors a more independent approach in foreign policy and economic relations, and Sarper has confirmed that there is some anti-American sentiment in the government. While the new regime may use the USSR's aid offers primarily in order to encourage an increase in American assistance, serious consideration may be given to unqualified Soviet offers if they appear to have no adverse political implications.
