In addition, Indian Ambassador Panikkar in Peiping has informed the British Charge that he has negotiated a long-term contract for the purchase from China of 500,000 to 1,000,000 tons of grain for a six-month period beginning 1 May 1951. Panikkar inquired whether British shipping would be available to move the grain, and US Embassy London reports that the British have no objection from a political point of view. US Embassy New Delhi also states that Soviet officials are telling the Government of India that “any amount” of Soviet wheat is available for delivery to India if arrangements can be made for a barter deal. The Indian Government has informed the Embassy that it is considering the above offers as a means of assuring the Indian people of at least minimum food requirements, in view of the uncertainty that the US will furnish the 2,000,000 tons of food grains which India has requested.

Comment: These Soviet and Chinese Communist offers appear to be part of a campaign to take the initiative from the US in providing special food supplies to India. China and the USSR have the capability to furnish and ship 2,000,000 tons of grain to India within the next year. Communist governments in the past have demonstrated their willingness to ignore the welfare of their people in the pursuit of important political objectives. Favorable publicity accorded in India to recent arrivals of Chinese rice suggests that even token shipments of Soviet or Chinese Communist grain will be used by the Indian press to draw critical comparisons between the efforts of the West and the Communist bloc to prevent starvation in India.

3. Yugoslavs sound out Greek reaction to attack on Yugoslavia:

Greek Prime Minister Venizelos has informed US Ambassador Peurifoy that the Yugoslav Minister in Athens made a formal demarche on 3 April to the Greek Government, seeking to learn the course of action Greece planned to take if Yugoslavia were attacked. The Greek Prime Minister replied that Greece would presumably mobilize and assist Yugoslavia economically, but that he would have to consider the matter carefully before giving any further or definite assurances. In relating the conversation to Ambassador
