Laos: General Phoumi, defense minister in the Somsanith government, told American and Thai officials in Ubon, Thailand, on 10 August that he planned to gather a force of 600 paratroopers for a drop on Vientiane airfield, which would be reinforced by an airlift of infantry troops. Phoumi plans to place these elements under the command of Colonel Sourith, commander of the Laotian air arm, who has just returned from the United States. An American Embassy observer notes, however, that Sourith appeared reluctant to undertake such a mission and had expressed high regard for Captain Kong Le, the leader of the Vientiane revolutionaries.

Phoumi would be heavily dependent on outside logistic and air transport if he were to mount such an operation against Vientiane. The American army attache in Vientiane estimates, after counting the planes held by the rebels, that three C-47s may still be available to the loyalists, but this number is inadequate for an operation of the scope apparently envisaged by Phoumi.

From the casual attitude of the Thai officials toward Phoumi's presentation of his plans that Thailand intended to contribute little to a counterrevolution and expected the United States to supply the necessary support. Phoumi has since established his headquarters at Savannakhet in south-central Laos.

Despite Phoumi's plans to mount a counteroffensive, his cabinet colleagues in Luang Prabang, including Premier Somsanith, seem anxious to avoid bloodshed and to reach some sort of agreement with the rebels. Former Premier Souvanna Phouma has told French Ambassador Falaize that General Ouane, who had been sent to Vientiane as an emissary of the Somsanith government, returned to Luang Prabang on 11 August with an "agreement" signed by the rebels and outlining their terms. Since this "agreement" in effect asks the government to negotiate under duress in Vientiane, it is likely to be rejected. It will probably be followed up by further exchanges, however.

Souvanna Phouma seems intent on acting as a go-between for the two groups. Falaize claims that Souvanna, as president of the National Assembly, refused Kong Le's request at the beginning of the coup to dissolve that body unless instructed to do so by the King in Luang Prabang. He also allegedly refused to become head of the rebel

12 Aug 60 DAILY BRIEF v
