II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

De Gaulle's Cabinet Changes Signal Extensive Shake-up

De Gaulle's determination to push his policy of self-determination for Algeria is indicated by his ouster of Deputy Premier Jacques Soustelle and other 5 January ministerial changes which emphasize the increasingly "technical" rather than political character of the cabinet. Although Premier Debré reportedly opposed the use of force against the European settler insurgents last week, De Gaulle may have reasoned that replacing him at present would create too many difficulties at a time when he wants to push his purge of those who oppose his policies, particularly since the special decree power granted the government would have to be renewed if a new premier took over. Two other opponents to the use of force--Information Minister Frey and Armed Forces Minister Guillaumat--who are technicians rather than political figures, were relegated to positions under Debré.

Pierre Messmer, the former French West Africa high commissioner general, who replaces Guillaumat, is a career civil servant whose vigorous personality has probably recommended him to De Gaulle as the man to carry out the expected shake-up of the army. Messmer's combination of toughness with a liberal record in the evolution of the French Community is certain to alarm the rightists.

Soustelle's departure formalizes a long-existing split in the "Gaullist" Union for the New Republic (UNR) which he helped to found. His immediate announcement following his ouster that he intends to continue working for "the cause of French Algeria" suggests he will fight to retain the support of many UNR deputies at odds with the "loyal" elements who seized control of the party machinery at the annual congress last December. Soustelle could serve as a dangerous focal point of opposition to De Gaulle, in cooperation with the die-hard members of the Independent party who demonstrated their sympathies with the European settlers in Algeria.

In addition to the purge of civil and military hierarchies which is now under way, De Gaulle also apparently intends to

6 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
