Tunisians Concerned Over Incidents on Algerian Border

Tunisian officials are displaying concern over what appears to be an increase in the number and gravity of frontier incidents involving violations of Tunisian territory by French forces based in Algeria. Following a series of such incidents last month--including one in which a sizable number of French troops penetrated Tunisian territory to a depth of about 25 miles--Tunisian Foreign Secretary Mokaddem expressed fear on 27 April that the French military might be building up to a "concentration of hostility" against Tunisia.

While there is no indication that any French elements are prepared at this time to provoke a major incident similar to last year's attack on the Tunisian border village of Sakiet Sidi Youssef, French Army units do appear to have become more active. This has been particularly noticeable in the southern desert region, where the French Army has taken an aggressive position in defending the "rights" of nomadic Algerian tribes which have traditionally moved freely in the barren and largely undemarcated border area. Early this year the Tunisians began cracking down on these tribesmen, whose incursions they believe are encouraged by French authorities in Algeria as part of France's effort to uphold its territorial claims in the area. These conflicting policies have already caused at least one dangerous confrontation of French and Tunisian military units and could easily lead to more serious trouble.

To cope with these border problems--which also include the unsanctioned activities of Algerian rebels--Tunisia is expanding its army as rapidly as possible. It now reportedly has approximately 12,000 of a desired 20,000 men in uniform. However, these forces still suffer from serious materiel and logistic difficulties. On 27 April, President Bourguiba forwarded to the American Embassy in Tunis a new urgent request for the expeditious shipment of arms and, especially, military vehicles from the US.

1 May 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
