Australia Cool to British Defense Suggestions

Since World War II, when Australia and New Zealand found themselves dependent on the United States rather than the United Kingdom for support of their military effort, the two countries have been reluctant to bind themselves too closely to the United Kingdom in military matters. They have preferred to maintain their military freedom of action in the Pacific area and have looked to the United States as their long-term source of support. Defense relations with the United Kingdom have been maintained largely through the informal 1953 agreement among Australia, New Zealand, and Malaya for the defense of Malaya under which the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve force is maintained in Malaya.

Mountbatten's suggestion of a unified Commonwealth command based in Singapore was not the first such proposal. A similar British suggestion in 1957 was rejected by both Australia and New Zealand, but led indirectly to the increase of their forces in Malaya. The Commonwealth Strategic Reserve consists of a brigade group--one battalion each of British, Australian, New Zealand, and Gurkha troops, plus naval and air forces.

The British Defense White Paper of February 1961 noted that a unified army-navy-and-air command--such as is now functioning in Cyprus and Aden--was under examination for the Far East. An alternative plan advocated by some British officials is to increase the number of British troops committed to SEATO, despite severe military manpower limitations.

Australian experiences with the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve forces in Malaya are likely to have increased the reluctance of Australia and New Zealand to accept Mountbatten's suggestions. In recent weeks, when Australia thought it might need to use its battalion from Malaya in Laos independently of United Kingdom action, it found that its troops would have been unavailable. As a result, Australia would probably accept a unified Commonwealth command only if Canberra had the freedom to use the total force for Australian defense without reference to London.

17 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
