The Coup in South Korea (Information as of 0400 EDT)

The Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC), nominally headed by Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong but under the actual leadership of Maj. General Pak Chong-hui, has issued a series of proclamations which, in addition to ousting the cabinet, have established martial law throughout the country, dissolved the National Assembly, temporarily named an all-military cabinet, instituted press and radio censorship, and imposed price controls.

The MRC's immediate objective appears to be the formal resignation of the Chang Myon government, presumably to lend an appearance of legality to the change in government. After discussions with MRC leaders on 16 May, President Yun, who is under custody in the presidential mansion, broadcast an appeal to Chang Myon to emerge from hiding and submit his resignation. The MRC has called on Chang and his ministers to attend an emergency State Council meeting late on 17 May and has guaranteed their safety for this purpose. The US charge in Seoul believes, however, that Chang will not resign as long as he believes his government has official American support.

Military and national police were reported to have suffered eight casualties, including two deaths, while resisting the military takeover in Seoul. The post-coup situation in Seoul and other cities has been quiet and there is general compliance with the MRC's order to continue normal daily activity and observe the 7 p. m. to 5 a. m. curfew. The Seoul radio, however, went off the air without explanation at 1415 hours local time on 17 May.

Communist bloc comment on the coup betrays a lack of firsthand information. Initial North Korean reaction, broadcast six hours after the coup was announced, condemned US Embassy statements backing the Chang Myon government and has fabricated stories of student demonstrations supporting the coup. Peiping has followed a similar line. Initial Soviet reaction pictures the coup as a decision by "reactionary forces" to "sacrifice" Chang Myon in order to strengthen the "dictatorial regime" in South Korea and suppress popular unrest. Soviet commentary notes that the leaders of the coup have declared that they "intend to strengthen friendship with the United States" and Soviet delegation sources in Geneva reportedly have said that, "it is evident that the US has organized the coup in South Korea."

17 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
