Japan

Prime Minister Kishi appears to be increasingly isolated, both politically and personally, as leftists and contending groups within his party accelerate demands for his resignation. He is widely held responsible for the present crisis by the press and by a large segment of the public, who tend to excuse recent leftist violence as provoked by Kishi's "high-handed" methods in ratifying the security treaty.

Kishi told the secretary general of the Liberal Democratic party that after the new US-Japanese security treaty went into effect, he would make an announcement that he would be prepared to resign as prime minister. Former Prime Minister Yoshida, who has been a supporter of Kishi but who now believes that new leadership is necessary, is pressing faction leaders to forget personal ambitions in the national interest and to agree on a successor. Ambassador MacArthur is convinced that Yoshida, frequently mentioned as an interim prime minister, does not aspire to the position.

The Japan Socialist party (JSP) meanwhile is planning to support nationwide strikes called by Sohyo, the pro-Communist labor federation, for 22 June. These are to be the largest held during the campaign protesting the treaty and demanding the resignation of the Kishi government. The "mainstream" faction of Zengakuren, the radical student organization responsible for the violent demonstrations which forced postponement of President Eisenhower's visit, is also expected to participate.

In an about-face on 19 June the JSP decided to retract the mass resignations of its Diet members, originally submitted as a propaganda maneuver against ratification of the treaty. The JSP now appears to be broadening its program to include repeal of the treaty. For consistency's sake, the Socialists are asking for dissolution of the Diet and a general election, although it is questionable that they actually desire an election in which the more moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP) would probably gain.
