Cyprus Negotiations

new instructions containing a proposed formula for solving the dispute between the British and Cypriots over disposition of British military bases on the island in the event of ultimate British withdrawal. Archbishop Makarios has insisted that London give unconditional assurances that the bases would revert to Cyprus. The British, however, fear that such assurances would invite a Cypriot campaign to force them out.

the new formula has been accepted by both the Greek and Turkish governments and was to be presented to Archbishop Makarios within two or three days.

has described the proposed plan as consisting of the following three steps. First, the British will send an official letter to Makarios stating that negotiations over the future of the bases are without purpose as the British will never leave them. Secondly, Makarios will reply that Cypriots will not raise the question of British departure but that if the British were to leave, the bases should revert to the future Cypriot government. Finally, the British will agree with Makarios' statement.
government will exert pressure on Makarios to accept the plan. Success of the new proposal to remove the "cession issue," which has deadlocked the Cyprus negotiations for weeks, will depend largely on the tactics used by the British in presenting the formula to Makarios and on the degree of pressure Athens may be willing to exert on the Archbishop.

Other issues will remain even if the question of bases is resolved. There has been no agreement on the form of a declaration on administration of British sovereign areas, on the location of corridors between Cypriot enclaves in the base areas, or on the extent of financial aid to be given the new republic by the British. Communal problems which must be settled prior to independence--such as implementation of a 70-30 ratio between Greek and Turkish Cypriots in the future civil service, also are unresolved. Unless all of these problems can be eliminated within the next few days, it appears unlikely that independence will be possible before late fall.
