[PAGE 01]
21 March 1952

Copy No. 43

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

4. American Minister analyzes rumors of French negotiations with Viet Minh (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. American Ambassador pessimistic about British-proposed joint statement on Egypt (page 5).

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
4. American Minister analyzes rumors of French negotiations with Viet Minh:

Minister Heath in Saigon credits assurances given last month by Minister Associated States Letourneau, and more recently by other high officials, that the French Government is not now engaged in, or considering the opening of, negotiations with the Viet Minh. Heath expresses the view, however, that some statements of French leaders on this subject are equivocal and do not preclude consideration of an offer for negotiations by the Viet Minh or a neutral like India.

[PAGE 05]
Minister Heath is convinced that the French would not initiate negotiations "at this precise time", and believes that the Viet Minh would refuse to deal with the French.

Comment: For some time rumors have persisted in Saigon and Hanoi that French officials have been, or have been on the point of, negotiating, or planning truce negotiations, with the Viet Minh. There is no evidence to substantiate these rumors.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. American Ambassador pessimistic about British-proposed joint statement on Egypt:

The American Ambassador in Cairo believes that the statement the British Cabinet proposed as a joint Anglo-Egyptian communique for the treaty negotiations represents a "degree of progress," but is "not nearly enough" to arouse Egyptian action. He is particularly disturbed by the British assumption that Egypt would accept a verdict on the Sudan from a Sudanese cabinet and parliament selected entirely by the British.

[PAGE 06]
According to the Ambassador, his British colleague has discussed the proposed communique with Prime Minister Hilali and with an adviser of the King only in general terms, because he feels that the proposed statement concedes so little that it might disrupt the negotiations.

Comment: A Foreign Office official in London, while admitting that the British statement offers little on the Sudan question, has explained that the draft nevertheless represents the maximum concessions which the British Cabinet can make at this time.
