The Situation in the Congo

Postponement by the Abako party of a convention originally scheduled for 13-16 August appears to have averted a major internal crisis for Congolese Premier Lumumba. The Abako on 7 August had passed a resolution of no confidence in the Lumumba government, and the convention reportedly was to have been the occasion for the Abako to declare the lower Congo region independent of the central government. Although the reason for the postponement is unclear, it may have resulted from pressure by Lumumba on Abako leader and Congo President Joseph Kasavubu.

With Kasavubu seemingly unwilling to oppose Lumumba, the focal point for anti-Lumumba activity may once again become the Congo Senate, whose moderate president, Joseph Ileo, has become increasingly critical of the premier. The Senate, which has been in adjournment since 22 July, is scheduled to reconvene on 16 August.

The Lumumba government continues to implement measures designed to suppress internal opposition. These include the suspension of judicial procedures in favor of trial by military tribunals and passage of a law requiring that licenses for newspapers and periodicals be renewed every two months. Congolese officials earlier had closed down the facilities of the Belgian and French news agencies in Leopoldville.

Lumumba may avoid an early showdown concerning the political status of Katanga in anticipation that a scheduled meeting of independent African states in Leopoldville from 25 to 30 August will take a strong stand in favor of a unified Congo.

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold on 15 August summoned a new Security Council meeting--expected to be held Wednesday or Thursday--following Lumumba's charges earlier in the day that the Congo had "lost confidence" in Hammarskjold. In an effort to retain the propaganda initiative, Lumumba also called for the dispatch of a 14-nation UN commission--Ghana, Guinea, Tunisia, Morocco, Ethiopia, the UAR, Sudan, Ceylon, Liberia, Mali, Burma, India, Afghanistan, and Lebanon--to oversee the withdrawal of Belgian troops
