their present dominant position, may be formulating plans to forestall a possible move against the Emperor.
(Backup, Page 7)

Bolivia: Extreme leftists are trying to force the government by strikes, which may be accompanied by violence, to release Communist leaders arrested under cover of the government-fabricated coup on 6 and 7 June. President Paz has stated that those arrested will not be released before the end of the 90-day state of siege, which began on 7 June. The American chargé in La Paz believes that the next few days will be critical. He believes that the government can probably survive if it is willing to use its armed forces, but that the immediate danger is that the government's nerve will fail and it may not follow through on its anti-Communist program.
(Backup, Page 8)

Argentina - Cuba: In discussing with Ambassador Stevenson inter-American policy regarding the Cuban problem, President Frondizi again urged a meeting of the Presidents of the United States, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and possibly Chile to seek agreement on strategy prior to the mid-July meeting of the Inter-American Economic and Social Council in Montevideo. Frondizi believes that a common policy must be devised first on economic, social, and political problems before tackling the Communist and Cuban problems. As an alternative to this proposal, Frondizi is prepared to travel through Latin America and undertake leadership of an anti-Communist campaign, provided what he terms the political risk to himself of such action were reduced by US aid in promoting Argentina's economic development. He has little confidence in the present ability of the Organization of American States to resolve the Cuban problem.

Frondizi and Brazil's President Quadros have agreed that they should pool their efforts to help Paraguay and Bolivia, where present conditions are favorable to Castroism. Quadros, however, is reported to oppose Frondizi's summit proposals and bid for a leadership role.

13 June 61  DAILY BRIEF  iv
