The Situation in Laos

The Thai delegation at Geneva apparently will not attend further sessions until the seating issue is decided to its satisfaction or unless it receives instructions from Bangkok to resume attendance. The delegation's walkout on 12 June provides a measure of Thailand's dissatisfaction and frustration over the course of the Geneva proceedings as well as over the evolution of the Laotian situation during the past year. In a compilation of various Thai grievances on 11 June, the American Embassy included the following: fundamental doubt on the wisdom of holding the conference in the first place, instead of taking more forceful action through SEATO; conviction that France and Britain are prepared to hand Laos over to the Communists when this can be done gracefully; lack of publicity for Thailand's role and viewpoint at the conference; and the apparent movement toward the formation of a coalition government in Laos. Underlying all of these considerations, in the embassy's view, is Thai uncertainty as to the United States' ultimate intentions in connection with Laos.

France has closed the airfield it controls at Seno to aircraft taking Laotian government troops to or from Thailand for training. Paris probably hopes by this action to encourage bloc acceptance of a continuing French presence in Laos, particularly at the Seno base. Closing the Seno base will create delays and add to the expense of the training program, according to Ambassador Brown, but other staging areas are available. The Vientiane Government is now likely to be even more hostile to any suggestion that the French be made responsible for the future training and support of the Laotian Army.

continuing preoccupation with the activity of Meo units of the royal army scattered throughout Xieng Khouang Province. three companies operating to the southwest of Xieng Khouang town were spreading propaganda and attempting to win the people over by distributing meat and salt. The lull in Kong Le - Pathet Lao
14 June 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
