released almost no economic data in recent months.

Neutralist "Summit Conference": Twenty "nonaligned" states on 13 June ended a nine-day preparatory meeting in Cairo with announcement of a proposed agenda for a subsequent heads-of-government conference. Invitations for the "summit" meeting in Yugoslavia on 1 September are to be issued later through diplomatic channels. The meeting appears to have been relatively smooth after a lengthy dispute over the seating of delegations representing the provisional government of Algeria and Gizenga's Congo regime. Algeria was seated, but after Indian protests the Congo question was shelved, over the objections of Ghana, Guinea, and Mali. Nehru had expressed concern that the meeting would become preoccupied with such disputes rather than with efforts to ease tensions. He suspects Nasir and Tito, originators of the conference, want it to advance the third-bloc concept which he opposes.
(Backup, Page 6)

Brazil: Ambassador Stevenson has reported that President Quadros' comments to him on 11-12 June gave few grounds for optimism about Brazil's position on "Castro or the use of Cuba as a base of Communist operations in the hemisphere." Quadros indicated a genuine interest in the success of the inter-American conference, scheduled to open on 15 July in Montevideo. He told Stevenson that social progress flowing from economic development is the immediate and imperative necessity in Latin America, and that, until such development is under way, inter-American activity in the political field is premature. Quadros said that in his opinion the two most acute danger spots in Latin America are Bolivia and Northeast Brazil. He expressed confidence that despite the present "chaotic" situation in Northeast Brazil--which, however, he does not fully identify with Communism--he could clear it up and put the area on a viable basis before the end of his five-year term.

*Colombia-Peru: Indicative of the manner in which extreme leftist elements are trying to exploit student unrest and cause
14 June 61 DAILY BRIEF
