Ecuadorean Vice President and Parliamentary Delegation to Visit USSR

President Velasco stated privately in late 1960 that he had no objections to the establishment of diplomatic relations with the USSR but would not take the initiative himself. The proposal is likely to be presented to Arosemena and his mission after their arrival in Moscow.

The vice president reportedly plans to select a delegation which will include the principal pro-Castro leader in Ecuador, former Minister of Government Manuel Araujo. Araujo, a close friend of Velasco, favors closer ties between Ecuador and the Soviet bloc.

A number of high-level government officials have advocated the expansion of trade with all countries, including the bloc; one official pointed out that bananas, the nation's principal export, "have no ideology." The leftist Ecuadorean minister of education, who visited Prague in late 1960, made arrangements for a $640,000 barter deal with Czechoslovakia in the initial implementation of this policy.

Ecuadorean political forces have become sharply divided in recent months between pro- and anti-Castro elements. Some military officers, in collaboration with conservatives and moderates, have expressed growing concern over the leftist drift of the Velasco regime, particularly its pro-Cuban attitude, and have considered measures to overthrow it. A group of key air force and naval officers has reportedly become involved in this plotting recently and is said to be planning action by mid-June.

Aware of rightist opposition to his policies, Velasco shuffled a number of officers in top command positions in the armed forces in late March and early April. This action, which suggests Velasco is uncertain about their loyalty, may have increased dissatisfaction among the military. The recent 30-percent pay increase granted to the armed services was an attempt to ensure their support for the regime. However, Velasco reportedly conferred with military officers in Guayaquil recently, and was presented with demands for a change in his pro-Cuban policy and stronger action against Ecuadorean leftists and Communists.

25 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 12
