Greece - Common Market

Nearly two years of negotiations were climaxed in March 1961 with the initialing of an agreement providing for Greek association with the European Common Market (EEC). While the agreement was still subject to approval by the EEC Council of Ministers and ratification by the member governments of EEC and by Greece, Athens had assumed that no serious difficulties would prevent the coming into force of the agreement by early 1962. Serious obstacles have arisen, however, which have delayed further action on the association agreement and which, conceivably, could endanger the entire project.

Difficulties in the Common Market over the association convention are apparently both procedural and substantive. The EEC Commission, which acted as agent for the Common Market in the negotiations with Greece, has been accused by individual members of the EEC Council of exceeding its authority in initialing the agreement--an accusation reflecting at least in part the general reluctance of the Council to see the Commission exercise any "supranational" authority. Although the Council decided on 19 May not to insist on renegotiation of objectionable provisions of the agreement, the Italians apparently decided to press for interpretive protocols which would afford Italian producers additional protection from Greek competition.

The new obstacles to Greek association have caused a bitter reaction in Athens. The government had greeted news of the initialing of the agreement in March with profound relief, and the press, including the non-Communist opposition, had applauded this new move to tie Greece more closely to Western Europe. The government had looked to the association agreement as a means of raising its popularity in preparation for national elections which must be held by May 1962 and may be scheduled for this fall. The resultant disappointment of the government at the latest moves by the EEC has been particularly great, and the US Embassy reports that a mere mention of the Common Market puts Premier Karamanlis in a "towering rage."

The next move appears to be up to Athens. The EEC Council has asked the Greeks to send a representative to Brussels

25 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
