Situation in Laos

Phoumi has told an American Embassy officer that he and Boun Oum are thinking of proposing an 11-man joint delegation for Geneva comprising five government members and five representatives of Souvanna and the Pathet Lao, with former Premier Phoui Sananikone as delegation head. It seems unlikely, however, that Phoumi could gain the assent of Souvanna and the Pathet Lao to such unequal representation.

Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman indicated to Ambassador Harriman on 23 May that his delegation intended to take a strong stand at Geneva in support of efforts to get representatives of five pro - Boun Oum government political parties seated at the Geneva Conference. Thanat has already proposed to the Geneva co-chairmen that two of the three seats allocated to the Laotian government be allocated to representatives of the political parties on a rotational basis, with the remaining seat left vacant until and if the Laotian government chooses to occupy it. Gromyko has rejected the proposal, according to Thanat, claiming that there was an oral understanding that only "three forces" would be seated at Geneva. Despite Gromyko's rebuff, Thanat plans to proceed with his efforts on the basis of conference documents which in his opinion offer him as a delegate the right to nominate those elements he wishes to represent Laos. He intends to give the impression that the Thai delegation may walk out on the conference if this issue is not satisfactorily resolved.

the three most influential men in the area are Pathet Lao leaders Phoumi Vongvichit--now in Geneva--Colonel Singkapo, and Quinim Pholsena, leader of the Souvanna Phouma delegation at Geneva.
Quinim has more power than Souvanna, who he alleges has been reduced to a figurehead.
Kong Le's troops have no real power.
the Pathet Lao does not want to negotiate but wants to resume its military drive to conquer Laos.
ICC, located in Xieng Khouang town, is denied access to

25 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
