Situation in Laos

The collapse of the recent Phnom Penh talks with Souvanna Phouma has had a deleterious effect on the Boun Oum government's morale and confidence, already shaken by the military reverses. Laotian leaders, who had hoped that the talks might lead to a modus vivendi with the Pathet Lao, have turned their attention to various proposals of international action to resolve the crisis. They are even reconsidering the feasibility of some kind of UN action.

General Phoumi has told Ambassador Brown that the Laotian Government prefers a 14-nation conference to a possible revival of the International Control Commission (ICC), but he said King Savang was prepared to accept almost any new formula for composition of an international body which would promise progress in the political field. Phoumi's remarks about Savang tend to confirm Indian Ambassador Ratnam's account of his recent meeting with the King, whom he described as discouraged and ready to accept any solution agreeable to East and West.

The communique issued by the Boun Oum government on 17 March blaming Souvanna Phouma for the failure of the Phnom Penh talks came close to branding him a rebel. It denounced Souvanna for leaving on a world tour at the nation's critical hour and stated that the government could not permit his claim to represent before great powers "an authority of which parliament divested him and an influence over the factions that he never possessed." The communique advised that the Laotian Government would consider as an inimical gesture toward it any welcome of an official character that might be given Souvanna in any country he visited.

Vientiane is particularly aroused by a report from its chargé in Paris that an official reception is being prepared for Souvanna in France and that he will be received officially by De Gaulle. Phoumi has instructed the chargé to protest and has told Ambassador Brown that Laos would be forced to break off its diplomatic relations with France if Souvanna were so received. French Foreign Ministry officials have told American representatives in

20 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
