[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Madame Pandit seeks Arab support for Communist China's admission to UN (page 3).

2. Polish official suggests Britain mediate US-Soviet differences (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Prominent Lebanese seek to prevent withdrawal of Point IV program (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Austrian Foreign Minister eager for new treaty approach (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Madame Pandit seeks Arab support for Communist China's admission to UN:

The American Embassy in Beirut has heard that Madame Pandit, who is touring the Near East, is urging Arab countries to support Communist China's admission to the United Nations. Her argument allegedly is that a China friendly to the Arab-Asian bloc would exercise the veto power in its favor.

Comment: Madame Pandit may actually be seeking support for an Arab-Asian approach to the UN on this matter. The Arab states have to date displayed no great interest, however, and a joint approach in the near future seems improbable.

2. Polish official suggests Britain mediate US-Soviet differences:

A Polish Foreign Ministry official informed the British Ambassador in Warsaw that only Britain was now in a position to mediate between the Soviet Union and the United States. The Polish official declared that more importance should be attached to Stalin's reply to Reston's questions, and inquired whether Prime Minister Churchill's visit to the US had been affected by this interview.

The British Ambassador concluded that the approach was Soviet-inspired in order to give the impression that the USSR would welcome a mediation effort by Churchill.

Comment: The Polish official may simply have been probing for information on Churchill's mission. The approach, however, could be the beginning of a new Soviet diplomatic maneuver designed to promote disagreement between the US and Britain.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Prominent Lebanese seek to prevent withdrawal of Point IV program:

Many prominent Lebanese have assured the American Embassy in Beirut of their determination to prevent the withdrawal of the Point IV aid from Lebanon on 15 January. They are aroused by the approaching deadline, fixed because of Lebanese lack of cooperation and particularly because of the Foreign Minister's efforts to end the program.

Comment: The Lebanese President may issue a last-minute statement to forestall complete withdrawal of Point IV aid. Nevertheless, the fact that pro-West Lebanese have shown such complete misunderstanding of an antagonism toward the program underscores the difficulties it faces in the area.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Austrian Foreign Minister eager for new treaty approach:

Foreign Minister Gruber believes the time is right to call for a new meeting of the Austrian treaty deputies. Despite the probable failure of such a meeting, he considers that it would pave the way for a Foreign Ministers' discussion, at which Russian terms for a settlement might be ascertained.

Gruber states that he is pleased with the outcome of the recent UN debate and with his private discussions with Gromyko. He reports, Gromyko indicated that the Trieste question is not "really a bar to further negotiations on Austria."

Comment: With the Austrian elections only two months away, Gruber's expressed optimism may stem from a desire on the part of the government to impress the electorate with intensive efforts to obtain a state treaty.

The latest Soviet note sent on 27 September made new negotiations contingent on withdrawal of the short treaty draft and left it clear that discussions would have to include the question of Trieste. The Russians have long held that an Austrian settlement is dependent on Western fulfillment of treaty obligations with respect to Trieste.
