[PAGE 01]
4 April 1953
Copy No. 80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Brazil proposes UN tactic on latest Korean developments (page 3).
2. Burma may agree to postpone UN consideration of its complaint (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
3. Improved Soviet aircraft design possible with new metal fabrication technique (page 4).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
4. White men killed in Burma reportedly were French Foreign Legion deserters (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Lebanese President favors immediate negotiations on Middle East defense (page 5).
6. Iranian Communists reportedly ready to aid Mossadeq (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Germany seen ready to make concessions on Saar issue (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Brazil proposes UN tactic on latest Korean developments:
Brazilian UN delegate Muniz, who is chairman of the UN's political committee, stated to an American colleague that some official UN notice should be taken of the latest Korean developments to avoid creating the impression that the United States is being dragged into peace against its will. He considered this necessary to "recapture the initiative from the Russians" and suggested that a resolution be offered in the General Assembly noting Chou En-lai’s declaration and expressing hope for an armistice.

2. Burma may agree to postpone UN consideration of its complaint:
A member of the Burmese Cabinet told an American official in Rangoon that a committee of influential government leaders has recommended to Premier Nu that Burma agree to postpone for four to six months UN consideration of its complaint. The committee also proposed that the government accept in good faith American assurances that it was seeking a solution to the Nationalist problem and suggested that Burma participate in the projected joint investigative group as an "unofficial observer."

Comment: Premier Nu, who has consistently favored a policy of moderation in dealing with the Nationalist problem, may be expected to agree to such proposals. Their adoption by Burma would permit an attempt to evacuate the Nationalists, which, even if only partially successful, would eliminate the need for UN consideration.
[PAGE 04]
SOVIET UNION

3. Improved Soviet aircraft design possible with new metal fabrication technique:

Comment: The use of tapered sheets of aluminum alloys would represent a considerable advance in Soviet technology of aircraft design and in rolling mill techniques. It would also permit more efficient structural design of the thin wing and tail surfaces required for high-speed aircraft.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

4. White men killed in Burma reportedly were French Foreign Legion deserters:
Two of the three white men recently killed in a Burmese Army encounter with Chinese Nationalist forces have been identified as individuals formerly residing in Bangkok. Their names are the same as those of two Germans who deserted from the French Foreign Legion in Vietnam in 1951.

Comment: There is a small group of deserters from the French Foreign Legion in Bangkok. General Li Mi has asserted that he had several German technicians at his base in Burma.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Lebanese President favors immediate negotiations on Middle East defense:
Lebanese President Chamoun believes that a Middle East defense organization should be set up as soon as possible, and that if Egypt insists on prior settlement of the Suez question, the other Arab states should proceed without Egypt.

Chamoun also declared that since Middle East defense is a responsibility of the Arab states, they should elaborate their own defense plans and then request Western assistance. He is convinced, following his visits to Saudi Arabia and Iraq, that these countries and probably Jordan support this position; he anticipates difficulty, however, in obtaining Syria's agreement.

Comment: This is the most definite statement by an Arab leader that participation in a Middle East defense organization should not depend on Egypt. Chamoun's statement is significant because Lebanon has traditionally followed other Arab states and is now apparently endeavoring to assume leadership.

Chamoun's suggestion that Middle East defense is an Arab responsibility is in line with the increasing sentiment in the area for a regional defense based on the Arab League Security Pact.

6. Iranian Communists reportedly ready to aid Mossadeq:
[PAGE 06]
Comment: There have been several recent reports indicating that Mossadeq may be seeking Tudeh support. He continues to believe that the Tudeh is primarily a domestic party and maintains that he can control it.

The Prime Minister, in attempting to strengthen his own position, may unwittingly give the well-organized Communists an opportunity to extend their influence in the government.
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

8. Germany seen ready to make concessions on Saar issue:
The US High Commission in Germany estimates that Chancellor Adenauer may now be willing to accept special French economic privileges in the Saar and agree to a general settlement granting the Saarlanders self-administration under the European Political Community when it is formed. He may insist, however, that such a settlement be subject to a Saar plebiscite in which the pro-German political parties would participate.

Comment: French Foreign Minister Bidault recently insisted that France's economic union with the Saar must be maintained. He conceded, however, that a final detailed settlement would not be essential for French EDC ratification provided that the principle of a special French economic position were clearly established and accepted by Adenauer.
