has been ineffective so far. Freeing of Mossadeq at this time would also complicate the oil negotiations.

Zahedi might consider the pardon of Mossadeq as tantamount to repudiation by the shah.

11. New Sudan crisis threatened by Unionist party demands:
The executive committee of the National Unionist Party, dominant party in the Sudanese parliament, recommended on 14 March dissolution of the proindependence Umma Party and its religious counterpart, the Ansar sect. The committee also called for the arrest of all persons who participated in the 1 March riot--presumably including Sayed Siddik, the mahdi's son and titular head of the Umma Party, who has been publicly charged by the Unionists with responsibility for the riots.

Comment: Any attempt by Prime Minister Azhari's government to implement its executive committee's recommendations is likely to cause the Umma Party to boycott the parliament and precipitate a constitutional breakdown in the Sudan.

British officials have indicated that under these circumstances the British governor general would assume the "extraordinary powers" granted him under the Anglo-Egyptian agreement of February 1953. Such action could lead to a general breakdown of law and order in the Sudan and would cause a new crisis in Anglo-Egyptian relations.

12. Spain reported planning to set up independent sultan in Spanish Morocco:
Spanish officials are planning to appoint the khalifa of Spanish Morocco--now the Moroccan sultan's representative-- as sultan of the Spanish zone, from Madrid to name the khalifa as regent for the deposed sultan,

Comment: The appointment of the khalifa as local sultan would abrogate treaty obligations between France and Spain and set up an independent spiritual authority in the Spanish zone.

The khalifa's appointment as regent, however, would be more consistent with Madrid's current policy of nonrecognition of the new sultan and its insistence that the unity of Morocco be preserved. Even this measure would provoke strong French protests and propaganda.

Serious consideration by Madrid of a change in the legal basis of its protectorate is unlikely. Spain will probably continue, however, its pressure on France in order to strengthen its position in Morocco and reach a general settlement of French-Spanish problems.
