[PAGE 01]
12 March 1952

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Department review completed

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Thai Premier admits intention to resign (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Senate aroused over violation of senatorial immunity (page 4).

6. Libyan King wants American military installations in Cyrenaica (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
2. Thai Premier admits intention to resign:

Premier Phibun confirmed to the American Ambassador in Bangkok recent reports that he wished to resign and become Speaker in Parliament. He mentioned the date of 15 March, when the present elections are expected to end.

Comment: Phibun's statement of intention to resign should not be considered final in view of past instances when he has continued as Premier because of the failure of rival political factions to agree on any other candidate.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Senate aroused over violation of senatorial immunity:

The recent search of an Iranian Senator's home by the police has resulted in demands for the resignation of the Acting Minister of Justice. The Senate, which considers the search a violation of the constitutional immunity of its members, has already demanded apologies from the Acting Minister. The Embassy comments that the incident may be used to demand Prime Minister Mossadeq's resignation.

Comment: Many Senators have become alarmed in recent weeks over the consequences of Mossadeq's policies and have reportedly been considering a vote of no-confidence in the Prime Minister. There is no evidence, however, that the Senate, whose present session will end on 16 March, is any more capable of decisive action than in the past.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
6. Libyan King wants American military installations in Cyrenaica:

King Idris of Libya has made it unmistakably clear that he would welcome the establishment of American military installations in his home province of Cyrenaica. The Governor of Cyrenaica was even more outspoken in his approval, citing as reasons the economic benefits resulting from the presence of US troops.

The American Minister points out that rivalry between Cyrenaica and the more populous and prosperous province of Tripolitania -- which has the important US airbase, Wheelus Field -- strongly colors the viewpoint of Cyrenaican authorities. He observes that strategically important Cyrenaica is nevertheless almost unique in actively encouraging the establishment of American bases and that this friendliness ought not to be neglected in over-all military planning for the Middle East.

- 5 -
