[PAGE 01]
27 November 1957

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]1. TYURA TAM ICBM/ESV RANGE RESUMES PRACTICE ACTIVITY[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 3).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]2. SOVIET DESTROYER POSSIBLY EQUIPPED WITH GUIDED MISSILES (page 4).

3. POSSIBLE SOVIET CENTRAL COMMITTEE MEETING[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 5).

4. GOMULKA DISAPPOINTED IN TALKS WITH MAO TSE-TUNG (page 6).

5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA (page 7).

6. INDIA SEES FOOD GRAIN IMPORTS OF 3,000,000 TONS ANNUALLY OVER NEXT FEW YEARS (page 8).

7. TURKISH CABINET FORMED AFTER MONTH DELAY (page 9).
[PAGE 04]
1. TYURA TAM ICBM/ESV RANGE RESUMES PRACTICE ACTIVITY

Comment on:

The Tyura Tam - Klyuchi missile test range resumed practice activity on 23 and 24 November. Resumption of practice activity indicates probable preparations for another event; either an ICBM test or another satellite launching attempt.

Previous extensive practice activity started on 4 November--the day after the launching of Sputnik II--and ran through 10 November. This was followed on 13 and 14 November by KRUG direction-finding activity which ceased on 15 November.

The period of relative quiet following the extensive practice activities of 4-10 November and the KRUG practices of 13-14 November could have been caused by the delay or postponement of a scheduled ICBM/ESV flight test or by changes in range communications.

Judging by Soviet statements of the number (12-14) of satellites to be launched during the International Geophysical Year at the rate of about one per month, the orbiting of another earth satellite, possibly containing another animal, is considered more likely than an ICBM test. The timing of this event cannot yet be determined, but the attempt is likely to occur in the near future.
[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET DESTROYER POSSIBLY EQUIPPED WITH GUIDED MISSILES

Comment on:

sighted a new Soviet destroyer in the Amur River on 16 September. The presence of a "catapult" and the absence of gun mounts on the stern constitute the first evidence that the USSR may be equipping destroyers with guided missiles.

The ship is probably the 3,880-ton Kotlin-class destroyer which left Komsomolsk shipyard on the Amur River on 14 September for at Vladivostok.

this shipyard was working on at least one Kotlin-class destroyer.

A number of sighting reports, and numer-

Work was suspended in 1955 on five Sverdlov-class cruisers in European Soviet shipyards, possibly as a result of a decision to delay completion of these units
[PAGE 06]
3. POSSIBLE SOVIET CENTRAL COMMITTEE MEETING

Comment on:

There is increasing likelihood that the Soviet party central committee will meet sometime in the middle of December.

Alerting the central committee members well in advance suggests that the topics for discussion would be more routine than those considered in June and October. Problems affecting the economy have not been brought to the attention of the central committee since the beginning of the year.

Indications of another central committee session appear at a time when Khrushchev in his recent spate of publicized interviews with foreigners is giving the impression of enjoying complete pre-eminence.

he still faces significant opposition within the party. Recently, Bulganin has been the subject of conflicting reports, some continuing to allege that he will be replaced soon as premier.
[PAGE 07]
4. GOMULKA DISAPPOINTED IN TALKS WITH MAO TSE-TUNG

Comment on:

During a three-hour bilateral talk with Gomulka in Moscow, Mao Tse-tung took a "hard" line in favor of Communist orthodoxy.

The Polish delegation was deeply disappointed, and relations with the Chinese Communists are now cool.

In his talks with Gomulka, Mao probably reiterated Peiping's warnings against tendencies in Communist states toward modification of basic Marxist-Leninist doctrine and toward the development of foreign policies not in harmony with over-all bloc interests. Early this year, Gomulka seemed to feel he would have Peiping's support for a more independent line. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]This latest report suggests that in discussions with Mao and other bloc leaders he did not receive the degree of support he had expected[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].
[PAGE 08]
5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

Comment on:

The opening of the national development conference in Djakarta on 25 November--the second attempt by the central government to bring the regional leaders into agreement--was marked by the absence of any representative from Central Sumatra, although dissident leaders from other provinces attended. Lt. Col. Hussein, military commander of that area, was quoted as saying that further discussions with Djakarta are useless as long as "fundamental questions" remain unsolved. Those questions are known to involve greater autonomy for the provinces, restoration of effective cooperation between Hatta and Sukarno, and a settlement of "army problems". Hussein and other Sumatran leaders had said earlier that regional representatives in general would present stiff demands at the conference and were prepared to torpedo the meeting, which they foresaw as ineffective at best and potentially harmful to their interests.

The conference is meeting in an atmosphere made tense by the government's continuing efforts to arouse national feeling over the West Irian issue. With the vote in the UN General Assembly approaching, President Sukarno has just reiterated to Ambassador Allison that Indonesia would have to take some action if its national desires are not recognized in some manner by either the UN or the Dutch. He asserted that this action would take the form of "moral violence, perhaps economic violence, but not physical violence." Sukarno told Allison that "only America can really help--don't throw away the ball to the Russians."

Despite reports that he is becoming worried by the growth of Communist strength and influence in Indonesia, Sukarno does not yet appear willing or able to foresake Communist support.
[PAGE 09]
6. INDIA SEES FOOD GRAIN IMPORTS OF 3,000,000 TONS ANNUALLY OVER NEXT FEW YEARS

Comment on:

An Indian food grain inquiry committee reported to parliament on 19 November that India probably will have to import up to 3,000,000 tons of food grains annually for the next few years to make up its shortage between supply and demand and to raise reserve stocks from 1,500,000 to 2,000,000 tons. Such imports would require an outlay of about $300,000,000 in foreign exchange each year.

Noting that food grain production would probably increase by only 10,300,000 tons instead of the planned 15,500,000 during the Second Five-Year Plan period (1956-61), the committee estimated that by 1961 production would be 77,000,000 tons while the demand--spurred by development expenditures and increased consumption--would reach 79,000,000 tons. The committee also noted that existing stockpiles had been insufficient to meet emergency needs. Furthermore, it found that per capita consumption per day had declined from 18.1 ounces in 1954 to 17.1 in 1956, and it expected that 1957 figure to be about the same as in 1956. Since harvests in 1955 and 1956 were good, the annual population increase of 5,000,000 persons is presumably responsible for this drop.
[PAGE 10]
7. TURKISH CABINET FORMED AFTER MONTH DELAY

Comment on:

The membership of the Turkish cabinet announced on 25 November indicates that Prime Minister Menderes has emerged from his intra-party struggle over government policy and personalities with his control somewhat shaken. Both the government and opposition parties have grievances carrying over from the October elections and are apparently ready for a showdown concerning their future roles.

The new cabinet contains two thirds of the previous ministers and includes the controversial Fatin Rustu Zorlu as minister of foreign affairs. Fevzi Ucaner, at one time commander of the Turkish air force, was the only former top-level military leader to receive cabinet appointment.

If opposition criticism intensifies, Menderes and other extremists in his party may undertake drastic measures against the press and the political opposition.
