[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

29 April 1961

Copy No. C

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

3. Nepal: Katmandu agrees to use of Chinese Communist troops in border area. (Page ii)

4. India: Nehru reportedly planning mid-May trip to USSR, France, UK, and US. (Page ii)

7. Dominican Republic: Dissidents reported planning a move against Trujillo within next two weeks. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Demarcated boundary
Undemarcated boundary
Indefinite boundary
Railroad
Road
Trail

Boundaries are not necessarily those recognized by the U.S. Government.

29 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page

[PAGE 06]
Communist China - Nepal: Peiping and Katmandu have reportedly agreed on the use of Chinese combat troops to protect the joint border survey teams now moving into the Mustang border area of Nepal. The new agreement could be used by Peiping as a precedent for the employment of Chinese troops in general mop-up operations against Tibetan rebels who have taken refuge in this and other isolated northern border regions of Nepal. approximately two thousand armed Tibetans are in the Mustang area alone. Peiping made a similar arrangement in 1960 with Rangoon for the protection of joint survey teams along the Sino-Burmese border, and Chinese troops subsequently moved farther into Burma to play the major role in driving out KMT irregulars. Nepal apparently agreed to the procedure out of concern for the safety of the teams in an area over which it has only nominal control and fears that the Tibetans will in time take to banditry and looting of the local inhabitants.

India: Nehru reportedly is planning a trip in mid-May which would include visits to the Soviet Union and--later, via Paris and London--to the United States. Nehru told President Prasad during the week of 17 April that his ambition was to bring about a disarmament agreement. The Indian prime minister, who has long regarded disarmament as the key to a general reduction

29 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 07]
in East-West tensions, had been increasingly concerned over the lack of progress in nuclear test-ban negotiations at Geneva.

*Dominican Republic: An attempt to depose Dominican dictator Trujillo is planned for some time within the next two weeks, according to information given the US Consulate by a knowledgeable dissident source. The consulate considers the information accurate, but notes that the opposition has been "historically long on planners and short on actors." If the plan succeeds, the consulate believes the US Government may receive an urgent call for assistance in the form of diplomatic recognition of the new authorities and "possibly even military help in keeping order."

a plan, probably related to the revolt attempt, is under way to assassinate Trujillo between 29 April and 2 May. The dissident group is not believed to have made adequate plans for controlling the situation after the dictator's removal, but believes immediate action is necessary to avoid discovery of the plot. Although opposition to Trujillo continues to grow in almost all sectors of the population as police atrocities continue, police surveillance and terrorism have prevented effective planning by the dissidents.

29 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 08]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
TOP SECRET
