LATE ITEM

Khrushchev Calls for Summit Meeting

Khrushchev took advantage of a day's recess in his talks
with Prime Minister Macmillan to set forth in a speech on
24 February his terms for negotiations with the West. He dis-
paraged the Western proposal for a four-power foreign-min-
isters' conference and said, "We cannot agree with this." He
charged that the Western powers hope to involve the USSR in a
"labyrinth of diplomatic negotiations so that we will get bogged
down for several years,"

Khrushchev called instead for a meeting of the heads of
government, because "they can take the necessary decisions."
He did not list the participants of such a conference, except to
say they should include "the powers who are fully responsible
for ensuring universal peace."

The first task of a summit meeting, according to the Soviet
premier, should be to conclude a German peace treaty which
would include a solution of the Berlin question. He again stressed
the USSR's unwillingness to discuss reunification but agreed to
consider measures to prevent the rebirth of German "militarism."
Other items on the proposed summit agenda would include Euro-
pean security, withdrawal of troops from foreign territories, dis-
engagement of the forces of both "military groupings," and dis-
armament measures such as a reduction of armed forces and a
prohibition of nuclear weapons and tests.

Khrushchev's speech provided further evidence that Moscow
plans to conclude a separate peace treaty with East Germany
either prior to or simultaneously with the transfer of access
controls to the East Germans. He claimed the signing of a
treaty "will invalidate all the obligations regarding Germany's
occupation--both ours and those of our allies." The press at-
taché of the Soviet Embassy in East Berlin said on 19 February
that the USSR wants to "establish the sovereignty of the German
Democratic Republic beyond all legal doubt" and that this would
be accomplished by the conclusion of a separate peace treaty.
The attaché hinted that the treaty would be signed before 27 May.

Khrushchev strongly attacked the Western position in the
Geneva nuclear talks as "absurd and unacceptable." He charged

25 Feb 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
