[PAGE 01]
5 August 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 31
NO CHANGE IN CLASS. []
DECLASSIFIED []
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE:
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 9 JUN 1980
REVIEWER:

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Yemen-Bloc: Moscow and Peiping are continuing to emphasize their support for Yemen by offering cash loans as well as other economic aid to the Imam. A Yemeni mission left for Peiping on 3 August to negotiate for further Chinese assistance.
the USSR has agreed in principle to provide a cash loan to the Imam.
Moscow has also offered to train Yemeni military personnel in the USSR.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Republic of the Congo: Katanga Premier Tshombé's opposition to a UN occupation of Katanga may result in a postponement of the UN's scheduled entry on 6 August. Tshombé has threatened armed resistance to any UN occupation. Europeans in Elisabethville are said to be concerned not only by the possibility of new violence, but by Tshombé's harsh criticism of the Belgians, whose decision not to oppose the UN entry Tshombé regards as a betrayal. A large-scale exodus of whites from Katanga may be imminent. The apparent stalemate appears certain to draw heavy fire from Lumumba, who on 4 August in Tunis threatened "radical" action if Belgian troops have not evacuated the Congo prior to his return to Leopoldville on 8 August.

5 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 04]
UAR: Akram al-Hawrani, Baathist leader and former UAR vice president, has left Syria and gone into exile in Lebanon, according to a press report from Beirut. Michel Aflaq, the Syrian Baath's other founder, has been a political refugee in Lebanon for some months. Hawrani has been reported to be associated with disgruntled Syrian civilian and military elements planning an attempt to separate Syria from Egypt and remove it from Nasir's control.
(Page 5)

Indonesia: Sukarno, despite army opposition, apparently plans to ban the anti-Communist Masjumi and Socialist parties in the near future, probably on grounds of disloyalty to the government. This move would be in line with Sukarno's drive toward authoritarianism and his plan to downgrade political parties. Some army officials are hoping Sukarno, after having banned the two parties, would be willing to permit further repressive action against the Communist party as a balance. Sukarno, however, would probably permit such action only on a limited scale.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: The potential exists for a power struggle between Raul Castro, Fidel's designated heir, and "Che" Guevara, who has already assumed much of the authority formerly exercised by the

5 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 05]
elder Castro. The danger to the regime of such a power struggle will increase if Fidel Castro's illness is prolonged. Neither Raul Castro, Guevara, nor the increasingly influential President Dorticos possesses Fidel Castro's great popular appeal among lower income groups, upon which the regime has come to depend.

Meanwhile, Cuban officials have exhorted delegates to the Communist-dominated Latin American Youth Congress to carry the struggle initiated by Cuba for "Latin American liberation" back to their home countries.

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE
REPORTS AND ESTIMATES

(Available during the preceding week)

Soviet Capabilities for Long-Range Attack Through Mid-1965.
NIE 11-8-60. August 60.

5 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 06]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Bloc Assistance to Yemen

Moscow and Peiping are continuing to step up their efforts to exploit Yemeni aspirations for economic development through new offers of aid. A high-level Yemeni delegation left on 3 August via Moscow for Peiping to discuss further Chinese assistance, presumably including additional economic aid for road building and light industrial enterprises. In May the first of 75 Yemenis arrived in Peiping "to study highway and textile technology," accordingly to Radio Peiping. The Yemeni mission reportedly also will explore a Chinese offer to mint $10,000,000 worth of silver coins imprinted with the Imam's likeness. These may be presented as a gift, if Peiping feels it will substantially advance the bloc's cause in Yemen.

The Soviet Union now may be willing to provide a cash loan to Yemen. In the past Moscow has on several occasions refused the Imam's requests for such financial aid. In addition, the Soviet Union presumably has agreed to construct the Hudayda-Taiz road, and Soviet technicians now are investigating the feasibility of carrying out an irrigation project in the Tihama coastal region.

The Imam is said to have agreed to send a group of Yemeni military personnel to the USSR for training. Presumably these trainees will undergo naval training in Odessa.

5 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
Syrian Baathist Leader Goes Into Lebanese Exile

(Former UAR Vice President and Syrian Baathist leader Akram al-Hawrani has gone into exile in Lebanon, according to a press report from Beirut. Hawrani, who was one of those most instrumental in bringing about the union between Syria and Egypt in 1958, has been dissatisfied with his relegation to a minor role in Syrian affairs and Nasir's suppression of the Baath. He resigned as UAR vice president last year.

During the period 1949-54 Hawrani was allied with army officers in four successful coups against various Syrian governments. The man who collaborated with him in founding the Baath (Arab Socialist Resurrection party), Michel Aflaq, has been a political refugee in Lebanon for some months. Hawrani is the Baath's activist leader, while Aflaq is its political theorist.

5 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
Indonesian President Plans to Ban Two Anti-Communist Parties

President Sukarno, despite army opposition, reportedly intends to ban two anti-Communist parties--the Masjumi, which is the largest Moslem party in Indonesia, and the much smaller Socialist party--sometime before 17 August, Indonesian independence day. He will charge them with not meeting the criteria stipulated in two presidential decrees regulating the role of political parties and may accuse them of disloyalty to the government. The Masjumi and Socialist parties have earned Sukarno's ill will by consistently opposing his implementation of "guided democracy"; although they have formally disavowed the 1958 provincial rebellion, party members have been in frequent communication with rebel leaders.

The principal effect of the ban will be psychological, since Sukarno had already largely excluded the two parties from both executive and legislative positions at the national level and is planning other measures to divest them of influence in the provinces. Anticipating the latter, the Masjumi has already withdrawn from regional councils in Java. The ban, however, will discredit the Masjumi in non-Javanese areas where it is strong and will further impair the anti-Communist position in Indonesia. It will also serve as a warning to the two large non-Communist parties, the National party and the orthodox Moslem Nahdatul Ulama, of the probable fate of organizations which oppose Sukarno's policies.

Some army officials hope that Sukarno, having banned two anti-Communist parties, would then permit further repressive action against the Communist party as a balancing measure. Significant restrictive action is not likely, however, since the President feels he must preserve the Communists as a balance against the army.

5 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
Cuban Developments

Fidel Castro's illness raises the possibility of a power struggle between Raul Castro, who is Fidel's designated heir, and "Che" Guevara, who already has assumed much of the authority formerly exercised by the elder Castro. The resulting threat will increase if Fidel's illness is prolonged. Neither Raul Castro, Guevara, nor the increasingly influential President Dorticos has Fidel Castro's appeal among lower income groups, on which the regime has come to depend.

Meanwhile, Guevara, Raul Castro, and other Cuban leaders have exhorted delegates to the Communist-dominated Latin American Youth Congress to carry back to their home countries the struggle initiated by Cuba for "Latin American liberation." Both Raul Castro and Guevara emphasized in their speeches that a genuine revolution must include destruction of the regular armed forces, which in all countries but Castro's Cuba serve the interests of "imperialism." Raul Castro told the delegates on 4 August that Cuba does "have something for which to thank imperialism. Without Batista, imposed by imperialism, we would probably still be playing with representative democracy."

The escape from Cuba on 3 August of Raul Chibas, an early Castro supporter, is a major blow to the regime. Chibas headed one of the two major anti-Batista political parties prior to the advent of Castro and was the brother of the party's late founder, one of Fidel Castro's early heroes.

5 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
