killing of Moslems will accelerate Afro-Asian efforts to secure UN intervention in Algeria. Rebel Premier Ferhat Abbas has sent a protest to Secretary General Hammarskjold, and the Moroccan Government has officially protested to Paris. A sense of shock was evident in metropolitan France over the intensity of the Moslem demonstrations. De Gaulle returned to France last night, and reportedly will make a speech to the nation this morning. (Page 3)

*Laos: The status of Vientiane is still in question as troops under Captain Kong Le attempt to repulse the attack begun by General Phoumi's forces on 13 December. Phoumi's troops apparently held the major portion of the city late on 13 December, but were receiving mortar and artillery fire from the airfield northwest of the city. Retention of the airfield by Kong Le would permit the continued Sino-Soviet bloc airlift of supplies unless interdicted by fire.

In addition to the continuing Soviet airlift, at least two North Vietnamese transports are to fly to Dien Bien Phu, near the Laotian border, on 14 December with "cargo and personnel to supervise," suggesting stepped-up North Vietnamese logistical support for Pathet Lao forces in Phong Saly Province. Additional bloc logistical support is suggested by the scheduling of five IL-14s--also on 14 December--from Nanning to Hanoi.

Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow are increasing propaganda charging "US intervention" in Laos. While this propaganda may represent an effort to justify more open support for Laotian leftists, it also could be intended to stimulate international fear about developments in Laos in the hope that some nations will support a bloc effort to get a negotiated Laotian settlement that would include the Communists in the government.

Meanwhile, Phoumi's Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee has formed a provisional government with Prince Boun Oum as premier and Phoumi as deputy premier and minister of defense. The new cabinet is strongly rightist in coloration and in effect

14 Dec 60 DAILY BRIEF iii
