Uneasy Calm in Algeria

An uneasy calm prevails in Algiers and Oran after four days of rioting. Public transportation is beginning to function again, and some downtown shops are open. Army commanders have made clear their determination to put down any further disorders, and a 13 December attempt by Europeans to march on the Moslem sector of Oran was repulsed by security police. Army units in the city of Algiers have been reinforced and now number approximately 25,000. Some 40 Europeans arrested during the first day have been brought before an Algiers court.

The funerals of those killed during the disturbances are being held, and further violence might erupt among either the Moslem or European crowds attending. The killing of Moslems--Delegate-General Morin has admitted that at least 45 were killed in the Algiers area--will accelerate Afro-Asian efforts to secure UN intervention in Algeria, and the support shown for the National Liberation Front by the Moslem rioters will no doubt be used to undercut the long-standing French argument that the front represents only a small minority of the Moslem population.

Rebel Premier Ferhat Abbas, in a 12 December press conference, again rejected De Gaulle's plan to reorganize the public powers in Algeria, and soon afterward he sent a protest to Secretary General Hammarskjold regarding the killing of Moslems. The Moroccan Government has also sent a formal protest to Paris.

A sense of shock is evident in metropolitan France following the Moslem demonstrations in Algeria. French security forces continue to round up known rightist supporters in France on the return of President de Gaulle. De Gaulle cut one day from his Algerian trip to make a "solemn appeal" to the nation and Algeria this morning. There is no indication that De Gaulle has been dissuaded from his earlier plan for a national referendum on 8 January and the creation of an interim Algerian government with local autonomy, but he is reportedly angry over the rioting and may crack down on the leaders of both European and Moslem demonstrations.
