*Laos: Souvanna Phouma has acted quickly to seize the initiative following the cease-fire appeal by the Geneva cochairmen. In a joint statement with Chou En-lai on 25 April, Souvanna--speaking as the "Premier of the Royal Government of Laos"--agreed on the formal establishment of full diplomatic relations between Laos and Communist China, and on the future signing of economic and cultural agreements.

Souvanna, emphasizing the need for Laotian representation at the forthcoming international conference, has also invited representatives of the Pathet Lao and the Savannakhet group to meet at "Xieng Khouang on 28 April" to enlarge the government and transform it into a provisional coalition government." Souvanna's pre-emptory statement, broadcast by the Pathet Lao radio, implies that the "Laotian Government" will be enlarged irrespective of Vientiane's stand.

The statement expresses Souvanna's support for the message of the Geneva cochairmen calling on interested parties in Laos to appoint delegations to enter negotiations and discussions for a cease-fire and armistice, but does not specify timing. Pathet Lao chief Souphannouvong on 25 April announced that cease-fire orders to Pathet Lao troops will be issued, but also did not specify any timing. However, shortly afterward, Peiping broadcast a statement issued by Kong Le, as "commander in chief of the Laotian armed forces," which called on Phoumi to send a delegation on 28 April to Xieng Khouang to discuss "rules governing a cease-fire and armistice." Peiping followed this immediately with a Pathet Lao statement expressing readiness to send a delegation "at any time" to participate in a cease-fire conference "of all parties concerned in Laos." Vientiane on 25 April declared its acceptance of the cease-fire appeal, and transmitted orally through the British its suggestion to hold military talks at Luang Prabang.

Enemy forces have apparently edged closer to Thakhek; on 25 April, government positions about 15 miles east of the town were under artillery fire. North of Phou Khoun junction, on Route 13, enemy attacks continue but reportedly are still being repulsed. North of Luang Prabang, the post of Muong

26 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
