Fighting Breaks Out in Pakistan Near Afghan Border

Guerrilla fighters from three of the major Bajauri tribes--the Salarzai, Utman Khel, and Mamund--reportedly have been engaged against Pakistani troops since 24 March. If this resistance continues, the powerful Mohmand tribe may join its neighbors. Other Pushtoon tribes, such as the Wazirs, might also lend their support and further extend the area of fighting. All the tribes, whose area extends on both sides of the border, want to remain relatively free of government control and resent Pakistani Government moves since last September to strengthen control over Bajaur. If the present fighting should become widespread, it would so deepen the antagonism between these tribes and Pakistan that the latter would be forced to suspend its efforts to bring the Pushtoon tribes all along the frontier under its administrative control.

The fighting in Bajaur follows recent moves by Afghanistan to strengthen its regular forces at the border opposite the area. In discussing this build-up with the American Army attaché in Karachi, the director of Pakistan's joint military intelligence said that the Pakistani Army would actually welcome the chance to defeat Afghan intruders again--whether tribal irregulars or Afghan Army units--and reiterated his government's determination to use whatever force is necessary to maintain its position in Bajaur.

Kabul, fearful of strong Pakistani counteraction, probably does not plan to send readily identifiable Afghan forces across the border. While it may be giving covert assistance in the form of arms and tribal "volunteers," the Afghan Government wants the fighting to appear to involve only the "oppressed" Pushtoon tribesmen on the Pakistani side of the line and the Pakistani Government.

Afghanistan would like to bring the matter before the United Nations to generate international pressure on Pakistan to negotiate the status of the Pushtoon tribes living in Pakistan. Kabul, however, probably calculates that open Afghan intervention would merely strengthen the Pakistani case in the eyes of the UN General Assembly.

The USSR probably would not be happy to see the Pushtoonistan issue come to a head again at this time. Moscow has made a

27 Mar 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7
