South Korea: In a broadcast on 18 May, Prime Minister Chang Myon announced the resignation of his cabinet and stated that the martial law proclaimed by Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong as chairman of the Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC) was legal. The Prime Minister's action will provide a cloak of legality for the coup and open the way for transitional measures within a constitutional framework.

Lieutenant General Yi Han-lim, commander of the front-line First Army who had previously ordered his troops to remain neutral, has now publicly declared his support of the coup. Yi had indicated earlier that he feared the time had passed for the successful commitment of the First Army to counter the coup. This action is certain to bolster the position of the Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC) by removing the main potential source of effective military opposition.

A South Korean field-grade officer with good connections at army headquarters has stated that the lack of resistance to the coup in Seoul and the public indifference or sympathy shown in other areas have already increased the confidence of the revolutionary group.

Army Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Chang To-yong had accepted the post as chairman of the MRC only after the MRC had agreed to three conditions. These were that no mass punishments or violence against individuals was to be carried out; the best men available were to be placed in a new cabinet; and the troops who participated in the coup were to be removed from Seoul "at the earliest opportunity." Chang noted that the committee agreed to the last condition with the understanding that removal of the troops would not begin until the position of the United States toward the coup was clear. Chang's actions are designed to maintain his position both with the insurgents and the American side.

Major General Pak Chong-hui remains the driving force in the revolutionary group.

The police have been ordered to enforce martial law and acknowledge the authority of the military officers in charge.

North Korea is describing the coup leaders as "flagrantly reactionary" but expressing the hope that events may yet develop to the Communists' advantage. While hailing the move

18 May 61
DAILY BRIEF
ii
