[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
11 January 1957
Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. OPPOSITION STRENGTH WORRIES GOMULKA REGIME

2. SHOWDOWN IN ALGERIA MAY BE NEAR

3. ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER ADAMANT ON GULF OF AQABA
AND GAZA ISSUES

7. THE NEW BRITISH PRIME MINISTER

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee

[PAGE 04]
1. OPPOSITION STRENGTH WORRIES GOMULKA REGIME

The Gomulka regime is

disconcerted by
the extent to which the pro-Soviet "Natolin"
elements within the Polish United Workers'
(Communist) Party (PZPR) have succeeded
in fomenting opposition during the campaign
for the parliamentary elections of 20 Janu-
ary.

Natolin elements have taken advantage of
the chauvinist feelings of the population to stimulate antiminor-
ity, particularly anti-Semitic, sentiment. The increasing
frequency and severity of incidents have placed the regime at
a political disadvantage by forcing it to defend the minorities.
A whispering campaign is also being conducted to defame re-
gime leaders by charging them with Nazi collaboration or
Stalinist associations.

The movement to urge voters to scratch
from the single electoral list the names of regime leaders,
PZPR candidates and prominent figures in favor of local can-
didates has gained momentum. Voters are also being encour-
aged to believe that since the election results will be rigged
anyway they might as well abstain.

As a result of these tactics, party leaders
are reportedly now afraid that a number of central committee
members will not be elected and that in many regions party
members will be defeated by nonparty candidates.

Comment
The regime press has charged the opposi-
tion with attempting to sabotage the elec-
tions, and politburo member Morawski complained publicly

[PAGE 05]
on 2 January that those "negativists" within the party who
oppose Poland's independent road to socialism "do not shrink
from unworthy methods of struggle in order to maintain their
position."

The press has also charged, in a thinly
veiled reference to Poland's (Communist neighbors, that "all
those abroad" who are hostile to changes in Poland would not
fail to take advantage of opportunities to "blacken Poland as
an unenlightened backward country not deserving independence."

[PAGE 06]
2. SHOWDOWN IN ALGERIA MAY BE NEAR

a
major showdown among the rebels, the
European settlers and the French admin-
istration may occur shortly before or
during the UN discussion of the Algerian
problem late this month. The American
consul general in Algiers believes it is
likely to involve considerable bloodshed.

The rebels, who recently accelerated
their terrorist attacks, have called for an "immense national
manifestation" through a week-long general strike to coincide
with the UN debate.
a general Mos-
lem "insurrectional" strike may start on 12 January.

Simultaneously, tension is reported mount-
ing at an alarming rate among European Algerians who fear
abandonment by France. Indications are that French extrem-
ists are preparing to counter further Moslem unrest with a
substantial show of their own force and that they may be supported
by at least some elements of the French military which has
largely taken over administrative operations in Algeria. This
danger is pointed up by the arrest in late December of a French
general charged with plotting to overthrow Minister Robert
Lacoste and establish an Algerian republic controlled by the
settlers.

[PAGE 07]
3. ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER ADAMANT ON GULF OF
AQABA AND GAZA ISSUES

Israeli prime minister Ben-Gurion
told Ambassador Lawson on 8 January
that while Israel "has no territorial am-
bitions anywhere in Sinai;" it "has to
have" the Gulf of Aqaba waterway. Ben-
Gurion said, "No more will we be subject to Nasr's whims
or charity. If he tries to re-establish the blockade, then
we shall have to start shooting."

The prime minister reiterated that he
cannot permit Egypt to regain authority in the Gaza strip
and that he believes a UN force there could not control
Egyptian fedayeen activity. He hinted that he would like
to see Israeli police control maintained under UN supervi-
sion if this would satisfy world opinion.

Comment
The Israeli cabinet reportedly met on
10 January to consider its position on
further withdrawal from Sinai. Israel's demands regard-
ing Gaza and Aqaba will probably be supported by Britain
and France. The British UN delegate told Ambassador
Lodge on 9 January that "we would be worse off than before
29 October" if no changes are made in the Gaza and Aqaba
situations.

[PAGE 08]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. THE NEW BRITISH PRIME MINISTER

The 62-year-old British chancellor of
the exchequer, Harold Macmillan, who
became prime minister on 10 January,
is a forceful initiator of progressive
domestic policies and a champion of closer relations with
the Continent. In view of his intimate association with the
Suez intervention, however, Macmillan will inherit most
of Eden's difficulties in trying to restore confidence in a
Conservative British government.

The new prime minister is given the
main credit for having persuaded the Conservative Party
to endorse the government's decision to withdraw its forces
from Egypt. Macmillan also probably reaped political ad-
vantage from the fairly widespread resentment within the
party at R. A. Butler--the "heir apparent"--for his "fence
sitting," especially during Eden's absence in Jamaica. The
speed with which Macmillan took measures to prevent a
serious financial crisis after Suez received a favorable pub-
lic reception.

Macmillan's first action was to announce
that he would not call an early general election. The gov-
ernment's first chance to assess initial public reaction to the
change in leadership, therefore, will come in three pending
by-elections in marginal constituencies.
