[PAGE 01]
26 August 1953
Copy No. 6

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
1. Comment on new Iranian cabinet (page 3).
2.
3. French decision on Moroccan reforms expected on 26 August (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. British seen adopting cautious attitude on Iran (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Comment on new Iranian cabinet:

The composition of the new Iranian cabinet offers little hope for a fresh or original approach to the country's problems. The new ministers and most of Prime Minister Zahedi's appointees represent the conservative and privileged classes of Iran. Hence the government may soon face opposition from groups which advocate social and economic reform and which previously gave Mossadeq significant support.

The shah told Ambassador Henderson on 23 August that he was disappointed to see "the same old faces which had been rotating in office for years." He said he had hoped for a cabinet which would stimulate the country, particularly its youth. Some progressive nationalist politicians, who had broken with Mossadeq earlier, are also unenthusiastic about Zahedi's appointments.

2.

3. French decision on Moroccan reforms expected on 26 August:
The French Council of Ministers is expected to approve and announce administrative reforms for Morocco
[PAGE 04]
on 26 August, according to a Foreign Ministry spokesman. The government is drafting new measures in addition to those contained in the protocol signed by the former sultan on 13 August. These included judicial reforms and the establishment of local and cabinet-level councils.

Comment: The creation of these councils, which probably will be appointive and advisory only, are not expected to be acceptable to the majority of the native population since French representation will be disproportionate.

In spite of the French government's declarations that Morocco will be "democratized," French vested interests and residents will continue to impede the government's policies.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. British seen adopting cautious attitude on Iran:
The American embassy in London does not expect Britain to take any initiative at this time for renewal of diplomatic relations with Iran.

The Foreign Office anticipates a period of grave difficulty in Iran, with no immediate lessening of the fervor of nationalism. Past experience with Zahedi has made the British distrust his opportunism, an attitude reinforced by his alliance with nationalist extremists.

Comment: London's official caution over Iranian developments may be influenced by the view current in business circles that increased oil production elsewhere has more than compensated for the loss of Iranian supplies.
