[PAGE 01]
10 September 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOUTHEAST ASIA
1. Reorganization of French administration in Indochina planned (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
2. Comment on Kashmir Assembly President's proposed Moscow visit (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Tudeh members reportedly instigated port strike in Iraq (page 4).
5. Greek Prime Minister said to have picked successor as party head (page 5).
6. German military advisers gain influence in Egypt (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Balkan gap in Orbit radar coverage possibly closed (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. West German parties to oppose discussions with East German commission (page 6).
9. Adenauer concerned over Arab opposition to German-Israeli settlement (page 8).

LATIN AMERICA
10. Argentine revolt reportedly scheduled for mid-September (page 9).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

1. Reorganization of French administration in Indochina planned:

A French administrative reform commission in Indochina has submitted recommendations for the replacement of the French High Commissariat by a small high-level organization for Southeast Asia. The new organization would be roughly comparable to Malcolm MacDonald's Commission General, and would entail sweeping cuts in the number of French personnel.

While the plan faces many difficulties, American Ambassador Heath sees in it the possibility that the French Union concept "may possess greater evolutionary elasticity than some observers have supposed."

Comment: If this plan is approved by the French parliament, the resultant alterations of the French administrative structure in Indochina should have a salutary effect on Vietnamese public opinion.

SOUTH ASIA

2. Comment on Kashmir Assembly President's proposed Moscow visit:

Ghulam Sadiq, President of the Kashmir Constituent Assembly, intends to visit Moscow in November for medical treatment suggests that Sadiq will report to the Kremlin on recent Communist activity in Kashmir and seek instructions for future action. Sadiq, who like Thorez will probably be a guest of the Soviet Government, also wishes to visit Eastern European countries.

Sadiq, the most prominent leftist and suspected Communist in Kashmir, is one of the Prime Minister's closest advisers. The announcement of his projected visit comes just a month after the first Communist-line "peace" conference and two weeks following the first public Communist Party meeting in Kashmir. These events suggest that the Communists now feel strong enough to conduct regular overt operations.
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tudeh members reportedly instigated port strike in Iraq:

The Iraqi Foreign Minister has informed the American Embassy in Baghdad that he believes the Basra port strike of 23 to 25 August was led by Tudeh members who had infiltrated across the Iranian border.

Comment: Several earlier unconfirmed reports have referred to Tudeh activity in the Persian Gulf area outside of Iran. Basra is approximately 30 miles up the river from the Abadan refinery, the scene of frequent Tudeh disturbances.

The American Consulate in Basra previously reported that the strike was not Communist-inspired but the result of a wage dispute.
[PAGE 05]
5. Greek Prime Minister said to have picked successor as party head:

Greek Prime Minister Plastiras has chosen Minister of Commerce Savvas Papapolitis to succeed him as leader of

Comment: Papapolitis, a close friend of the ailing Plastiras, has emerged as one of the most prominent EPEK figures.

He has a history of Communist affiliations and his brother owns a Communist-line newspaper in Athens. There are at least two other Plastiras lieutenants who might contest the control of a new leader.

6. German military advisers gain influence in Egypt:

German officers advising the Egyptian Government believe that their positions are more secure as a result of the July military coup. The officers reportedly will remain in Egypt unless more favorable opportunities develop for them in West Germany.

Immediately following the coup Nagib praised the German officers in the presence of both his Egyptian military staff and the German advisers.

Comment: the German military advisers in Egypt played a smaller part in the military coup than press accounts have suggested.

This group, which has been characterized as an economic mission, consists of approximately 25 officers. Thus far the Bonn government has shown no interest in securing their services.
[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE

7. Balkan gap in Orbit radar coverage possibly closed:

US Air Force headquarters in Wiesbaden has tentatively identified two additional Soviet-manned early warning and GCI radar installations employing equipment which is comparable to the CPS-6 type, now operational with US forces. Such equipment is located at Igralishte, Bulgaria and Nagykanizsa, Hungary.

If confirmed, this would bring the total of known newer-type radar installations in the European Satellite areas to four and would indicate that the previous gap in radar coverage of the Balkan area no longer exists.

Comment: Radar installations of this type have been confirmed elsewhere in the European Satellite area only in Gdynia and Prague, although several have been observed by US Attaches in Moscow and identified by ferret aircraft in the Vladivostok area.

This type radar is primarily designed for ground control of air intercept but has an early warning range of 180 to 200 nautical miles.

(See map)

WESTERN EUROPE

8. West German parties to oppose discussions with East German commission:

According to American officials in Bonn, the 5 September proposal of the East German Government to send a five-man delegation to the Federal Republic to discuss unification will be opposed by all leading West German political parties. The politicians available for comment have generally rejected the offer as a ruse.
[PAGE 07]
Confirmed Locations of CPS-6 Type Radar

Gdynia
Prague
Nagykanizsa
Igralishte
[PAGE 08]
Even the executive committee of the opposition Social Democratic Party has declared that "under no circumstances" could the West German parliament negotiate with the East German parliament since such negotiations were reserved for the four occupation powers.

Comment: Bonn has not yet officially received the East German proposal. In the probable event of its rejection, the East German Government may try to prolong its propaganda maneuver by getting West German Communist front groups to send "unofficial" representatives.

9. Adenauer concerned over Arab opposition to German-Israeli settlement:

Strong Arab opposition to settlement of Jewish claims against West Germany has led Chancellor Adenauer to request American assistance in relieving the pressure.

The chief of the Syrian political department, who has been campaigning actively in Bonn against the settlement, has protested sharply to Adenauer. He stated that the Arab nations, at a meeting in Cairo on 10 September, will undoubtedly agree to boycott the Federal Republic. This pressure has encouraged the political elements in Germany opposed to the settlement.

Comment: Arab action will not prevent the Federal Republic from fulfilling the terms of the recent West German-Israeli restitution settlement. West Germans, however, are anxious to avoid involvement in the Arab-Israeli controversy in order not to jeopardize their growing commercial interests in the Near East.
[PAGE 09]
LATIN AMERICA

10. Argentine revolt reportedly scheduled for mid-September:

An Argentine revolt starting in the interior provinces is scheduled for mid-September.

Civilians, as well as members of the armed forces, will participate. The new government is to be temporarily headed by an army-navy-air triumvirate.

eleven unidentified army generals and certain military garrisons were "completely in sympathy" with a revolt against the government. He also stated that Peron undoubtedly suspects a revolt, but does not know where to look for it.
