[PAGE 01]
17 January 1961
Copy No. C 76

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
17 January 1961

DAILY BRIEF

THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Pakistan: At Peiping's request, talks on a preliminary boundary agreement between Communist China and Pakistan are now under way, according to Pakistan's foreign minister. The Chinese probably hope to use such an agreement, following the pattern of recent border accords with Burma and Nepal, to put additional pressure on New Delhi to accept a compromise solution in the Sino-Indian border dispute. Indian claims in the Ladakh area might well be prejudiced by a bilateral Sino-Pakistani boundary settlement, and the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir would also be further complicated. A preliminary agreement between Peiping and Pakistan would probably call for the establishment of a joint committee to undertake formal demarcation of the border.

ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: Anti-Communist elements in Mosul, in northern Iraq, began a general strike on 13 January to protest actions by the Qasim regime favoring pro-Communist elements. Students in Mosul have been on strike since 1 January following the arrest of several anti-Communist teachers. During the past several months anti-Communists in Mosul have almost daily been carrying out revenge killings of Communists who helped suppress the March 1959 rebellion. The governor and the commandant of police have tacitly condoned these assassinations. The general strike is an indication that Iraqi anti-Communist elements are becoming bolder in their protests.

[PAGE 04]
Syria-Jordan: Both Syria and Jordan have within the past few days asked for additional emergency shipments of wheat from the United States. Food shortages which have resulted from three successive years of drought are particularly serious in the Bedouin tribal areas; some 760,000 people in Syria and about 100,000 in Jordan are reported to be in extreme need. Prospects for the 1961 harvest are good; thus the critical immediate requirement is for supplies to tide these people over until August. The Bedouin populations will also need longer-term aid to build up their herds, which have been depleted to about 25 percent of the pre-drought size.

*Congo: The initiative in eastern Congo remains with the Lumumbist forces and their tribal allies.
The UN in the area does not plan to take strong action against the dissidents unless ordered to do so by headquarters in Leopoldville.
believes that the Baluba forces will succeed in setting up another "independent" state in northern Katanga. Hammarskjold has reiterated his confidence in Rajeshwar Dayal, his representative in Leopoldville who is widely believed to be favoring Lumumba, and has rejected Kasavubu's formal demand of 14 January that Dayal be recalled.
(Page 3)

17 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
THE WEST

El Salvador: The armed forces in El Salvador are reported united behind Defense Minister Castillo in a plan to overthrow the civil-military junta before it permits a Communist takeover. The attempt reportedly will be made soon. The armed forces plan to enforce strong rule initially through a military directorate in order to bring the Communist threat under control. Non-Communist political parties, however, are to be permitted to continue political activity in preparation for congressional elections which may be called in May.

17 Jan 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
CONFIDENTIAL

PAKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN
HUNZA
SINKIANG
KASHMIR
JAMMU
LADAKH
INDIA
CHINA
TIBET
Karakoram Mountains

Boundary line on maps of Communist China.
Proposed boundary agreement between Communist China and Pakistan.

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 07]
Sino-Pakistani Boundary Talks

Communist China and Pakistan are discussing a preliminary boundary agreement, according to the Pakistani foreign minister. The talks apparently follow a recent suggestion by the Chinese Communist ambassador to Pakistan that negotiations be started over the Hunza area and such other regions along the border as Pakistan might wish to discuss. Prior to that time Peiping had not shown any interest in such talks.

Peiping has apparently concluded that its failure to gain any concessions from India after the talks between Chou and Nehru in March 1960 and several months of low-level discussion by Foreign Ministry experts necessitated a change in tactics. The Chinese may hope that even a preliminary border agreement with Pakistan, following boundary accords with Burma and Nepal, will put additional pressure on New Delhi to accept a compromise solution for the Sino-Indian border along lines drawn up by Peiping.

The Chinese probably also feel that a bilateral boundary settlement with Pakistan would prejudice Indian claims in the Ladakh area. The Karakoram mountain range, which might provide the basis for demarcating portions of the Sino-Pakistani border, roughly divides the Indian- and Chinese-occupied parts of Ladakh.

Pakistan has been especially concerned about China's claims to the Pakistani border state of Hunza and apparently hopes to forestall any serious incidents while gaining Peiping's recognition of the "traditional" border. In addition, the Pakistanis probably calculate that China's interest in making a show of progress at this time gives them a transitory bargaining advantage.

A preliminary boundary agreement would likely follow the pattern of preliminary Chinese border accords with Nepal and Burma. In each case a joint committee was established to negotiate the formal demarcation, and ground rules were set up to govern the committee's action.

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Anti-Qasim General Strike in Mosul

Fearing that Prime Minister Qasim is about to favor Mosul's pro-Communist elements, anti-Communists there began a general strike on 13 January. This action follows a student strike begun in Mosul schools on 1 January after the arrest of several anti-Communist teachers. Rumors have spread in Mosul that Qasim intends to replace two strongly anti-Communist officials--the governor and the police chief--who have tacitly condoned revenge killings of Communists during the past several months. These assassinations, which have averaged six or seven a week since early last fall, have been in retaliation for massacres by Communist elements in the aftermath of the March 1959 Mosul revolt. Although Iraqi military courts have been carrying out repressive measures against Iraqi Communists, Qasim has repeatedly vitiated the courts' work by releasing imprisoned Communists.

On 28 December the Baghdad military court handed down death sentences to seven Communists and gave 22 other Communists and pro-Communists prison sentences for their part in the Mosul massacres; 55 others were sentenced the day before. Meanwhile, the editor of the country's largest Communist paper failed to appear in court on 27 December to face charges of violating censorship regulations; he is believed to have gone underground.

While apparently trying to mollify local Communists, Qasim appears to appreciate the strength of Iraqi "nationalist" sentiment in favor of Arab solidarity. Emphasis on Arabism has become an increasingly dominant theme in his recent speeches: he has frequently referred to the "Arab nation," talked of greater economic and political cooperation, and displayed a less hostile attitude toward the UAR. However, none of these gestures is likely to placate Iraqi anti-Communist and pan-Arab elements. Some plotting against Qasim appears to be continuing, although rivalries between factions have militated so far against efforts to overthrow him.

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
The Situation in the Congo

The initiative in the eastern Congo remains with the Lumumbist forces and their tribal allies, who reportedly are becoming more aggressive as a result of recent successes. Baluba tribesmen have cut the rail link between Elisabethville and Kamina air base and, together with troops from Kivu Province, continue to oppose reinforcement of the UN garrison at Manono.

The UN in the area does not plan to take strong action against the dissidents unless ordered to do so by headquarters in Leopoldville.
the Baluba forces will succeed in setting up an "independent" state in northern Katanga.

Tshombé's government in Elisabethville reportedly now has imported more than 100 Belgian paracommandos. Although Tshombé apparently distrusts his native troops, Belgian officers with the Katanga forces discount the possibility of dissension among Africans in the armed forces. The native civilians in many of the province's important mining cities reportedly present a threat to order; they apparently have some weapons at their disposal.

UN Secretary General Hammarskjold has reiterated his confidence in Rajeshwar Dayal, his representative in Leopoldville, and has rejected Kasavubu's formal demand of 14 January that Dayal be recalled. Hammarskjold took issue with charges made against Dayal by Kasavubu, but said he would refer the matter to the Security Council for final action.

Dayal has been withholding information and slanting reports in such a way as to favor Lumumba supporters. However, Hammarskjold angrily told American officials on 14 January that he was "very determined" to keep Dayal in the Congo, despite a campaign of "Russian-type" innuendo which he implied was coming from Western sources. Nevertheless Hammarskjold may yet have to appoint a new representative if the UN follows

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
the precedent of acceding to such requests from recognized chiefs of state in the country where UN troops are serving.

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 11]
Salvadoran Armed Forces Reportedly Planning Coup

The armed forces of El Salvador, under the leadership of the minister of defense, Colonel Castillo Navarette, plan to overthrow the ruling civilian-military junta soon in an attempt to head off a Communist takeover.

The armed forces, which had been virtually paralyzed by disunity, appear to have been spurred to cooperation by increasingly bold Communist activity in recent weeks. Unrestricted Communist organizational activity among the Salvadoran peasants and the visit to Cuba earlier this month of a group of Salvadoran extremists have particularly heightened the concern of the military.

the army is well organized for the coup, which has the support of "practically all" important military leaders. A newly formed political party plans public demonstrations in the capital during the next day or so to give the army a show of popular support for its action.

The army plan reportedly calls for strong rule initially through a three-man military junta composed of the defense minister, army chief of staff Colonel Portillo, and Colonel Yanez, one of the three military members on the present six-man junta. The new government would permit continued activity by all non-Communist political parties in preparation for congressional elections which may be called next May. The Communist-front April and May Revolutionary party would be outlawed.

The coup planners are said to recognize the possibility of some bloodshed after they initiate action, and the Communist-influenced student and labor groups in the capital would probably attempt counteraction. As long as the army remains united, however, it could probably control any disorders.

17 Jan 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
