[PAGE 01]
27 April 1957
Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. TURKS REINFORCE TROOPS ON SYRIAN BORDER

4. ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER PROMISES NEW TEST OF
RIGHTS ON GULF OF AQABA

5. EUROPEAN NEUTRAL BELT IDEA GAINS SUPPORT IN
BRITAIN

6. MIKOYAN HINTS USSR DESIRES SUMMIT CONFERENCE

8. SUMATRAN LEADER SETS CONDITIONS FOR SETTLEMENT
WITH DJAKARTA

9. MILITARY JUNTA SEEN IMMINENT IN HAITI

10. ALLEGED CHINESE BRIBERY BECOMING EFFECTIVE
CAMPAIGN ISSUE IN PHILIPPINE POLITICS
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
2. TURKS REINFORCE TROOPS ON SYRIAN BORDER

A redeployment of Turkish troops to forward areas on the Syrian border was ordered at 2200 hours on 25 April, according to the US army attaché in Ankara. The 39th Infantry Division, a first echelon unit, is most directly affected, with division headquarters and one infantry regiment ordered to move from Iskenderun to Kirikhan. Two additional regiments of this division, already near the frontier, will move to forward positions at Gaziantep and Kilis. The First Tank Battalion stationed at Dortyol has been moved to Islahiye. The Fifth Armored Brigade has been ordered to move from Ankara to Iskenderun and the 28th Infantry Division in Ankara has been alerted for possible movement. The air force has been instructed to patrol the border. Leaves in all affected units have been canceled.
[PAGE 07]
On the arrival of the Fifth Armored Brigade from Ankara, there will be approximately 16,000 Turkish troops on or near the border between the Euphrates River and the Mediterranean coast. A movement of the 28th Division to this area would increase this number by another 8,000 to 10,000.

The army attaché comments that the moves are primarily designed as a diversionary maneuver aimed at reducing Syrian capability to participate in any action against Jordan. He adds that Ankara’s action will inevitably draw domestic Turkish attention away from the bitter dispute with Greece over Cyprus.

The Syrians, who have a traditional fear of Turkish designs on northern Syria, will probably reinforce their estimated 4,500 troops in the Aleppo and Latakia areas, and may seek a counter-gesture by the USSR.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
4. ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER PROMISES NEW TEST OF
RIGHTS ON GULF OF AQABA

Israeli foreign minister Meir informed Ambassador Lawson on 25 April that an Israeli-flag vessel would probably test Israel’s right to innocent passage through the straits of Tiran to the Israeli port of Eilat in a week or ten days. Mrs. Meir urged that the United States tell King Saud to refrain from public threats to halt Israeli vessels by force

At present no Israeli-flag merchantman is known to be within a week’s distance of the straits south of the Suez Canal. The Pandora, a Costa Rican vessel which Israel used under Israeli flag and under the name of Queen of Sheba last winter to carry cargo between East Africa and Eilat, transited the Suez Canal northbound on 22 April. The Attil, an Israeli-flag vessel which departed Haifa early in April for Eilat via the Cape of Good Hope, presumably is still off the West African coast and reportedly is not expected at Eilat until early June. The Israelis still have two frigates and armed launches in the Gulf of Aqaba, however, and it is possible that a test would consist of using these vessels, either alone or as protection for a foreign-flag vessel.

The American-owned tanker Kern Hills, which is under time charter to the Israeli government fuel corporation, has again loaded 15,000 tons of crude oil at Bandar Mashur, Iran, despite the Shah’s "order" to halt such shipments. The Kern Hills departed Bandar Mashur on schedule on 19 April, almost certainly headed for Eilat via Djibouti. It would reach Eilat about 28 April. Like the first cargo which it discharged at Eilat on 6 April, the Kern Hills’ second loading was for the account of the National Iranian Oil Company and was consigned to a firm located in Switzerland. The ship declared for Cape Town. The Kern Hills’ first passage to Eilat was protested strongly by Saudi Arabia and the other Arab states.
[PAGE 10]
5. EUROPEAN NEUTRAL BELT IDEA GAINS SUPPORT
IN BRITAIN

Growing support in Britain for Labor Party leader Gaitskell’s plan for a neutral belt in central Europe may bring the government to give it serious consideration.

In recent months Gaitskell has informally suggested that all foreign troops be withdrawn from a reunited Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, that their security be guaranteed, and that their national forces be limited and controlled. He asserts that NATO should not be dissolved merely because of Germany’s withdrawal. Publication on 25 April of Gaitskell’s book including the plan will bring increasing attention in Britain to the idea. On 25 April the influential London Times endorsed its substance, advising that "something of this kind is the only way forward in Europe."

The government would be especially vulnerable to wide popular pressure on this issue because the Gaitskell plan appears to draw its inspiration from proposals offered by Eden at the 1955 "summit" talks. Eden called for limitations and controls on all military forces in Germany and its neighbors and also suggested a demilitarized zone, apparently in Germany. The British government soon dropped this approach and now cautions against anything that might lead to a weakening of NATO.

This growing interest in the neutral belt concept will provide the USSR with further opportunities to press its proposals for a European zone of limitation and inspection of armaments as a step toward a collective security system for Europe.
[PAGE 11]
Europe. Soviet spokesmen continue to claim that their plan is based on Eden’s summit proposals. Soviet delegate Zorin told the American representative at the London disarmament conference on 16 April that establishment of a zone of limitation and inspection would set the stage for a collective security agreement and political settlements in Europe, and recalled that Britain had earlier proposed this. In his 20 April letter to Prime Minister Macmillan, Premier Bulganin stated that the USSR is ready "to resume discussion" of the Eden plan as a first step toward a collective security system.

Moscow probably will exploit interest in the neutral belt idea to counter the trend toward Western European integration and, with an eye to the West German elections in September, to encourage the Germans to believe that the USSR would make considerable concessions on reunification if Bonn would withdraw from NATO and agree to the neutralization of a united Germany within a European security system.
[PAGE 12]
6. MIKOYAN HINTS USSR DESIRES SUMMIT CONFERENCE

Soviet deputy premier Mikoyan’s remarks to Austrian officials on 24 April support other indications that the Soviet leaders intend to propose a top-level conference. He said that ways to a detente with the West "will simply have to be found" and suggested in this connection the possibility of a wide demilitarized zone in Europe. In contrast, he called the US proposal to ban further manufacture of atomic weapons without destroying present stockpiles merely a device to perpetuate Western superiority.

Mikoyan repeatedly stressed the USSR’s conviction that the United States genuinely desires world peace, and said that American efforts on behalf of peace during the Suez crisis had made a powerful impression on the Soviet government and people.
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
8. SUMATRAN LEADER SETS CONDITIONS FOR SETTLEMENT
WITH DJAKARTA

In a defiant speech in Padang on 23 April before a gathering which included Prime Minister Djuanda, Lt. Col. Husein of Central Sumatra listed 11 specific conditions for the settlement of differences between the Djakarta government and the non-Javanese provinces. These conditions included the "immediate abolition of centralism," recognition of the Central Sumatran governing council and legalization of actions it has taken since December, the return of former vice president Hatta to a position of joint national leadership with President Sukarno, a "proper financial understanding" between Djakarta and the provinces, and the organization of Sukarno’s proposed national advisory council into a senate which would represent the provinces.

Three of the conditions dealing with the army call for severe restriction of the authority of the army chief of staff, General Nasution. These particular terms probably reflect the demands which will be presented by Sumatran and other dissident leaders during the current army conference in Djakarta.

Sukarno is quite unlikely to accept the 11 conditions or even to use them as a broad basis for compromise. The outlook is for a continued deadlock as long as the provinces can maintain themselves economically and can resist efforts by Sukarno and Nasution to undercut provincial authority.
[PAGE 15]
9. MILITARY JUNTA SEEN IMMINENT IN HAITI

Mounting tension and continued deterioration of the political situation in Haiti will probably necessitate military control of the government in the near future. The army reportedly failed in an attempt to set up a military junta on 26 April, possibly because of reluctance of most of the army officers and because of opposition from at least two of the leading presidential candidates.

The 11-member executive council of government, composed of supporters of five presidential candidates, has been unable to deal with the continuing political and economic crises since it took office on 6 April. Constantly shifting loyalties and political maneuvering among the candidates and army officers apparently preclude the development of a stable government under the present administration.
[PAGE 16]
10. ALLEGED CHINESE BRIBERY BECOMING EFFECTIVE
CAMPAIGN ISSUE IN PHILIPPINE POLITICS

The opposition Liberal Party’s charges that government officials have accepted bribes on behalf of the Chinese refugees whose Philippine visas have expired are gaining public credence because of the Nacionalista Party’s inept reaction.

In protesting his own innocence, President Garcia has fostered the impression that such other important Nacionalistas as Senate president Rodriguez and Senator Laurel may be guilty. In addition, Nacionalista opposition to Liberal demands for a congressional investigation have strengthened public suspicion of government corruption.

The charges have stimulated intense public interest, and this issue may well decide the November election in their favor if it can be kept alive.

Comment

The practice of "soliciting" and accepting Chinese funds has been prevalent among Philippine officials in the past. The awkward Nacionalista response to the Liberal attack stems partly from the desire of rival bidders for the Nacionalista presidential nomination to use the charges against each other. In any event, the successful pinning of the corruption label on the Nacionalistas could be an important, and possibly decisive, factor in the November elections, as the Liberal Party knows from bitter experience.
