might yet enable Senanayake to squeak through Friday's vote, this would only postpone his government's fall. Governor General Goonetilleke now seems inclined to order new elections if Senanayake is defeated, rather than to call on the divided opposition to try to form a government.

Turkey: The three-month ban on all political activity announced in Ankara on 18 April followed several weeks of rising friction between the government and its political opposition, and at the least the move seems certain to increase tensions further. Administration spokesmen have accused the major opposition force, the Republican People's party, of "subversive, illegitimate, and illegal" activities, and have threatened that the Menderes government will "liquidate" that party. Meanwhile, recent attempts by the government to use the army for political purposes have caused dissatisfaction in military quarters, where Republican leader Inonu retains great popularity.

South Africa: UN Secretary General Hammarskjold believes that the South African Government's reply to his approach about visiting South Africa presents an opening for further negotiations and thus postpones the need for further UN action on that country, at least for the time being. The Union government has suggested that Hammarskjold meet Foreign Minister Louw in London at the close of the Commonwealth prime ministers' meeting on 11 May to discuss arrangements for a visit in July or August.

Within the Union, the failure of Black Africans to respond to calls for a work stoppage this week indicates that the virtual exhaustion of the urban Blacks' meager economic reserves, coupled with the widespread arrests of native leaders, has temporarily reduced Black African ability to organize antigovernment campaigns.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel Castro has been angered by recent decisions of the Cuban Supreme Court favoring owners of expropriated properties, and he may be planning to name President Osvaldo Dorticos to head the court in an effort to control it more closely.

20 Apr 60     DAILY BRIEF     ii
