[PAGE 01]
18 March 1955

Copy No. 88

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Comment on condition of Chinese Communist air bases in Fukien (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Vietnamese defense minister wary of military action against sects (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Right-wing British Laborites plan new tactics to ensure Bevan's expulsion (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Comment on condition of Chinese Communist air bases in Fukien:

the Chinese Commu-
nists have apparently not yet begun to
renovate the six airfields in the coastal
area of Southeast China opposite Formosa and the Nationalist-held
offshore islands (see map, p. 4).

Chinese Communist bombers can reach
the Matsus and Quemoys from existing bases outside Fukien
Province, but Peiping would probably want to ready some of the
Fukien fields in order to provide close-in jet fighter support prior
to launching major attacks on the islands. Operational air bases
in Fukien are considered essential for major operations against
Formosa.

The Chinese Communists are believed
capable of readying any one of the Fukien area fields for jet opera-
tions in five days' to two weeks' time.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Vietnamese defense minister wary of military action against sects:

The Vietnamese defense minister and
three other cabinet members believe
an attempt to solve the sect problem by
military means would result in a civil
war "which Diem cannot win."

[PAGE 04]
SOUTH CHINA COAST (inc. FORMOSA)
OFF-SHORE ISLANDS

Available Airfield (jet)
Available Airfield (conventional)
Airfield Site
Nationalist-held Islands

[PAGE 05]
Diem is more worried about the Binh Xuyen than about the other
sects. The premier asked General Ely to request the return of
two armed corvettes which the French provided the Binh Xuyen
and also asked that Ely supply the Vietnamese army with tanks.
The Vietnamese general staff believes the Binh Xuyen is currently
capable of isolating and controlling Saigon.

Comment: Diem's current tactics against
the sects stress political maneuvers--for the most part the lavish
distribution of bribes--rather than force. By such means, he hopes
to weaken the sects as a whole to the extent that a military solution
would be feasible.

Such subordinate commanders as he has
been able to buy off, however, are likely to stay "bought" only so
long as funds are forthcoming. In the meantime, the Binh Xuyen,
whose armed forces are the most effective, have not been weakened.
Their lucrative holdings appear to be such as to put them beyond any
price Diem could raise.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Right-wing British Laborites plan new tactics to ensure Bevan's
expulsion:

The narrow majority (141-112) by which
Aneurin Bevan's Labor Party status in
parliament was removed may make it
necessary for the right-wing elements
to adopt new tactics in
order to ensure his expulsion from the party,
according to the American embassy in London.

Right-wing leaders, including the former
chancellor of the exchequer and the heads of three of Britain's top
trade unions, are considering "cornering" Bevan before the Na-
tional Executive Committee meets on 23 March. An "abject apology"
is being prepared which, it is expected, Bevan will refuse to sign.
He could then be expelled without greatly endangering party unity.

According to the embassy, the closeness of
the 16 March vote is explained by Attlee's deliberate failure to make
the issue a test of confidence. He refused to state that the "shadow
cabinet" would resign if its motion were defeated.

Comment: Identification of the right-wing
leaders confirms the impression that trade union leaders are re-
sponsible for the determined effort to purge Bevan. Their determi-
nation contrasts sharply with Attlee's continued vacillation, and may
presage growing criticism of his leadership.
