Venezuelan Policy Toward Cuba and the Dominican Republic

Venezuelan President Betancourt has told Ambassador Sparks that he is completely disenchanted with Fidel Castro and that he would play a leading role in bringing hemisphere attention to bear on the Cuban problem if Dominican dictator Trujillo were ousted beforehand. Betancourt insists, however, that any effort to present the Cuban problem to the Organization of American States (OAS) before Trujillo's ouster would not have the support of more than three other Latin American countries--Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Honduras. He evidently is aware of the charges of Cuban intervention presented to the OAS on 25 April by Guatemala, which has now broken diplomatic relations with Havana. Honduras may also take this action soon for similar reasons.

The question of policy toward Cuba is a potential threat to the viability of the three-party coalition of Betancourt, who has admitted that Castro supporters in Venezuela are causing difficulties for the Caracas government. Among the strong political groups seeking closer Venezuelan-Cuban ties are the dissident leftist wing which recently broke away from Betancourt's own Democratic Action party, the principal Venezuelan labor organization, the Communists, and the Democratic Republican Union, which is a dissatisfied member of the government coalition.

Betancourt is a long-standing enemy of Trujillo, and his hatred has been intensified by Dominican support of the 20-21 April uprising of Venezuelan military dissidents and the possibility that Trujillo will soon assist another group of Venezuelan plotters. Trujillo has also alienated Colombia, which is considering breaking diplomatic relations and lodging a formal complaint against Trujillo in the OAS. The complaint would be based on Dominican documentation used by the Venezuelan dissident leaders to enter Colombia before the revolt. Betancourt's regime, which has already lodged charges in the OAS against the Dominican Republic for flagrant violation of human rights, would support Colombia in this move.

According to the Venezuelan foreign minister, Ecuador is on the verge of breaking relations with the Dominican Republic and will probably be followed by Peru and later Panama.

29 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
