Lebanese Political Developments

The Lebanese Government's emergency decree powers, obtained last November, are scheduled to expire on 13 June. The speaker of the National Assembly has announced that a special session of Parliament will convene on 12 June, and that the government will remain in office until it is dismissed by President Shihab or receives a vote of no confidence from the assembly.

Although both Foreign Minister Uwayni and Interior Minister Edde have announced they intend to resign shortly after 13 June, President Shihab hopes to persuade the members of the present four-man cabinet to remain. Shihab also intends to add an unspecified number of new ministers in order to continue present policies and avoid political turmoil by spreading the administrative burden. However, the problem of appeasing the many religious and political factions in such a government expansion may result in increased tension. Moslem-Christian antagonism has been relatively quiescent during the seven-month tenure of the present cabinet.

Lebanese security forces, although they are being reorganized, still are not in a position to control effectively any serious resumption of internal strife. Some arms have been seized during recent sorties against both Christian and Moslem villages, but sizable quantities of weapons are still in the hands of the several factions.

The agreement on oil pipeline revenues just concluded between the government and the Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) may have enhanced the prestige of Prime Minister Karami and could increase his chance of remaining at the head of a reorganized government. The agreement was prearranged by Karami with the IPC so that his overt intervention and "solution" of the complicated negotiations would give an impression of astuteness. Under the terms of the agreement concluded on 3 June, Beirut's annual revenues will be raised from the present $1,008,000 to about $3,433,000. In addition Lebanon will receive a $16,174,040 payment in settlement of government claims dating to 1952. Karami signed an economic agreement with the UAR during his current visit to Cairo.
