III. THE WEST

Adenauer's Decision to Remain Chancellor Provokes Sharp Criticism

Chancellor Adenauer, by remaining chancellor, has forfeited some degree of respect and authority in his Christian Democratic Union (CDU), and dissident CDU elements will now be strengthened and encouraged to assert their own views increasingly in hindering government policy. Adenauer's move has created unprecedented confusion and resentment in the CDU; party leaders endorsed his decision on 5 June only to maintain the "best face" possible and avoid splitting the party. For the present, the party is likely to attempt to maintain this solid front on major issues.

Ambassador Bruce comments that Adenauer acted against the advice of even his closest Bonn advisers, and has provoked almost unanimous condemnation in the pro-CDU press. Even Adenauer's mouthpiece, the Koelnische Rundschau, failed for the first time to support him, questioning why the alleged "well-considered" decision in April to accept the presidency should be "ill-considered and wrong" only 58 days later. American officials in Bonn comment that Adenauer is no longer pictured as a master politician but as a man no longer capable of choosing and holding "a clear and correct course."

Adenauer's decision is being interpreted throughout the Bundestag and press not as a move dictated by the foreign political situation but as an effort to retain personal power and deny it to Economics Minister Erhard, whom Adenauer felt he could not control from the presidency. In a private interview with a journalist long very close to him, Adenauer stressed his intense opposition to Erhard, and maintained that the CDU had not sufficiently matured in the right direction for him to relinquish control. He also informed the journalist that French Premier Debré had warned him of French apprehensions over Erhard as chancellor.

The CDU is in complete confusion and has postponed until 15 June choosing its presidential candidate for the 1 July election. With no agreement on a strong CDU nominee, the chances for the popular Social Democratic candidate, Carlo Schmid, are improved.
