Laos

The rebellious Pathet Lao battalion apparently has escaped again from loosely encircling Laotian Army forces. Although the army had taken up new positions near the battalion on the morning of 3 June as part of a plan to crush its resistance, battalion personnel are reported to have slipped between army units that night, headed toward the North Vietnamese frontier. On 4 June a Laotian Defense Ministry spokesman told foreign military attachés that, with the dispersal of the Pathet battalion, the government's operation was finished and that a "mission accomplished" announcement would be forthcoming.

Before this indirect admission of failure is made, the army may make further attempts to contact the rebel unit. However, in view of the army's inability in the past to maintain even nominal contact with the battalion, it seems likely that any such efforts would again be inconclusive.

The Laotian cabinet on 6 June decided to release leaders of the Communist-front Neo Lao Hak Zat, who have been under house arrest, but to maintain surveillance of their activities, according to the American Embassy in Vientiane. This decision was made apparently because of insufficient evidence for prosecuting them on charges of incitement to rebellion and in deference to Western fears that the bloc would seize on such prosecution as a violation of the Geneva truce agreements. The crown prince, whose views are aggressively represented in the cabinet by young reformist elements, is believed strongly opposed to release of the leaders and may be considering the advisability of attempting to reverse the decision.

North Vietnam is continuing its heavy propaganda blasts against Laotian Government "provocations." The American army attaché in Vientiane comments that Hanoi's charges of Laotian incitement to "civil war" on the North Vietnamese frontier could set the stage for intervention by "volunteers." Most recently, Hanoi radio has alleged that Laotian Army reconnaissance planes had violated North Vietnam's air space on 5 June for the third consecutive day.
