[PAGE 01]
30 January 1953

COPY NO. 59

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

2. Tito hints acceptance of Trieste compromise and Italian participation in Balkan pact (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Israel may transfer Foreign Office to Jerusalem around 15 March (page 5).

6. Sudan disorders predicted if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations fail (page 6).

7. Tito proposes treaty with Greece and Turkey (page 6).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

2. Tito hints acceptance of Trieste compromise and Italian participation in Balkan pact:

Turkish Foreign Minister Koprulu told Ambassador Peurifoy in Athens that, in reply to his suggestion that provision be made for eventual Italian adherence to a Balkan defense pact, Tito said that this could probably be arranged and that the Trieste issue itself was capable of "reasonably prompt solution."

Kopru[u] deplores Premier de Gasperi's attempts to have the West exert pressure on Belgrade in order to achieve a favorable Trieste solution. The Turkish Foreign Minister hopes that after the Italian elections it will be possible to obtain an early solution of the Trieste issue and secure Italian adherence to a Greek-Turkish-Yugoslav protocol.

[PAGE 04]
Tito hints acceptance of Trieste compromise and Italian participation in Balkan pact:

Comment: Tito has offered to put aside the Trieste question in order to achieve closer economic and military collaboration with Italy. In a private conversation earlier this month the Italian political adviser in Trieste admitted that Premier de Gasperi would be able to make substantial concessions on Trieste after the Italian elections.

[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Israel may transfer Foreign Office to Jerusalem around 15 March:

The French Charge in Tel Aviv has been informed by the Israeli Foreign Minister that the Ben Gurion government will transfer its Foreign Office from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem around 15 March. The Charge also stated that other diplomatic missions have apparently been told by the Israelis that the move would take place "before summer."

According to the American Ambassador in Paris, current opinion in the French Foreign Ministry favors an immediate démarche against the proposed move by the United States, Britain and France.

Comment: Israel has long insisted that Jerusalem is its real capital and has accordingly transferred all the governmental departments, except the Foreign Office, to the Israeli part of the city.

[PAGE 06]
An Israeli "fait accompli" in regard to the transfer would be strongly opposed by all the Arab states, with the exception of Jordan, which now shares de facto control of the city. It would also meet vigorous opposition from the Vatican, and from many Latin American countries which favor the internationalization of Jerusalem.

6. Sudan disorders predicted if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations fail:

At Khartoum, a British citizen with 26 years of experience in the Sudan, believes that serious outbreaks will occur there if an Anglo-Egyptian agreement is not reached. He believes Britain is losing the good will of the Sudanese and may jeopardize its future position by prolonged delay in concluding a settlement.

Comment: Other sources have stated that disorders in the Sudan may occur if Anglo-Egyptian negotiations on self-government fail. Reports also indicate that Egypt has succeeded in gaining considerable Sudanese support by insisting on a greater degree of independence than the British have proposed.

7. Tito proposes treaty with Greece and Turkey:

Turkish Foreign Minister Koprulu told Ambassador Peurifoy on 28 January that, during recent Belgrade talks, Tito had proposed a "tripartite treaty of friendship" between Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia. Koprulu had expressed his approval provided the treaty in no way contravened prevailing NATO obligations, and had stated he hoped that such a political arrangement would be a step toward Yugoslav membership in NATO.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Turkey has previously reported that Tito has been pressing for specific mutual security commitments. It has assured Britain and the United States that it would make no military or political arrangements which might contravene its NATO obligations.

There is widespread Western agreement that Yugoslavia should eventually be associated with NATO, but that the time is not yet ripe.
