The USSR Refutes Chinese Views

The Soviet Union has used the major speech given in Mos-
cow in commemoration of Lenin's 90th birthday to refute the
views recently expressed by the Chinese Communists in their
two Red Flag editorials on the same occasion. Attributing the
Chinese views to "bold publicists in the West," Presidium mem-
ber Otto Kuusinen, without mentioning Communist China, con-
demned those who assert that Lenin was an opponent of peace-
ful coexistence.

Claiming that "these falsifiers" take from Lenin's works
only those passages which support their own thesis, Kuusinen
maintained that Lenin developed the idea of peaceful economic
competition in the world. Contradicting the Chinese, who in-
sist that wars are inevitable so long as imperialism exists,
Kuusinen stated that the conclusions reached at the 20th and
21st party congresses about "the absence of inevitability of
wars in our epoch" are "a new contribution to Marxism."

Kuusinen noted that to be loyal to Marxism-Leninism to-
day it is not enough to repeat the old truth that imperialism is
aggressive--as the Chinese do. To look on only this one side
of the question is "dogmatism," he said, and such dogmatism is
obsolete. Kuusinen alleged that Lenin foresaw long ago that
"the time will come when war will become so destructive as to
be impossible."

In developing the theme that the strength of the socialist
world will soon be such that it cannot fail to win out in peace-
ful competition, Kuusinen made the interesting observation that
the significance of violence is soon exhausted, but that "influ-
ence and example will tell." He asserted, therefore, that the
Leninist policy of peaceful coexistence, now being followed by
the Soviet Union, is the only correct and vital policy.

Kuusinen's observation echoes Khrushchev's admonition in
Peiping last September that Communists should not "test the
stability of the capitalist system by force." The speech as a
whole is an expression of Khrushchev's view that bloc coun-
tries should do nothing to jeopardize forthcoming negotiations
in which the West will have no choice but to make accommoda-
tions to Communist demands because of the shift in the balance
of power.

26 Apr 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
