[PAGE 01]
5 November 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

4. RETURN OF BEN YOUSSEF TO MOROCCAN THRONE
EXPECTED BY 18 NOVEMBER (page 6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 7)

5 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
4. RETURN OF BEN YOUSSEF TO MOROCCAN THRONE
EXPECTED BY 18 NOVEMBER

A French Foreign Ministry spokesman
has told American embassy officials
that Mohamed ben Youssef will prob-
ably be restored to the Moroccan
throne before 18 November, the anniversary of his ac-
cession to the throne in 1927.

The official assumed that Paris would
simultaneously accept the resignation Resident General
Boyer de Latour has tendered several times recently.
Leon Marchal, secretary general of the Council of Eu-
rope, who resigned from the Foreign Ministry in 1953
in protest against Ben Youssef's removal, and General
Marie Bethouart, who currently represents the French
of Morocco in the French Council of the Republic, were
mentioned as possible successors.

Comment

Pressure is being built up by the na-
tionalists to keep Ben Youssef from
making concessions before returning to Morocco, while
Paris is believed to be trying to reach a favorable agree-
ment with the former sultan before he returns. Current
activities of the Moroccan nationalists in their demands
for independence raise doubts that Ben Youssef's return
will quiet the country.

5 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700 4 November)

Military action, aside from a minor
skirmish in the southern part of the Gaza area on the
morning of 4 November and sporadic fighting in the El
Auja area, appears to have ceased,

The Israeli Foreign Ministry announced
on 3 November: "The Israeli Defense Force operation was
aimed at removing the Egyptian forces from Israeli area."
This, according to Israeli spokesmen, has been accomplished.

According to a UN observer, about 750
Israeli troops participated in the attack. This official also
reported that on the evening of 3 November UN observers
were again given freedom of movement on the Israeli side
but not on the Egyptian side. Israeli statements and atti-
tudes suggest that they are ready to consider this particular
incident closed.

5 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7
[PAGE 09]
Israel, continuing its drive to secure
military equipment, has contacted a Belgian firm for im-
mediate delivery of 300 rocket launchers with 20-30,000
3.5 rocket rounds.

Syria moved 1,000 troops and some equipment
toward the Israeli frontier on 3 November. Although Iraq
on 31 August was trying to promote bilateral pacts with
Lebanon and Syria aimed at countering Cairo's alignment
with Damascus, the Iraqi press has called for a closing
of ranks against Israeli aggressions.

General Burns, chief of the UN truce
organization, is expected back in Palestine on 6 November
to impress both sides with the need to observe the truce.
An Israeli spokesman, commenting on the anticipated ar-
rival of Burns stated, "We shall co-operate fully with
General Burns in any effort he makes to bring about a re-
duction of tension."

Soviet ambassador Abramov returned
to Israel yesterday after six weeks in the USSR.

5 Nov 55     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8
[PAGE 10]
