Situation in Laos

assessing the capabilities and intentions of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces in the Plaine des Jarres area, conclude, on the basis of present indications, that the enemy will fight a delaying action along Route 7 preparatory to making a major stand either at Muong Soui or on the Plaine des Jarres itself. They estimate that the force now in contact with government troops just east of the Phou Khoun junction of Routes 13 and 7 consists of about two battalions, supported by a battery of 105-mm. howitzers, a few 120-mm. mortars, and two to four armored cars. This force could be reinforced by an estimated four battalions (1,200 to 1,500 men) for a sudden counterattack on the government forces; however, it is considered more likely that the bulk of this reserve will be used in the defense of Muong Soui or the Plaine des Jarres. A potent factor in any delaying action would be the use of antitank mines, which the enemy has recently introduced into the fighting.

The assessment notes reports of intensive recruitment activity on the part of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao combine, both for new troops and work gangs to be used in road improvement and construction of defensive positions. The Pathet Lao are considered poorly trained, with North Vietnamese advisers in most cases providing tactical guidance down to the company level. With regard to logistics, it is estimated that a minimum of 40 tons of supplies are being landed daily by Soviet aircraft at the Plaine des Jarres airfield complex. This tonnage is apparently being augmented by an undetermined amount of supplies being moved in by truck via Route 7 from North Vietnam.

Despite the defensive tactics being pursued by the enemy in Xieng Khouang Province at the present time, the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces retain the over-all initiative in Laos through their ability to mount guerrilla attacks on widely scattered government posts.

South Vietnam reportedly plans shortly to send a special army team to Laos, to be attached to Phoumi's staff.

9 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
