President Nasir Extends Control Over Syria

There are increasing indications that President Nasir will issue a new unified currency, probably on 22 February--the third anniversary of the United Arab Republic.

More than 15 million new "dinar" notes with a face value of almost $215 million were printed in the UK in early spring 1959, and issuance apparently was scheduled to begin about July 1959. However, pressures from leading Syrian politicians and businessmen caused Nasir to postpone this action until his political control was more firmly established.

The economic philosophies of the leaders of Egypt and Syria are quite dissimilar. Cairo has moved far in implementing Nasir's "socialist, democratic cooperative" concept which calls for substantial government ownership and economic control. With such control Nasir has been able to facilitate long-term economic planning, utilize large Communist credits, and direct private investment according to government design. Foreign exchange restrictions are essential for such an operation.

In Syria, meanwhile, a free enterprise system has continued with relatively little interference from Damascus. In fact most of the important Syrian leaders have fully supported this system, realizing that with very limited government resources the success of the country's overambitious economic plan depended on full cooperation from the private sector. However, as Nasir added more and more controls in the Egyptian region, Syrian businessmen began to lose confidence. A substantial capital flight took place and foreign exchange reserves dropped to all-time lows. This, coupled with three successive years of drought, brought the country's economy to a low level of activity.

In an effort to restore confidence, UAR Vice President Nur al-Din Kahhalah, a Syrian who is in charge of planning for the Syrian region, proposed a UAR guarantee for foreign and domestic private investment in Syria. Acting for the

9 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
