I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
No Back-up Material

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR to Allow Israeli-chartered Ships Through Suez Canal

The UAR has made a concession in the dispute over Israeli Suez Canal traffic. In order to avoid UN Security Council consideration of the recent UAR seizures of cargoes from two Israeli-chartered neutral ships, Cairo officials now say Israeli-chartered ships outbound from Israel will be permitted to pass through the canal with cargoes intact under certain conditions--there must be nothing in the cargoes to endanger the canal's security, and the ship's manifests must show third-party ownership of the cargoes. UAR officials reluctantly made this decision after discussing the dispute with UN Under Secretary General Bunche.

The UAR considered the Israeli-chartered Capetan Manolis and Lealott to be, in effect, "enemy ships" but allowed them to transit the canal in March "out of deference" to their Liberian and West German flags. The cargoes they had loaded in Israel, however, were confiscated and are still in UAR possession, even though they are owned by countries other than Israel. In explaining why these seizures suddenly had been made, Cairo officials told Bunche they had only recently learned of Israeli chartering arrangements.

Neutral ships in the past have been allowed through the canal with cargoes of Israeli origin without questions concerning their charterers. Since the seizures, another West German freighter chartered by an Israeli firm has transited the canal without interference, giving rise to Israeli fears the UAR policy may now be one of intermittent harassment.

(Israeli Ambassador Eban said early this month three more ships with Israeli cargoes are scheduled to pass through the canal soon; the first will arrive at Port Said in late April. It is not clear whether or not these ships will be under Israeli charter. Eban reiterated that if UN efforts to resolve the dispute failed, Israel would make a formal complaint to the UN Security Council.)

27 Apr 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
