[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
9 May 1959
Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 49
NO CHANGE IN CLASS. X
DECLASS.
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH:
DATE: 11/18
REVIEWER:

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Geneva foreign ministers' meeting: Soviet preconference tactics suggest that Moscow plans a number of procedural skirmishes at the foreign ministers' conference before discussing substantive issues. The Soviet member of the group making final technical arrangements for the conference cited the absence of agreement on participation in the conference, including the status of the two German delegations, and said this should be settled by the ministers before the first meeting. He argued that the German delegations should be seated with the four great powers.
[PAGE 05]
Thailand - North Vietnam: Thailand apparently has agreed to direct talks between its National Red Cross organization and the North Vietnamese Red Cross on repatriating the bulk of the predominantly pro-Communist 50,000 Vietnamese refugees in northeast Thailand. Such talks would represent an important departure from Bangkok's policy of avoiding any direct contact with Communist North Vietnam and, if successful, would give Hanoi a major propaganda victory at the expense of the Diem regime in South Vietnam.

Laos: Laotian officials appear adamant in their opposition to continued French control of Laotian Army training, despite French claims that the Laotians prefer French training. The Laotian leaders identify the French Army with defeat in the Indochina war and also object to what they consider the "colonial arrogance" and inefficiency of French officers. Paris, preparing for early US-French talks on the problem, insists that any American role be limited to "technical training," with only French personnel supervising combat training.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Tactics at Geneva

Soviet preconference tactics suggest that Moscow plans a number of procedural skirmishes at the foreign ministers' conference before opening substantive discussions. The USSR apparently is attempting to force the ministers to meet before the opening session to discuss outstanding procedural questions including the composition. The Soviet member of the four-power group responsible for technical arrangements in Geneva stated on 7 May that nothing could take place until the ministers had decided who should participate in the first meeting, and he flatly asserted that the Germans should be seated at the table. He also rejected a "square-shaped conference table on the grounds that it would "prevent more than four participating powers." Already, Soviet propaganda has begun to refer to the talks as "the round-table conference in Geneva."

Soviet notes of 30 March had stated that the question of Polish and Czech "participation" could be settled at the conference itself, and that the question of the "representation" of the two German states was a "decided matter." This vague wording was accepted as indicating a desire not to obstruct the convening of a foreign ministers' conference by prior insistence on the composition; it reserved the USSR's right, however, to bring this matter up as soon as the conference convened. There have been hints that the USSR may intend to bring the nuclear test cessation issue before the foreign ministers' conference.

The Soviet delegate to the nuclear test talks asked the British delegate on 6 May for his views on the possibility of putting some of the unresolved issues of test suspension before the foreign ministers. Again, on 7 May he stated that the question of continuing sessions during the foreign ministers' conference would depend to a great extent on whether the ministers discuss the test cessation issue. Soviet leaders may anticipate that, by introducing the nuclear test issue at the foreign ministers'
[PAGE 08]
conference, they can obtain agreement in principle for their present proposal at the Geneva nuclear test talks for a predetermined quota of annual on-site inspections of phenomena suspected of having been nuclear explosions. They could then maintain that the actual number of annual inspections would be a suitable subject for discussion and agreement at the summit.

The counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Paris suggested to a US official that the USSR would be willing to guarantee the Berlin status quo in return for a reduction in Allied forces there, and an agreement to cease subversive activities in both East and West Berlin. Apart from Berlin, he said, the main points for discussion should be a German peace treaty and force reductions in Central Europe, taking into account the 1954 Paris agreements forbidding German development and possession of atomic weapons. He added that all parties would have to recognize the Oder-Neisse boundary.
[PAGE 09]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
Thailand Plans Red Cross Talks With North Vietnam on Refugees

The Thai Government has accepted Hanoi's proposal for direct talks between the Thai and North Vietnamese National Red Cross chapters concerning the possible repatriation of the bulk of the 50,000 predominantly pro-Communist Vietnamese refugees in northeast Thailand, according to the Bangkok World, a usually reliable English-language daily. This climaxes months of serious consideration of the refugee problem by Thai authorities and an on-the-scene observation of the refugee communities by a representative of the International Committee for the Red Cross. Bangkok reportedly will select its delegates to the conference next week, but the location is still undecided, with North Vietnam apparently favoring Geneva and Thailand arguing for a nearby neutral country.

Talks between the respective National Red Cross chapters of the two countries would represent a departure from Thailand's policy of avoiding any contacts with Communist North Vietnam, attesting to the importance Marshal Sarit attaches to solution of this long-standing security problem. The Thais may also have become convinced that current talks in Geneva of a similar nature between the Japanese and North Korean Red Cross chapters have provided them with a precedent which will minimize any adverse reaction from Thailand's Western allies.

There is some chance the talks may break down, particularly over arrangements for screening the refugees; however, if they should succeed, North Vietnam will achieve a major propaganda victory at the expense of the Diem regime in South Vietnam, which had earlier refused to accept the refugees.
[PAGE 14]
Laos Seeking Replacement of French in Military Training Role

On the eve of US-French negotiations in Paris on military training responsibilities in Laos, Laotian leaders remain strongly opposed to continued French control of army training, preferring American instruction instead. They identify the French Army with defeat at Dien Bien Phu and object to what they describe as the colonial arrogance and inefficiency of French officers. Laotian delegations to South Vietnam, by way of contrast, have been greatly impressed by the rapid progress of the Vietnamese armed forces under US guidance.

France is willing to turn over logistical training of the Laotian Army to the United States, but is strongly opposed to American participation in combat training. This position stems from France's desire to maintain its influence in Laos through its integral military role and from its concern over Communist reaction to any such "flagrant violation of the 1954 Geneva agreements," which Paris insists are still valid in Laos. The French apparently are confident that a bilateral accord reached with the US at Paris can be imposed on Laos without difficulty.

Until this problem is solved, effective training of the 24,000-man Laotian Army will continue to be delayed. The Phoui government is counting heavily on the army to implement its anti-Communist reform program.
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 18]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
