[PAGE 01]
2 February 1956
Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET BLOC REACTION TO PRESIDENT EISENHOWER'S REPLY TO BULGANIN (page 3).

2. SOVIET MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS REPLACED (page 4).

3. SOVIET MILITARY AND ECONOMIC "AID" PROGRAMS (page 5).

4. PROSPECTIVE HATOYAMA SUCCESSOR STATES VIEWS ON COMMUNIST CHINA (page 6).

5. PRINCE SIHANOUK OF CAMBODIA DEPARTING SHORTLY FOR VISIT TO PEIPING

6. SOUTH AFRICA DEMANDS CLOSING OF SOVIET CONSULATE GENERAL (page 8).

7. USSR INTENSIFIES OVERTURES TO WEST EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS (page 9).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 10)
[PAGE 04]
1. SOVIET BLOC REACTION TO PRESIDENT EISENHOWER'S
REPLY TO BULGANIN

The Soviet press and radio have not yet
published President Eisenhower's reply to Premier Bulganin's proposal and
there has been no authoritative official
or editorial reaction. Ambassador Bohlen has suggested that the Soviet leaders
are withholding publication of the President's reply until its effect can be offset by another message
from Bulganin. He also reported that Moscow has made a
special effort to jam VOA broadcasts of the President's reply not only in Russian but in other languages.

The Moscow press and radio have begun,
however, to prepare the Russian people for publication of
the President's reply. Moscow radio has commented that
American "unwillingness to accept the proposal has caused
profound disillusionment among the supporters of peace and
relaxation of international tension."

Most Satellite media have taken note of
the President's rejection of the treaty. A Czech broadcast
on 29 January said, "Bulganin has now put the American
President's sincerity to the test . . . Eisenhower failed
in this test." In his 30 January speech, Chou En-lai stated,
"It is regrettable that the United States authorities have quickly rejected the Soviet proposal" and insisted that it "definitely
cannot be pushed aside by an offhand rejection."
[PAGE 05]
2. SOVIET MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS REPLACED

The appointment of N. P. Dudorov to
replace Colonel General S. N. Kruglov
as Soviet minister of internal affairs
(MVD) brings all police functions, secret
and regular, under the immediate direction of men politically
loyal to Khrushchev and will probably strengthen Khrushchev's
control of the party's central committee.

In addition to its responsibility for overt
police functions, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is concerned
with the supply of labor to major construction projects. Dudorov,
apparently a construction specialist, rose to prominence in the
the Moscow city party organization and became a deputy mayor
of Moscow at a time when Khrushchev was the Moscow Oblast
party boss. When Khrushchev reorganized the party central
committee's apparatus early last year, he picked Dudorov to
head the newly created construction department under the party's secretariat. Dudorov will probably also replace Kruglov
on the central committee to be elected this month at the 20th
Party Congress.
[PAGE 06]
3. SOVIET MILITARY AND ECONOMIC "AID" PROGRAMS MERGED

the Soviet organization
responsible for foreign trade in military items, the Engineering Directorate, had been subordinated to the Chief Directorate for Economic Relations
(GUES). Prior to April 1955, GUES was formed as a unit
within the Foreign Trade Ministry to co-ordinate Moscow's
military and economic "aid" programs. It was subsequently removed from this ministry and given a semiautonomous
status directly under the Soviet Council of Ministers.

These transfers centralize authority
over the planning and execution of all Soviet foreign assistance programs in a single agency under the direct command
of the Soviet leaders. This action indicates that the USSR's
widely publicized foreign assistance program for non-Communist, underdeveloped areas is intended to be a long-term
program. (Prepared jointly with ORR).
[PAGE 07]
4. PROSPECTIVE HATOYAMA SUCCESSOR STATES
VIEWS ON COMMUNIST CHINA

Secretary General Kishi of the
Liberal-Democratic Party, who is
expected to succeed to the premiership later this year, told Ambassador Allison on 31 January that Japan desires to increase
trade with Communist China but that no top conservative leaders are pressing for recognition of the Peiping regime.
He said he considered it most important for Japan to continue its alignment with American policy toward the Chinese Communists.

Most Japanese conservative leaders
have indicated awareness that Japan's best interests are
dependent on the friendship of the United States. They also
realize that moves for relations with Peiping are not feasible at this time. They believe, however, that Japan must
deal with Communist China in order to achieve economic
independence and a more independent foreign policy.

Along with many other influential Japanese, Kishi hopes a relaxation of international tension
will lead the United States to adopt policies which will permit normal Japanese relations with the Peiping regime.
[PAGE 08]
5. PRINCE SIHANOUK OF CAMBODIA DEPARTING SHORTLY FOR VISIT TO PEIPING

Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia is
leaving for a visit to Peiping on
13 February, according to the
Indian charge in Phnom Penh.

The American embassy comments
that the trip must not be viewed as any veering toward Communism on Sihanouk's part and doubts that recognition of the Peiping regime will result from the trip.

Comment  In view of Sihanouk's unpredictable
nature, it would not be surprising
for him to agree to establish diplomatic relations with
Communist China while visiting Peiping.

Sihanouk in effect requested an invitation during a press interview in Tokyo last December.

The Peiping visit will help him in his
efforts to establish a reputation as a neutral. Despite
these efforts, he has repeatedly acknowledged Cambodia's
dependence on American aid for its defense.
[PAGE 09]
6. SOUTH AFRICA DEMANDS CLOSING OF SOVIET
CONSULATE GENERAL

The South African government's demand
of 1 February that the Soviet consulate
general in Pretoria be closed by 1 March
is in keeping with that government's strong
anti-Communist policy. There is little Soviet commercial
activity in South Africa and local authorities considered the
consulate a center of Communist intrigue. The consulate in
Pretoria has been the only official Soviet representation in
Africa south of Ethiopia.

South African foreign minister Louw had
indicated last November that some such action might be taken
against the consulate after it violated local laws by serving
liquor to Africans at an official reception. In the demand for
closing of the consulate, Louw charged that propaganda broadcasts from Moscow were inciting racial discord and stated
that the consulate had cultivated contacts with subversive elements. The closing of the consulate is not expected to have an
appreciable effect on Communist influence in the area. While
this influence is not a major problem, Communist doctrines
are spread by Africans and other non-Europeans returning
from trips to the Sino-Soviet bloc countries.

South African officials have shown increasing concern over the Soviet threat to Africa, particularly in
view of the Soviet-Liberian discussions over diplomatic representation last month. They have stepped up efforts to interest African colonial powers in a continental defense pact to
guard against the growing Soviet threat through Egypt and the
Sudan.
[PAGE 10]
7. USSR INTENSIFIES OVERTURES TO WEST EUROPEAN
SOCIALISTS

Western European representatives to
the Bureau of the Socialist International, meeting in London on 30 January, have reported intensified Soviet approaches to Socialist parties. Invitations to visit the
USSR have been accepted by the French Socialists, rejected by the Norwegians, and are still to be considered
by the Austrian, Danish, and Dutch parties. This Soviet
initiative is to be discussed at a meeting of the Council
of the Socialist International in Zurich in March.

The US embassy in London believes
that Khrushchev and Bulganin may invite the British Labor
Party to send a delegation to the Soviet Union next spring,
during or even before the Soviet leaders' visit to the United
Kingdom.

According to Fritz Heine, West German
Socialist (SPD) representative at the Bureau meeting, Soviet
ambassador Zorin in Bonn has hinted that he would like to meet SPD leader Ollenhauer in the near future. Heine believes the Soviet leaders may invite Ollenhauer and the party
executive to visit Moscow.

Comment  These overtures to Western European
Socialists are part of a continuing Soviet
effort to overcome Socialist opposition and distrust toward
local Communist proposals for "popular fronts" and electoral
alliances and to encourage Socialist support of Soviet foreign
policy positions on such issues as disarmament, European
security, and German unity.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 1 February)

Press reports from Cairo state that the
Egyptian army is holding maneuvers in east Sinai with new
arms. The Egyptian foreign liaison officer refused to confirm
this, claiming that as of 31 January no maneuvers were taking
place.

Egyptian prime minister Nasr stated
he believed Syria would take military action if Israel
again tried to divert Jordan River water at Banat Yacov, and
that Egypt has decided to support Syria militarily.
Nasr said, however, that he would
insist that Syria give both the US and the UN an opportunity to
persuade Israel to stop such "provocative and illegal action."

Syria, in an aide-memoire stated
that it continued to hold to its position stated in its complaint to
the UN Security Council of 16 October 1953 that an Israeli attempt to resume work to divert the Jordan River would be a new
breach of the general armistice agreement, a violation of the
Security Council decision, and a provocation threatening the peace
and security of the area.

Critics of the Nasr regime are coming to
believe that the Israeli problem should be dealt with by force.

These critics believe that if Egypt has
in fact received Soviet arms to the extent publicized, the Egyptian army should strike before the West can provide Israel with
weapons. Nasr is well aware of this
attitude and, although he is sincerely opposed to war with Israel,
[PAGE 12]
he admits that present conditions may force him into some
sort of limited war.

UN secretary general Hammarskjold
believes that a settlement of the Arab-Israeli problem might now be possible and that the next few months offer a better
opportunity than might arise in the future. Hammarskjold
thinks Nasr wants peace now but he is not so certain that in
the long run the Egyptians will continue to seek a settlement.
On the other hand, he believes there is danger from Israel in
the immediate future.

Hammarskjold has been thinking of requesting "quadripartite intervention" in working toward an Arab-Israeli settlement. He is presumably thinking of Soviet participation
in the deliberations of the tripartite powers, the US, Britain,
and France.
