[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
INFORMATION
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Propaganda build-up of Malenkov begins (page 3).

FAR EAST
2.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Viet Minh attack against northern Laos indicated (page 4).
4. Burmese Premier reportedly sees crisis in American-Burmese relations (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
5. Comment on Italian court decision on Iranian oil (page 5).
6.
7. Turkey presses Iraq for commitment on MEDO (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Bonn government confident of treaty approval by Bundesrat (page 7).
9.
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Propaganda build-up of Malenkov begins:
The American Embassy in Moscow reports indications already appearing of an effort to build up Malenkov's prestige. Pravda on 10 March printed a picture of Stalin, Mao, and Malenkov at the 1950 signing of the Sino-Soviet Treaty. A comparison with the original shows that a wholesale retouching job has placed Malenkov next to Mao by eliminating three persons between them. The original has also been trimmed to remove Molotov at Stalin's right hand and Vyshinsky seated in front of Mao.

The 9 March Pravda featured quotations from Malenkov's report at the 19th Party Congress in heavy black type similar to that used in quotations from Stalin.

FAR EAST
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Viet Minh attack against northern Laos indicated:
French intelligence believes that Viet Minh reconnaissance activities indicate preparation for an attack on Sam Neua in northern Laos. Two divisions would probably be employed as the striking force, with an additional division in support.

Comment:
Since the threat to Sam Neua in January, French Union defenses there have reportedly been strengthened by the construction of a ring of fortresses around the town and improvement of the airfield. However, an enemy task force of the size indicated would far outnumber the French Union forces stationed there.

Such a Viet Minh objective may be a step toward the eventual establishment of a large "liberated area" including northern Laos which would be relatively immune to French ground action.

4. Burmese Premier reportedly sees crisis in American-Burmese relations:
a crisis is approaching in American-Burmese relations. Unless the United States Government brings about the removal of Chinese Nationalist troops from Burma, the Rangoon government will terminate the American aid program.
[PAGE 05]
Comment:
Last week Nu publicly threatened that unless the United States moves quickly to halt Nationalist activities, a serious rupture in American-Burmese relations would result.

Although the possibility that the Burmese may take some rash action against the United States cannot be discounted, current threats are probably intended to stimulate efforts to solve the Nationalist problem quickly and thus relieve internal political pressure over the issue.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Comment on Italian court decision on Iranian oil:
The decision of the Venice court on 11 March that the Italian company, SUPOR, had legally purchased the oil carried on the Miriella provides Prime Minister Mossadeq with an opportunity to obtain popular support for any line he may choose to take in the Anglo-Iranian oil talks.

Although the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company announced that it would take the case to a court in Rome, Mossadeq can use the Venice decision as evidence that the British "blockade" is broken. SUPOR intends to move more oil from Abadan; the Miriella transited the Suez Canal eastbound on 28 February. Other potential purchasers, who have been deterred by threats of British legal action, may now be encouraged to buy.

Iran's financial position will not be improved substantially by the relatively small amounts of oil which might be sold through a series of small contracts.
[PAGE 06]
7. Turkey presses Iraq for commitment on MEDO:
According to the Turkish Charge in Baghdad, Turkey expects an official response to its 28 February proposal to Iraq that the two countries associate in establishing MEDO. He was told by the Iraqi Foreign Minister that this matter was being considered by the Council of Ministers in Baghdad.
[PAGE 07]
The Charge stressed Turkey's role as the leader of Middle East defense, and re-emphasized his country's desire to have MEDO headquarters on Turkish soil. He said that any suggestion that the headquarters be located in Egypt would be unacceptable to Turkey for reasons of prestige as well as defense.

Comment:
The Charge's remarks, apparently reflecting official thinking, are the clearest indication of Turkey's current disagreement with Western estimates of Egypt's importance to Middle East defense. Iraq, on the other hand, would prefer to follow Egypt's lead in joining MEDO.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Bonn government confident of treaty approval by Bundesrat:
West German coalition leaders believe that the Bundesrat or upper house will ratify the Bonn and Paris treaties prior to the federal elections. They also feel that the opposition Social Democrats will still seek a constitutional ruling on the treaties, but will refrain from asking for an injunction which would prevent the Federal President from signing the treaties into law.

In the opinion of these coalition leaders, the Social Democrats will count on the French Parliament to "kill" the treaties, and therefore will not choose to risk popular censure in hamstringing national defense measures just prior to elections.

Comment:
The Bundestag is expected to approve the treaties on the third and final reading, now planned for 19 March. Early Bundesrat action will depend on the attitude of the leader of the key Bundesrat delegation, Reinhold Maier, who in the past has opposed consideration of the treaties until after the elections, but whose current attitude is unknown.
[PAGE 08]
