Communist Guerrillas Active in Central Highlands of South Vietnam

Recent guerrilla attacks on South Vietnamese government installations in the highlands of central Vietnam indicate that the Communists now are striking in a considerable force in this region, which previously has been relatively secure. Although details are sketchy, a number of attacks apparently were made between 20 and 25 October against military outposts and road construction camps in Kontum and Pleiku provinces near the Laotian border, with diversionary actions occurring in Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh provinces to the east. The guerrillas, who were driven off by local militias reinforced by regular army and paratroop battalions, reportedly were operating in bands of up to 300, consisting chiefly of mountain tribesmen from the border region. They are believed to have operated under cadres infiltrated through Laos from North Vietnam.

There is no evidence, however, to substantiate initial reports from some South Vietnamese officials that the attacks were a large-scale incursion by regular North Vietnamese forces crossing Laos. The Diem government may have exaggerated evidence of North Vietnamese involvement in the hope of charging Hanoi with violations of the 1954 truce agreement and justifying its position that military needs to meet the Communist guerrilla threat require the postponement of political and social reforms. The North Vietnamese have clearly shown in the past few months that they intend to increase both violence and political agitation in the South. Hanoi, however, has denied Saigon's claim that North Vietnamese troops entered the South from Laos, charging that this "Western fabrication" was intended as an excuse for South Vietnamese intervention in Laos.

The spread of guerrilla activity to central Vietnam places an increasing burden on local security forces as well as on the army, which has over the past year been partially diverted from border defense to meet the stepped-up Communist warfare in the southern delta provinces near Saigon. Deteriorating security may also be taken by Diem as evidence of the need for maintaining authoritarian control, thus adding to growing dissatisfaction with his regime.
