[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

25 October 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS
review(s)
completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE HUNGARIAN SITUATION

4. POLAND REPORTEDLY TO ASK FOR AMERICAN AID
NEXT MONTH

6. FRANCE STIFFENS POSITION ON ALGERIA
(page 10).

7. INDONESIAN PRESIDENT'S IMPRESSIONS OF SINO-
SOVIET BLOC

8. LARGE-SCALE BURMESE ARMY DRIVE ON KARENS

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

[PAGE 04]
1. THE HUNGARIAN SITUATION

The Hungarian radio in the early morn-
ing hours of 25 October admitted that
as of midnight (Budapest time) fighting
continued in certain sections of Budapest,
contradicting an earlier broadcast from
Moscow which asserted that the "enemy adventure" had been
"liquidated" and order restored in the city. Claiming that
the situation had improved since earlier in the evening, the
Budapest broadcast stated that "the armed attackers are be-
coming more and more isolated in some places"; but added
that the attackers "have begun to start new actions; they are
carrying out surprise attacks in groups of two or three."

Soviet and Hungarian military action has
included the use of tanks, artillery fire and, in one instance,
strafing aircraft against the "rebell" forces, who apparently
have occupied a number of industrial plants, apartment build-
ings and public buildings within the city of Budapest. No ac-
curate reports of over-all casualties have been announced,
but eyewitness reports appearing in the press suggest a high
casualty rate.

Throughout the day, Radio Budapest--
which had been under siege for several hours in the morn-
ing--broadcast appeals from party and government leaders,
regional party organizations, workers and front groups call-
ing for an end to the "senseless bloodshed." Broadcasts im-
plied that when the fighting ended the new government would
continue a program of democratization and equality with the
USSR, and promised that the Soviet troops who "are risking
their lives to protect" the peaceful citizens of Budapest would
return to their garrisons after order is restored.

The Moscow broadcast at 2235 (Budapest
time), which claimed liquidation of the attackers, branded
the Budapest rioting as a "counterrevolutionary revolt" of

[PAGE 05]
"Fascist thugs" who represent the "forces of foreign reac-
tion." This Moscow commentary, the first Soviet reaction
since the fighting began, also alleged that the outbreak
"obviously had been in preparation for some time."

The fighting in Hungary--the greatest
challenge to Communist authority yet to emerge in Eastern
Europe--may cause the Soviet leaders to return to a tougher
policy in the Satellites generally, and might cause them to
reassess in particular their apparent decision to accommo-
date Gomulka in Poland. The Soviet decision not to inter-
vene in Poland was presumably based in part on a general
reluctance to compromise so drastically and openly their
de-Stalinization campaign and "peaceful coexistence" line.
This reluctance may already have been diminished by the
necessity for direct intervention in Hungary. Although threats
to the Communist regime in Poland, as distinct from threats
to Soviet control, appear considerably less potent than those
in Hungary, Moscow may now review its estimate of the abil-
ity of Gomulka and other Satellite leaders to maintain order.

The situation in Hungary outside of Buda-
pest is not yet clear but there has been firm evidence of vio-
lence in other Hungarian cities.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
4. POLAND REPORTEDLY TO ASK FOR AMERICAN
AID NEXT MONTH

Foreign Minister Rapacki
may discuss the possibilities of Ameri-
can aid to Poland with Secretary Dulles
at the United Nations General Assembly session in Novem-
ber. The new Polish leaders are coming
to the conclusion that without Western, specifically Ameri-
can, economic help, they will not be able to solve their
problems and will in the long run have no independence
from Moscow even if the Soviet Union lets them have their
way now.

Comment
An official of the Yugoslav Foreign
Ministry on 23 October told the Ameri-
can embassy in Belgrade that the Poles had inquired about
Yugoslav aid arrangements with the United States but had
not asked Belgrade to make a "preliminary reconnaissance"
on their behalf.

The American embassy in London re-
ported that the British Foreign Office has been sufficiently
encouraged by events in Poland to consider a camouflaged
loan to Poland in the form of a generous trade agreement
when British-Polish trade talks commence in late November.

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
6. FRANCE STIFFENS POSITION ON ALGERIA

While some concern is evident in
Paris over the effects the capture of
five Algerian nationalist leaders may
have on France's position in Morocco
and Tunisia, the government thus far appears to have no
intention of backing down. France's case in the UN Gen-
eral Assembly may be further weakened, however, and
France, in the hope of offsetting the unfavorable reaction
to the plane seizure, may concentrate on its complaints
against Egypt rather than make the planned "declaration
of intent" on Algeria. Premier Mollet has announced
France's intention of presenting to the Security Council
its complaints against Egypt for shipping arms to Algeria.

Meanwhile, non-Communist French
deputies generally have indicated enthusiastic support for
the government's stand. There are some signs of discon-
tent in the cabinet, however, and Mollet's reaffirmation on
23 October of his intention to continue the pacification ef-
fort will keep alive the apprehensions of the Radicals, as
well as those of some of his Socialist Party.

[PAGE 11]
7. INDONESIAN PRESIDENT'S IMPRESSIONS OF
SINO-SOVIET BLOC

Foreign Minister Abdulgani, who ac-
companied President Sukarno on a
seven-week tour of the Sino-Soviet
bloc, told the American ambassador
in Djakarta that the president believed
Marxism was "really working" in Communist China.
Sukarno and most members of his entourage were more im-
pressed generally with Communist China than by the Soviet
Union. In Yugoslavia, Sukarno was intrigued by that gov-
ernment's ability to obtain aid from both East and West.

Sukarno will probably make public his
impressions of bloc countries and their application to
Indonesia when he addresses the Constituent Assembly,
which he hopes to convene on 10 November. He has fre-
quently stated that Indonesia can borrow profitably from
both blocs in writing a constitution and in charting its
economic philosophy. His sympathy for Marxism, now
reinforced by his favorable impressions of Communist
China, may lead him to advise even more strongly than
heretofore a socialized economy and a highly centralized
government. He will probably endorse increased rela-
tions in all fields with bloc countries and particularly with
Communist China.

[PAGE 12]
8. LARGE-SCALE BURMESE ARMY DRIVE ON KARENS

The Burmese army, following the end
of the monsoon rains in mid-October,
has started a drive against the Karen
insurgents in eastern Burma. The drive
is being pressed in conformance with Premier Ba Swe's
promise to do everything in his power to restore law and
order within two years. The scope of the present cam-
paign and concentration on the Karens may be due to their
reported agreement last summer to co-operate closely
with the Communist insurgents.

Although previous actions against the
Karens have been indecisive, the American army attaché
in Rangoon reports that the army is employing encircling
tactics this year which are designed to prevent the insur-
gents from escaping to safe areas as they have in the past.
The attaché is inclined to believe these tactics will succeed.

The prospects for success are further en-
hanced by greater co-operation from Thailand, which has
just signed a treaty of friendship with Burma. The Thai for-
eign minister reportedly has indicated Bangkok's willingness
to move Karen refugees into the interior of Thailand in order
to prevent their contact with insurgents still in the field.
