*Iran-USSR:
the "abnormal" state of Iranian-Soviet relations so that he might "confer with the influential Soviet authorities," expressed concern over the continuing sharp personal attacks against the Shah in Soviet radiobroadcasts and over the absence of Ambassador Pegov from his Tehran post.

had seen Khrushchev twice and that the Soviet premier complained that Iran's foreign policies do not "make it possible to stop the broadcasts," but repeated previous assurances that he is "opposed to offensive statements." In a subsequent interview with A. P. Pavlov, head of the Soviet Foreign Ministry's Middle East section, who reportedly stated that Khrushchev had given orders "to stop the offensive broadcasts." Pavlov charged Iran's bilateral defense pact with the United States violates Tehran's treaty obligations with the USSR and that Pegov had been "ignored" by Iranian authorities. Pavlov also reiterated Moscow's demand, which had led to an impasse last December, that Iran agree to ban foreign bases of all types. The Shah, in a recent talk with Ambassador Wailes, indicated that Iran would not go beyond its offer to give the USSR a written guarantee not to allow foreign long- and intermediate-range missile bases in Iran.

Tunisia: The government is recalling its ambassador to all NATO countries, presumably for consultation on the issue of the French base at Bizerte. Even though President Bourguiba, in deference to President de Gaulle's preoccupation with Algeria, postponed his popular "battle for Bizerte" which was to have commenced on 8 February, Tunisia remains determined that French troops shall be withdrawn. The Tunisian ambassador to Washington anticipates that the Bizerte question will be submitted to the UN Security Council. Bourguiba's consultations with these ambassadors may indicate that he hopes to enlist NATO assistance in persuading France to meet Tunisia's demands.

Cameroun: French forces in Cameroun, in response to Prime Minister Ahidjo's recent request for assistance, are reported planning to begin concerted military action on 15 February against terrorists and rebellious tribesmen who control areas of

13 Feb 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
