[PAGE 01]
16 April 1957

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN (page 3).

2. KISHI PROPOSES MAJOR REVISION OF US-JAPANESE RELATIONS (page 4).

3. JAPANESE SOCIALIST MISSION INCREASES PRESSURE FOR RELATIONS WITH COMMUNIST CHINA (page 5).

4. NEW INDONESIAN CABINET UNACCEPTABLE TO SUMATRA (page 6).

5. BLOC ARMS FOR ALGERIA IDENTIFIED AS TEST SHIPMENT (page 7).

6. SOVIET BLOC DELIVERY OF SUBMARINES TO EGYPT AGAIN INDICATED (page 8).

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. THE SITUATION IN JORDAN

King Hussain, backed by the army, has succeeded in obtaining the formation of a "national cabinet" under the premiership of moderate Dr. Hussain Khalidi. The cabinet includes representatives of most major political factions, including the left-wing parties which dominated the Nabulsi government and had, prior to the king's recent initiative, refused to support any but Nabulsi's candidacy. Nabulsi is minister of foreign affairs and communications, and pro-Egyptian Fawzi Mulqi is minister of education and public works. However, the key posts of defense and interior are held by the moderates, Khalidi and Said Mufti. This combination suggests that Hussain regards the cabinet as temporary, and may wish to replace it soon with a more conservative group.

Infantry and armored car units were deployed throughout Amman on 15 April, apparently in support of Hussain. These troops were reported to be in full battle dress, and equipped, in addition to regular weapons, with axe handles and riot clubs. However, there are unconfirmed press reports of new clashes between rival army factions and of demonstrations against the king in West Jordan. The Israeli radio reported a general strike in the four principal towns of West Jordan--Tulkarm, Nablus, Jenin and Ramalla. Ramalla radio, seized by rioters on 14 April, has not resumed broadcasting.

Iraqi foreign minister Bashayan has informed Ambassador Gallman that Hussain had requested Iraq's King Faisal on 14 April to prepare to furnish military aid to Jordan if it should be necessary. Bashayan stated that in response Iraq was reinforcing its troops at H-3 pumping station near the Jordanian border to approximately a reinforced brigade--about 4,000 men. It was not planned however, to send these troops into Jordan at present.

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 05]
2. KISHI PROPOSES MAJOR REVISION OF US-JAPANESE RELATIONS

Prime Minister Kishi has made far-reaching proposals for changing present US-Japanese relationships, Ambassador MacArthur reports from Tokyo. MacArthur comments that United States security as well as the security and perhaps survival of friendly Asian countries could be affected.

Kishi called for revisions of the US-Japanese security treaty to include mutual agreement on the disposition and use of American troops in Japan, sought to relate the treaty more clearly to the UN charter, and suggested a time limit of five years for the treaty, after which either party could terminate it on one year's notice.

Kishi urged hastening the withdrawal of American troops from Japan, including the complete elimination of ground combat units, and he wants a reduction in the number of US bases. He promised a build-up of Japanese forces in two to three years to 180,000 ground forces, 111,000 tons of vessels for sea defense, and an air force of 1,300 aircraft.

Kishi asked that complete control of Okinawa and the Bonins be returned to Japan in ten years at the latest. He asked for certain administrative rights on Okinawa in the interim, and for the gradual return of Bonin islanders to their homeland.

Comment
The security treaty, the Okinawa issue, and the question of restrictions on China trade have been the basic causes of Japanese dissatisfaction with the US-Japanese relationship. Kishi has staked his political future on his ability to adjust this relationship on a basis of "equality" and "independence." It is probable, however, that Kishi's proposals represent a maximum position to sound out the US on what concessions he might expect during his Washington talks.

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 06]
3. JAPANESE SOCIALIST MISSION INCREASES PRESSURE FOR RELATIONS WITH COMMUNIST CHINA

Comment on:
The Japanese government and its conservative supporters fear that a Socialist "good-will" mission now visiting Communist China will enable the Socialists to monopolize public attention on the popular issue of a rapprochement with Peiping. This apprehension apparently has prompted the Kishi government to rush preparations for sending a Diet repatriation delegation to Peiping to investigate the status of approximately 40,000 Japanese still listed as missing in China. The government also plans to participate more directly in "private" trade talks with Peiping and to expedite the exchange of permanent trade missions.

An exchange of views with Communist Chinese leaders on the restoration of diplomatic relations between Tokyo and Peiping is the primary objective of the Socialist visitors. The Socialists reportedly harbor some expectation that Communist China may issue a unilateral declaration ending the "state of war" with Japan.

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. NEW INDONESIAN CABINET UNACCEPTABLE TO SUMATRA

Comment on:
The new Indonesian government is "completely unacceptable" to Central Sumatra.

Lt. Col. Hussein, who controls the province, has stated that Sumatra and Java must go their separate ways until President Sukarno gives in to demands for the participation of former vice president Hatta in a non-Communist government. The governing council in Central Sumatra, which had been showing signs of factionalism, is now reunited as a result of Sukarno's refusal even to consult Hatta before forming the cabinet.

Hussein fears, however, that the central government may use force to reimpose its authority, which would mean civil war. The Sumatran military leaders are ready to fight if necessary, although they are short of guns.

Sukarno and army chief of staff Nasution, meanwhile, appear to be following a policy of promoting bloodless coups and political dissatisfactions wherever possible. Nasution reportedly is considering further counteraction in South Sumatra. He is also sending emissaries throughout East Indonesia to battalion commanders in order to undercut Lt. Col. Samual, the dissident territorial commander in that area.

16 Mar 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 6

[PAGE 08]
5. BLOC ARMS FOR ALGERIA IDENTIFIED AS TEST SHIPMENT

Comment on:
Czech arms scheduled to leave Poland on 7 April for Alexandria as an experimental shipment to be followed by others if successful. The arms--presumably for the Algerian rebels--appear to be "sterile" equipment not easily traceable to the bloc.

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 7

[PAGE 09]
6. SOVIET BLOC DELIVERY OF SUBMARINES TO EGYPT AGAIN INDICATED

Comment
Egypt ordered at least two submarines from the Soviet bloc under the first arms contract in 1955. Bloc attempts to make delivery to Egypt in the fall of 1956 were canceled because of the outbreak of hostilities at the end of October. The boats were to have been delivered by Soviet crews, at least some of whom would remain to supervise Egyptian training.

Some Egyptian naval personnel received submarine training in Poland in the spring and summer of 1956 but returned home in October. Despite many rumors, no Soviet bloc submarines are believed to have reached Egyptian waters thus far.

16 Apr 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8
