[PAGE 01]
2 March 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
2 March 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Poland: Workers from four key industrial establishments in Poznan--despite threats of punitive actions by the regime--have met informally to decide on a possible coordinated protest if the wage cuts resulting from the higher work norms continue through the 10 March pay day. The workers now appear to be better organized than for the apparently spontaneous strike on 19 and 20 February at the Poznan railway repair shops and railway yards, which was readily brought under control by regime threats to blacklist striking workers. The Warsaw regime has already laid off a number of industrial workers to cut production costs, and is using the threat of unemployment to forestall strikes.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: The statements to parliament by the army chief of staff and security minister, General Nasution, regarding Indonesia's claim to West Irian (Netherlands New Guinea) reflect the government's renewed emphasis on the issue but do
[PAGE 05]
not foreshadow imminent military operations. Nasution said that the struggle to reclaim West Irian would be intensified and that it would be waged on all fronts--political, economic, and military. Nasution undoubtedly hopes to keep the army in the forefront of the politically significant West Irian campaign, which has been consistently exploited by President Sukarno and the Communist party and which received the support of Soviet Premier Khrushchev during his recent visit.

Kenya: African leaders have indicated that they do not expect the London agreements to last as long as the four or five years hoped for in London, and have made aggressive statements on their return to Kenya. A speech by Tom Mboya, in which he advised moderate as well as rightist Europeans to accept an African-dominated "democracy" in Kenya or get out, was followed by disorders between African nationalists and police. The prospect of increased African participation in government, and of unabated African demands for full independence, will prompt some Europeans to leave Kenya and may lead others to consider extralegal means of combatting the African "threat."
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Indonesia May Renew Emphasis on West Irian Claim

Renewed emphasis on Indonesia's claim to West Irian (Netherlands New Guinea) probably is indicated by statements to parliament on 27 February by Army Chief of Staff and Security Minister General Nasution. Nasution reportedly stated that the struggle to "reclaim" West Irian would be intensified, that it must be waged on all fronts--economic, political, and military--and that it must be carried out both within West Irian and outside its borders. He said that the West Irian issue affected all of Indonesia's domestic and foreign policies and would continue to do so as long as the territory was not returned to Indonesia. The army's press spokesman, however, has denied press reports that Nasution said the nation should be prepared to undertake a war in behalf of its claim.

During the same parliamentary debate, Foreign Minister Subandrio refused to say whether or not Indonesia would raise the Irian question at the next session of the UN General Assembly, claiming it would be a "tactical error" to reveal future actions at this time. Subandrio told the Thai foreign minister a few weeks ago that Indonesia was very anxious to settle the West Irian question with the Netherlands, and that if this could be done adjustments would be made regarding Dutch economic claims in Indonesia.

Both Subandrio and President Sukarno have stated publicly during the past year that Indonesia will not resort to force to achieve its claim. Indonesian officials, particularly President Sukarno and air force leaders, undoubtedly feel that the nation's military build-up is strengthening its international stature and will assist in bringing pressure to bear on the Netherlands. Indonesian paramilitary groups reportedly continue to infiltrate West Irian in an effort to stimulate the local population against the Dutch administration.

The West Irian claim was de-emphasized in 1958 and 1959, and anti-Dutch measures in Indonesia itself were substituted. National pride and political necessity now may dictate renewed emphasis. Nasution undoubtedly hopes to keep the army in the forefront of leadership for the politically significant West Irian campaign, which has been consistently exploited by President Sukarno and the Communist party and which was supported by Soviet Premier Khrushchev during his recent visit.
[PAGE 08]
Kenya Africans Maintain Pressure for New Concessions

Statements by African delegates on their return to Kenya from constitutional talks in London have been provocative in tone and reflect intent to continue pressure for full independence. African leader Tom Mboya has characterized the compromise agreed to in London as only an interim measure, to be followed swiftly by full independence. The London agreements provided for legislative elections later this year under a greatly enlarged African franchise which is expected to result in a legislature with an African majority.

A speech on 27 February by Mboya--in which he advised moderate as well as rightist Europeans to accept an African-dominated "democracy" in Kenya or get out--was followed by disorders between African nationalists and police. A second African spokesman emphasized in a press conference that African delegates had not committed themselves to the preservation of the White Highlands, a rich farming area which remains a European preserve despite action late in 1959 to legalize African holdings.

The prospect of increased African participation in government, unabated African demands for full independence, and continuing pressure on the White Highlands will prompt some Europeans to leave Kenya and may lead others to consider extralegal means of combatting the African "threat."
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
