Japanese Prime Minister Faces Political Test

Ikeda has hoped since coming to power last July to avoid controversial issues at least until late 1961. However, faction leaders within the LDP as well as the opposition Socialists are maneuvering to force him to come to grips shortly with major issues.

A Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) official has called the China question "perhaps the most critical problem facing Ikeda." LDP leaders agree that the issue--particularly the questions of a government-to-government trade agreement and admission of Communist China to the UN--is more political than economic, particularly since poor economic conditions in mainland China have decreased the interest of large Japanese industries in the Chinese market. However, some of Ikeda's conservative rivals may try to improve their own political positions by appealing to small producers still interested in trade with the mainland and by exploiting the popular desire for an independent Japanese policy toward Peiping. These leaders have predicted that the US will change its China policy and have emphasized that alignment with Washington has alienated Japan from the increasingly influential Afro-Asian bloc.

Tokyo is reported ready to begin negotiations on Japan's obligations for postwar aid soon after Ambassador Reischauer arrives in mid-April. The US has asked Japan to repay about $650,000,000 of the $2,000,000,000 in assistance provided between 1945 and 1952 under the Government and Relief in Occupied Areas program. Many conservatives as well as the Socialists oppose repayment, on grounds that the Japanese believed the aid was a grant rather than a loan. The Japanese press reported on 6 April that Finance Minister Mizuta hopes to hold repayments below $500,000,000--a figure $50,000,000 below Japan's lowest informal offer. Such reports may strengthen public support for those who oppose any settlement and thus hamper Ikeda's ability to negotiate a compromise satisfactory to the US.

By trying to prevent the re-emergence of the two major intra-party coalitions that characterized Prime Minister

11 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
