reaction may be forthcoming from the repatriation of Soudanese officials of the Mali Government--including Modibo Keita, the president of the Mali Council of Ministers and Soudanese premier. Senegal's action, which follows a lengthy period of tension with Soudan, was greatly influenced by the secret visit to Guinea of the Soudanese interior minister in early August,
He is said to have committed Mali to join the Guinea-Ghana union, and he may also have reached agreement on a union of Soudan and Guinea in the event of a breakup in the federation. French officials are striving to maintain a public position of neutrality in this issue concerning a French Community republic. De Gaulle has proposed talks in Paris, and the Senegalese premier has announced his acceptance.
(Page 1) (Map)

Laos: Souvanna Phouma apparently is moving to meet at least some of General Phoumi's preconditions for negotiations. He has reinstituted General Ouane as armed forces commander and has placed him in charge of security in Vientiane, with Captain Kong Le serving as Ouane's "temporary deputy." Ouane's freedom of action under such an arrangement is questionable. There also are reports that Kong Le's paratroopers are withdrawing from the city and are being replaced by civil and military police and possibly regular army elements as well. Souvanna claims that either he or Ouane will meet Phoumi in Savannakhet as soon as the "arrangements" now in process in Vientiane are completed. Meanwhile, Phoumi continues to apply pressure on the Vientiane regime by moving up his troops, although the location of his units is the subject of conflicting reports. He may interpret Souvanna's conciliatory gestures as a sign of weakness and hence raise his price for a settlement.
(Page 3)

South Vietnam:
Hanoi has increased the number of its illicit radio stations in South Vietnam from six to 17 since late 1959, presumably for tighter control and coordination of clandestine activity and intelligence collection. Almost all of the new stations are located in the southern portion of South Vietnam, where Communist guerrilla activity has intensified greatly since late last year.
