Because of the influence of these advisers and the known attitude of Muntasser, the American Charge believes that Libya will not accept a lower figure.

Comment: Muntasser informed American Minister Villard in August that the $1,000,000 previously agreed on as annual compensation for US bases in Libya was not sufficient. Muntasser has maintained that unless the compensation is increased, the treaty will not be ratified.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. New Soviet move on German POW's seen likely:

American officials in Berlin believe that East German initiative in publicizing recent discussions between Prime Minister Grotewohl and leaders of the West German Communist-front "Deutsche Sammlung!" may portend some surprise action from Moscow on the release of German prisoners held since the end of World War II. This is the first time that the Communists have admitted discussing the POW problem with West German representatives.

A Soviet move at this time could be intended to deprive Bishop Dibelius of credit for any favorable Soviet action following his forthcoming visit to Moscow.

Comment: A Soviet concession at this time would more likely be intended to facilitate continuing East German overtures to Bonn for all-German talks.

10. Austrian support for East-West trade controls weakening:

Austrian officials are now "definitely stiffening" against American pressure on trade controls and some concessions may be necessary to ensure their long-run cooperation, according to American Embassy officials in Vienna. They attribute this change in sentiment to mounting unemployment, difficulties in finding alternative Western markets, and the rejection of recent proposals for trade with the Orbit.

Foreign Minister Gruber has urged careful consideration of the plight of a large Tyrolean metals firm whose inability to fill certain Orbit orders will aggravate an already serious unemployment problem.

Comment: Recently proposed tungsten and molybdenum processing agreements with Satellite countries would help alleviate the unemployment problem, but have generally been considered too beneficial to the Orbit. With the elections only about four months away, the coalition government will be particularly vulnerable to pressure for an expansion of foreign trade.
