[PAGE 01]
5 June 1961

Copy No. 518

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 June 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. South Korea: Leadership concerned to establish legal continuity with prior regimes. (Page iii)

6. Moscow giving Somali Republic long-term credits. (Page iv)

7. Iranian prime minister believes he has Shah's support for reform program. (Page iv)

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
South Korea: South Korean insurgent leaders reportedly are considering the adoption of a new constitution patterned on that of the French Fifth Republic, providing for a strong executive. After the fall of the Rhee government last year there was considerable interest among more conservative South Korean elements in such a constitution. However, a spokesman for the ruling Supreme Council for National Reconstruction has vigorously denounced as "absolutely groundless" and "irresponsible" recent press speculation forecasting an early return to civilian control. US Chargé Green in Seoul notes that, so far, embassy contacts with government officials and members of the junta tend to indicate that those insistent on an extended period of military rule continue to exercise decisive influence in the Supreme Council.

Meanwhile, the regime is moving ahead with plans to promulgate a "basic law" that will in effect set aside those provisions of

5 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
the present constitution dealing with civil rights and the National Assembly and "legalize" the assumption of power by the Supreme Council. The leadership is concerned that unless legal continuity is maintained with the Rhee and Chang Myon governments, Seoul's claim to be the only legitimate Korean government will be regarded as no more valid than that of Pyongyang. The foreign minister has announced that special missions will visit various noncommitted nations to win greater support in the UN for South Korea.

USSR - Somali Republic: Moscow, continuing to broaden its ties with African states through the extension of long-term economic aid, announced on 2 June that it will provide the Somali Republic with $44,400,000 in long-term credits for industrial and agricultural development and with a $7,800,000 credit to finance commodity deliveries. The Soviet Union will also build two hospitals, a printing plant, a school, and a radio station as gifts. The announcement was contained in the communiqué marking the end of a ten-day visit to the USSR by Somali Prime Minister Abdirascid. The economic agreement is in line with the announced intention of the moderate Somali Government to accept aid from all sources; it has been pending since last April when a Soviet good-will mission visited the East African nation. Mogadiscio appears to be headed toward early conclusion of similar aid programs with Czechoslovakia and possibly Communist China.

Iran: Following a conversation with the Shah on 31 May, Prime Minister Amini was reported "greatly encouraged" by the Shah's reaffirmation of support for the government and for Amini's reform program. The Shah demonstrated this support by not countermanding Amini's order canceling the appointment of former Prime Minister Eqbal as ambassador to Spain. This appointment apparently had been ordered by the Shah about the middle of May without consultation with Amini and was regarded by many Iranians as evidence of the Shah's intention to undercut

5 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]
the prime minister. Amini hopes to see the Shah frequently to sustain his support for the government. The Shah and Amini have no essential differences on foreign policy and particularly on the necessity of Iran's membership in CENTO. In spite of the present appearance of cooperation, however, there has been no change in the basic source of conflict between the two--the monarch's unwillingness to refrain from direct participation in the government.

5 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    v

[PAGE 08]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Counsel to the President
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Under Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 10]
TOP SECRET
