[PAGE 01]
15 June 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

3. CZECH PARTY LEADER SCORES DISSIDENT EXCESSES

4. HUNGARIANS RELEASE BELA KOVACS

7. AFGHAN KING'S ILLNESS DELAYS MEETING
WITH PAKISTANI PRESIDENT

8. THAILAND TO PERMIT NONSTRATEGIC TRADE WITH
COMMUNIST CHINA

10. GROWING POLITICAL DISSENSION IN INDONESIA

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2
[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. CZECH PARTY LEADER SCORES DISSIDENT EXCESSES

In a militant speech to the Czech party conference on 11 June, First Secretary Antonin Novotny virtually admitted the existence of widespread confusion and discontent within the party. He warned that continued transgressions against the party line would not be tolerated. Novotny declared that the call by more than 2,000 party organizations for another party congress was "unjustified and incorrect" because no revision in the basic policy decisions of the June 1954 party congress is necessary. He added that the central committee is capable of solving the present admittedly grave problems.

Novotny stated that the government and party intend to take a firm stand with dissident elements of the population, scored students and writers for "unprincipled liberalism," and flatly rejected suggestions from newspaper readers that the press be independent of party control.

Novotny did indicate, however, that some limited concessions, not affecting party control, will be granted. The regime, for example, plans a program of extensive administrative reforms with major emphasis on widespread decentralization, greater responsibility for lower party organs, and a simplification in the administrative structure.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. HUNGARIANS RELEASE BELA KOVACS

A Hungarian provincial newspaper announced on 10 June that Bela Kovacs, former Smallholders Party general secretary, had been pardoned by the Hungarian presidential council and that no further criminal proceedings shall be initiated against him. The article stated that Kovacs had been sentenced by a Soviet court in 1947 for crimes against the USSR and that he recently had been handed over by Soviet authorities to Hungarian officials after serving part of his sentence in the USSR.

Comment

Bela Kovacs was one of the most prominent anti-Communist politicians in Eastern Europe and was one of the leaders of the opposition to the Communist takeover in Hungary. Hungary has released nearly all imprisoned Social Democrats and a number of minority party figures.

A prerequisite to Kovacs' release may have been a promise not to oppose regime policies. This appears to have been the case with Archbishop Groesz, who has recently made some favorable comments about the regime. Cardinal Mindszenty reportedly continues under "house detention" because of his unwillingness to make this compromise.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6
[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
7. AFGHAN KING'S ILLNESS DELAYS MEETING WITH
PAKISTANI PRESIDENT

The meeting between Pakistan's President Mirza and Afghanistan's King Zahir Shah which was scheduled to begin in Kabul on 18 June has been postponed because of the king's illness. The Pakistani chargé in Kabul, who was officially requested on 14 June to delay Mirza's visit until some time in July, believes King Zahir's illness is real and that the king may be suffering from typhoid or typhus.

The chargé states that the Afghan government had been making extensive preparations for the visit. It did not announce the king's illness until four days after his fever began.

Since President Mirza is scheduled to make an official visit to Turkey from 15 to 24 July and various dignitaries are to visit Kabul this summer, the meeting may have to be postponed until late summer.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 9
[PAGE 11]
8. THAILAND TO PERMIT NONSTRATEGIC TRADE WITH
COMMUNIST CHINA

The Thai government has decided to remove nonstrategic goods, including rice and timber, from the list of commodities it undertook not to export to Communist China under the UN embargo resolution. Thailand's two other major exports, rubber and tin, remain among the proscribed items.

This action follows a campaign of several months' duration by certain Thai officials and Bangkok merchants to induce Premier Phibun to relax restrictions on trade with China. Phibun's opposition to these pressures was almost certainly weakened seriously, when Great Britain lifted the ban on the export of rubber to China from Malaya and Singapore.

This relaxation of Thailand's strict controls on trade with Communist China does not indicate an imminent shift in the Thai policy of close relations with the West. The Thai foreign minister has assured the American chargé in Bangkok that his government will continue to withhold recognition of Peiping unless Communist China is admitted into the United Nations.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
10. GROWING POLITICAL DISSENSION IN INDONESIA

Recent reports from Indonesia suggest that the political "honeymoon" which has existed since the present government was formed last March is coming to an end.

Heretofore, the three major parties represented in the cabinet--the National Party, the Nahdatul Ulama and the Masjumi--have made a determined effort to maintain an attitude of harmonious co-operation. Recently, however, a member of the moderate, pro-West Masjumi told American officials that his party had been effectively isolated by the other two, and that at some point it would be "forced to stand and fight." In this connection, there have been growing reports of inter-party friction within the cabinet, particularly in the matter of patronage, and that the Masjumi is receiving a disproportionately small share of the spoils.

Meanwhile, the American embassy in Djakarta has indicated that public disillusionment with the government's inability to deal effectively with the country's serious security and economic problems is increasing.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
[PAGE 14]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 14 June)

The Cairo press reported on 13 June that Egypt has contracted with Rumania and the USSR for 300,000 tons of kerosene from each country. This latest agreement brings total Egyptian contracts for kerosene from the Soviet bloc to about 900,000 tons thus far this year, roughly three times Cairo's imports of kerosene from the bloc in 1955. The agreement probably reflects increased requirements for both military and civilian uses and a reduction in imports from Western sources.

15 June 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 13
[PAGE 15]
