[PAGE 01]
21 February 1961
Copy No. C 77

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
21 February

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

4. Iran-Iraq: Dispute over Shatt-al-Arab River approaches to Abadan refinery has again broken out. (Page ii)

5. USSR: Gromyko says Khrushchev will not attend UN General Assembly session resuming 7 March. (Page iii)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Iran-Iraq: The long-smoldering dispute between Iraq and Iran over navigation rights on the Shatt-al-Arab River, which

21 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
ii
[PAGE 06]
controls the approaches to the oil refinery of Abadan, has again broken out. Iranian insistence on 17 February that henceforth its personnel, rather than Iraqi pilots, handle tankers calling at the refinery has halted tanker traffic. Heretofore, only Iraqi pilots have worked on the run to Abadan. As many as two dozen tankers, chartered by the consortium of Western oil companies which operates Iran's oil industry, are probably already involved. Meanwhile, a shortage of storage space has forced the Abadan refinery to cut back production from the normal 350,000 barrels a day to less than a third of this figure on 20 February. Output probably will be cut further--perhaps to 50,000 barrels a day--in an effort to avert a complete shutdown, which would further weaken Iran's already strained economy. (Page 7) (Map)

USSR: Foreign Minister Gromyko told the Finnish foreign minister recently that neither he nor Khrushchev will attend the UN General Assembly session, which resumes on 7 March. He stated, however, that Khrushchev was still willing to come to the US for talks with the President. Gromyko's remarks suggest that Khrushchev has reverted to his decision since First Deputy Premier Kosygin's assertion to the West German ambassador in early February that Khrushchev would attend the UN meeting. The Soviet premier probably recognizes that his decision to exploit Lumumba's death to the maximum and renew his attacks on Hammarskjold will make a sharp US-Soviet clash unavoidable, and that his personal participation in such a debate would undermine the prospects of a meeting with the President during the UN session.

21 Feb 61
DAILY BRIEF
iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
IRAN-IRAQ BOUNDARY
ALONG THE
SHATT AL ARAB

21 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Map Page
[PAGE 15]
The Shatt-al-Arab Question

Between the Persian Gulf and a point a few miles north of Khorramshahr the Iranian-Iraqi frontier runs along the low-water mark on the Iranian shore of the Shatt-al-Arab except for two short stretches opposite the major Iranian ports of Khorramshahr and Abadan, where it follows the thalweg--the middle of the river--so as to leave these two ports in Iranian waters. Sea-going vessels bound for these Iranian ports thus have to pass through Iraqi waters. Navigation on the river is governed by the Iranian-Iraqi treaty of 4 July 1937.

For several years Iran has periodically agitated for a commission to negotiate changes in the 1937 treaty and has threatened to take unilateral action if Iraq refuses to co-operate. This treaty recognizes most of the Shatt as Iraqi territorial waters. Tehran has complained that the treaty was invalid because it was signed under British pressure. Despite this view, Iran was willing to leave control of the Shatt to Iraq as long as the Basra Port Authority was, for practical purposes, under British control.

An important change in the Iranian position took place following the July 1958 coup in Iraq which brought Qasim to power. Viewing the Qasim regime as basically unfriendly and wary of the presence of Soviet technicians in Basra, Iran began to demand a greater voice in control of the Shatt, including adoption of the thalweg principle along the entire length of the river. Since 1958 there has been a series of incidents between the two countries. Iran's present insistence on use of its pilots is its most ambitious effort thus far to pressure Iraq to begin negotiating. However, fully a third of Iran's oil production of more than 1,000,000 barrels a day is refined at Abadan, and with an already shaky economy the government could ill afford more than a token shutdown.

21 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 7
[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
The Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 17]
TOP SECRET
