Brazil: President Quadros has directed Minister of War Odilio Denys to arrest Marshal Lott, defeated candidate in the 1960 presidential election, for granting a press interview on his political views. Denys is resisting the order because Lott insists he had not intended his remarks for publication and Lott's arrest would bring on a political-military crisis. Quadros' hostility to Lott has undoubtedly been intensified by remarks derogatory to Quadros reported in the interview such as, "I would not want to be minister to this peasant." The military are unlikely to attempt to overthrow the Quadros administration at this time, but the arrest of Lott would add to the dissatisfaction in the officer corps caused by Quadros' transfers and reassignments of officers associated with the previous administration. (Backup Page 3)

Congo: Gizenga's 6 June announcement that he is willing to negotiate with Leopoldville and the UN over the site for a reconvened parliament probably stems from misgivings concerning his isolation from the mainstream of Congo events, together with doubts regarding the long-term prospects for his regime. He probably also hopes to embarrass the Leopoldville regime by contrasting his moderate stand with that of Kasavubu, who so far has refused to consider any site but Leopoldville. He probably will try to delay the actual opening of parliament in the hope of adding to his bloc of supporters. A late May estimate of parliamentary strengths by the American Embassy indicates that at that time he had a substantial minority position to which he may be able to add by bribes and persuasion.

A Yugoslav aircraft, ostensibly on a Red Cross mission, arrived in Stanleyville from Cairo on 5 June apparently after landing in Khartoum. It was scheduled to return from Stanleyville on 7 June. The aircraft was to pick up the children of various Stanleyville figures. However, this was to be a "pretext" to bring goods of an unspecified nature covertly to Gizenga. This is the first known occasion that an aircraft

8 June 61 DAILY BRIEF iv
