[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

9 March 1961

Copy No. C Ed

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
9 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

5. West Germany: Bonn may be less forthcoming in financial negotiations with US following currency revaluation. (Page ii)

6. Communist China: Peiping postpones program to communize Tibet. (Page iii)

7. Rumania: Local disturbances and peasant dissatisfaction reported in southern Rumania. (Page iii)

8. Watch Committee conclusions. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
West Germany: American officials in Bonn believe that as a consequence of the 4 March revaluation of the mark, West Germany may be less forthcoming in current financial negotiations with the US on debt prepayment and military orders. On the question of aid to underdeveloped areas, the Bonn cabinet seems to be near agreement that future German contributions should be limited to one percent of the gross national product, or approximately $700,000,000 at the 1960 rate. According to embassy officials, the primary factor in the decision to revalue the currency was the sudden realization that the government and central bank were unable by other means to cope with growing inflationary pressures only six months before national elections. Embassy officials do not believe the move will have a lasting impact on West Germany’s trade or balance of payments and expect that the only significant effect will be short-term money movements in which foreign speculators will withdraw funds to take their profits.

9 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
Communist China: The Chinese Communists have postponed their program of communizing Tibet in the face of persistent opposition there. The Tibetans have been told that further “reforms” have been deferred for four years. In addition, some of the land already collectivized is being returned to its former owners, political indoctrination meetings have been suspended, private trade is being resumed on a small scale, and harassment of religious activities has been halted. Internal Chinese problems, particularly food shortages, probably contributed to the regime’s decision against committing the resources and manpower needed to force the Tibetans into the Communist mold at this time. (Backup, Page 6)

Rumania: Several isolated local disturbances resulting from peasant dissatisfaction have taken place in the past month in southern Rumania. These difficulties apparently are caused by peasant opposition to the regime’s program for agricultural collectivization and compulsory purchase of livestock. In one local demonstration, several militiamen were rumored killed or wounded. The reported unrest is reminiscent of similar outbreaks in eastern Rumania in 1958, which the regime was readily able to control.

WATCH COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee the United States Intelligence Board concludes that:

A. No change from last week.

9 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
B. No change from last week.

C. In Laos, Communist attacks at the Phou Khoun road junction do not appear to have been planned as the start of a major counteroffensive against government forces, but Communist success in this instance may lead them to seek further limited military gains.

D. Significant political compromises among the factions in the Congo in the near future appear unlikely while Gizenga continues to have reason to hope for outside support. The probable replacement of Dayal may permit a less partisan and more effective UN operation in the Congo and will remove one of the obstacles to the return of UN forces to Matadi and Banana. The deteriorating economy and rapidly growing inflation in the Congo could lead to disorders.

9 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 08]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Socialization of Tibet Postponed Again

Peiping’s postponement of socialization in Tibet marks the second time that the Communists have had to suspend their program for transforming Tibetan society. The first, announced in February 1957, was presented as a six-year moratorium reversing the programs set in motion a year earlier with the establishment by Peiping of the Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region. This period of grace came to an abrupt end in 1959 with the Tibetan uprising and Peiping’s subsequent decision to Sinicize Tibet as quickly as possible. Implementation of this decision included the introduction of numbers of Chinese into Tibet as well as a new attempt to impose socialist “reforms.” Following the same general pattern as was used within China, the Communists plunged into a program of land reform, moving from that to mutual-aid teams and cooperatives. Efforts were also made to halt private trade and weaken the Lamaist Church.

Despite Peiping’s claim that the Tibetans eagerly accepted these changes, the regime now acknowledges that “too many errors” were committed by Chinese and Tibetan cadres, intimating that their highhanded practices aroused a good deal of wrath among the public. The Tibetans are also disgruntled by local food shortages as serious as those plaguing China itself. In addition, the imposition of Chinese will on a recalcitrant populace is made difficult by Tibet’s position at the end of a very long supply line. This line is all the harder to maintain as a result of the current fuel shortage in China.

Still, the regime is making it clear that the retreat is only tactical. Tibetans are being told by Peiping that the political need for reforms persists, and the likelihood is that the process of socializing Tibet will be started again whenever circumstances are deemed favorable, even if the promised four-year grace period has not elapsed.

9 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 10]
Peasant Unrest in Rumania

While the Rumanian populace, with the exception of the Hungarian minority in Transylvania, has been passive toward the Communist regime, the peasants have, on occasion, maintained a more independent position and the government has moved somewhat more slowly than most other East European states in collectivization. There are rumors that peasants in the Arges and Oltenia regions of southern Rumania have petitioned for authority to withdraw from collectives, made a series of oral complaints about agricultural policies, and conducted public demonstrations.

The regime’s recent actions tend to support these rumors. Party leader Gheorghiu-Dej and politburo members Borila and Ceausescu visited Arges region from 16 to 17 February on a tour which the American Legation speculates may have been a reflection of official concern over developments in the area. On 28 February, the regime promulgated a liberalized resolution dealing with the purchase of cattle in a move which may have been designed to minimize popular discontent over the compulsory sale of livestock to the state. Furthermore, the regime, after initially pushing its collectivization vigorously in the early part of this winter, has slowed down its efforts during the past month.

Five separate trip requests by US diplomatic officials for travel to the areas of reported unrest were refused during the period from 24 February to 6 March, although this may have been because of military activities.

9 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
