[PAGE 01]
25 March 1961
Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

DIA and DOS have no objection to declassification and release

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Congo: UN postpones plan to re-enter Matadi. (Page ii)

3. Ethiopia: Emperor's prestige damaged by conces-
sion on army pay. (Page ii)

4. South Korea: Demonstration against proposed anti-
Communist law. (Page ii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Congo: The UN plan to re-enter Matadi has been post-
poned. According to high officials in the UN Secretariat, the
decision to move more slowly was made partly because Ham-
marskjold's plan was opposed by his military officers in the
Congo on grounds they did not have sufficient military strength.
(Backup,

Page 3)

Ethiopia: The Emperor's decision of 22 March to yield
to the demands of army elements for an increase in enlisted
pay scales has lessened--at least temporarily--the threat to
his regime. The Emperor, however, has suffered a loss in
prestige by surrendering to a threat of force. This incident,
moreover, may serve as a precedent for future threats to the
regime by other dissatisfied groups.
(Backup, Page 5)

South Korea: Scattered violence and the appearance of
pro-Communist themes in the later stages of a demonstration
in Seoul on 22 March are probably the result of organized sub-
version. This demonstration, like others in major South Korean
cities against a proposed anti-Communist law, failed to attract
wide public support. However, it did succeed in arousing con-
siderable emotion stemming from fears of a return to the re-
pressive practices of the Rhee regime and led the press to take
a common position opposing the bill. The government has re-
portedly decided to drop the proposed legislation. The police
showed some improvement in their ability to control limited
crowds but they still appear incapable of handling large-scale
disturbances.
(Backup, Page 6)

25 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Situation in the Congo

One UN official in New York implied that if tensions less-
en as a result of Kasavubu's current visit to the Lower Congo
area, a military operation might not be necessary. However,
civilians in the UN Command in Leopoldville continue to press
local officials to permit a return to Matadi. The UN adminis-
trative officer said on 23 March that the command had had no
information concerning the arrival of goods in the port since
its officers were forced out early in March. As a result, it
has issued no instructions for shipping goods inland. Officials
of OTRACO, the company which operates the port facilities
and the railroad to Leopoldville, apparently believe that the
UN has deliberately refused to issue forwarding instructions,
since to do so would weaken its claim that a UN presence in
Matadi is necessary.

The heads of state of the twelve "Brazzaville powers"--the
former French territories in tropical Africa with the exception
of Guinea, Mali, and Togo--are to meet at Yaounde in Cameroun
from 26 to 31 March. At this time they hope to develop a com-
mon policy on the Congo.

Cleophas Kamitatu, a former ally of Gizenga who has been
cooperating with the Leopoldville government, reportedly is to
leave the capital for Stanleyville on Saturday for negotiations
with the Gizenga regime. Optimism is high in Leopoldville that
a reconciliation can be reached; however, Gizenga's opposition
to the central government and its supporters apparently has
hardened. He has expelled the five Western consuls from Stan-
leyville and reportedly told a visiting journalist that there was
"not the slightest possibility of reaching a compromise" between
his regime and Leopoldville.

In preliminary talks with Hammarskjold's personal repre-
sentative in Brussels, Belgian Foreign Ministry officials took
the position that the only way to settle the question of withdrawing

25 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]
Belgian officers from areas controlled by Kasavubu is to have
the three parties involved "thrash out the question of individual
officers." Even if such a conference could be organized, it is
doubtful that it would prove productive.

25 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
Haile Selassie Capitulates to Army Demands

The announced pay increases, which equal the amount
promised by the short-lived rebel regime last December,
are also to apply to the 28,500-member police force; they
apparently do not extend, however, to the air force and the
navy. The latter services, which to date have not been in-
volved in significant antiregime activity, apparently are not
to receive higher pay because of budgetary considerations.
In the future, however, they may join forces with civil ser-
vants, whose salaries are to be cut to defray the cost of the
army and police pay raises, to create further difficulties
for the regime.

The US Embassy believes that the events of the past
few days were well organized.

Menghistu, whose trial has been in progress since
27 February, is gaining acceptance as the symbol of reform
in Ethiopia. Should he be executed, as expected, a new
crisis will confront Haile Selassie.

25 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
Demonstrations in South Korea

The demonstrations on 22 March were conducted by about
a thousand reformist political agitators and students, but a
small, hard-core subversive group is believed to have been
responsible for the appearance of pro-Communist slogans fa-
voring Korean unification and for several clashes with the
police which occurred during the last stages of the demon-
strations.

The demonstrations were staged to protest efforts by the
Chang Myon government to tighten the law passed in June 1960
which prohibited membership in or conscious support of Com-
munist groups. One draft law would have punished persons
who praised or encouraged antistate organizations--not clearly
defined--and their members, or who were in any way involved
in defections to North Korea. This law would have increased
the maximum penalty for illegal entry from North Korea from
five years' imprisonment to death and would have authorized
military intelligence agencies to investigate civilians suspected
of violating security laws.

A second draft bill would have limited public demonstra-
tions to one-half hour's duration and prohibited demonstrators
from blocking public buildings, using loudspeakers, or con-
ducting demonstrations in front of foreign official buildings and
private residences.

As a result of its failure to pass the draft legislation, the
government presumably will depend on stricter enforcement of
existing regulations and more effective police work to control
demonstrations, disorders, and subversive activities.

American Ambassador McConnaughy comments, however,
that such countermeasures provide no fundamental cure. Under-
lying public apprehension about security legislation is gradually
increasing dissatisfaction with the Chang government for its
failure to move quickly in the field of economic reform. A dem-
onstration in Seoul on 23 March by 2,000 members of the Korean

25 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 11]
Unemployed Association criticized the government for its
preoccupation with antisubversive measures and called for
speedy implementation of the National Construction Service
program, which is designed to utilize large pools of unem-
ployed persons in nationwide public works projects. Further
demonstrations are expected in April to celebrate the first
anniversary of the ouster of the Rhee government.

25 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
