Opposition to South Korea - US Aid Agreement

(The April revolution generated national pride in South Koreans, particularly among young people who expected a quick improvement in their political and economic situation. Although the ouster of Rhee improved United States - South Korean understanding, the new nationalism is sensitive to any alleged infringements on Korean sovereignty. South Koreans have been particularly sensitive over the adminis- tration of the United States aid program and over the lack of a status-of-forces agreement which would give them ju- risdiction over off-duty American military personnel.)

(Much of the criticism by students, opposition legisla- tors, and the press appears to be based on misinformation. Ignoring the existing situation, one legislator has argued that free import privileges for US aid mission personnel would permit a flood of foreign luxury goods that could dis- rupt the nation's economy. Another has speculated that a secret annex to the agreement contains terms more disad- vantageous than those made public. A leftist politician, prominent in the most extreme overt political opposition, has led the formation of a "joint struggle committee" to op- pose the agreement. Although there is no evidence as yet that student opponents of the agreement are Communist di- rected, they are an obvious target for Communist subver- sive efforts, particularly where, as in the present instance, their activities can be disguised as nationalistic protests.)

(Prime Minister Chang has publicly expressed his con- fidence that the legislators will agree there are no unfavor- able aspects in the agreement once they fully understand the situation. However, should public opposition to the aid agree- ment continue to increase, Chang might become reluctant to force the assembly to ratify it. Chang's party has a major- ity, but many members are reluctant to support what they feel to be an unpopular measure.)

(Since the revolution and the almost total demoralization of the national police, any public agitation raises the pros- pect that demonstrations will get out of hand. Although the

18 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
