WESTERN EUROPE

6. Comment on shake-up in Soviet High Command in Austria:

The American Joint Indications Committee in Austria attributes the current shake-up of Soviet occupation officials to Moscow's dissatisfaction with the Soviet High Command's failure to support the Austrian Communist Party. The Committee is concerned that the changes may bolster the party and increase the internal security problem in Austria.

While speculative, this interpretation is supported by other evidence. Heretofore, the Soviet officials in Austria have extended neither respect nor trust to Austrian Communists although they assisted them on such occasions as the demonstrations in October 1950. Communist organizations have been criticized, and Communist leaders treated shabbily at public functions.

On the other hand, despite the general unpopularity of the Soviet occupation, personal relations between top Soviet and non-Communist Austrian officials have not been entirely unfriendly. That Moscow may be preparing to amend this policy in favor of closer cooperation with the Austrian Communists is suggested by the replacement of the relatively popular political adviser by Sergei Kudryavtsev who was connected with the Soviet espionage system in Canada in 1945.

7. Schuman expects French-German accord on security controls:

On the basis of a private discussion with German Chancellor Adenauer on security controls over armament production in Germany, French Foreign Minister Schuman revealed his belief that the French and German Governments will reach an agreement satisfactory to the US and Britain. In the meantime, Schuman does not favor further French-American-British conversations on this subject at the diplomatic level.

Commissioner McCloy in Bonn feels that the French now seem prepared to adopt a more reasonable attitude on security controls.

Comment: Early in December, France had requested high-level tripartite conversations to decide on an acceptable Allied position on security controls, and the American Embassy in Paris later reported its opinion that the French had made their last concession on the issue. Schuman had hoped to obtain Adenauer's acceptance of a contractual arrangement on security controls during the Paris meeting of the Defense Community Foreign Ministers, but there is no indication that Adenauer has given in on this point.

A French-German accord on security controls would eliminate the main obstacle to speedy agreement on the European Defense Community and the whole problem of contractual arrangements.
