[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
18 September 1952
Copy No. 57
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Kennan comments on Sino-Soviet Communique (page 3).

FAR EAST
2.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Chinese Communist troops withdraw from Indochina (page 4).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]4. Burmese Prime Minister proposes Chou En-lai visit to Burma and India (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
5. Afghanistan to delay oil-drilling operations near Soviet frontier[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
6.
7. Britain to seek Egyptian cooperation on Sudan constitution (page 7).
8. Field Marshal Montgomery suggests reduction in Greek Army (page 7).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Kennan comments on Sino-Soviet Communique:
The Sino-Soviet communique reveals, in the opinion of Ambassador Kennan, that the Chinese Communists have been compelled not only to accept but actually to request an indefinite continuation of the USSR's presence in Port Arthur in order to obtain some satisfaction of their military needs from the USSR.

Kennan speculates that while the communique did not mention the Korean war, "sinister" military decisions may have been made. He notes no evidence, however, that the Soviet Union is preparing for major military operations and comments that the Soviet reply avoided a hint in the Chinese note that the Far Eastern situation might call for the implementation of the Sino-Soviet Treaty.

FAR EAST
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Chinese Communist troops withdraw from Indochina:
All Chinese Communist troops in northwest Tonkin have now withdrawn to China, with the possible exception of a few advisers attached to the Viet Minh regiment in that area.

Comment: Between 5000 and 6000 Chinese troops entered northwest Tonkin several months ago, presumably to assist the Viet Minh in local operations against French-led border tribesmen. all but one battalion were expected to withdraw by the middle of the month.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]4. Burmese Prime Minister proposes Chou En-lai visit to Burma and India:
Prime Minister Nu proposed to the Chinese Ambassador in Rangoon on 30 August that Chou En-lai visit Burma and India. The Chinese Ambassador seemed favorably impressed with the idea, and Nu has asked Prime Minister Nehru for his views[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 05]
Ambassador seemed favorably impressed with the idea, and Nu has asked Prime Minister Nehru for his views.

Comment: In a widely publicized speech last July, Nu asked for Russian and Chinese economic aid, explaining privately that his purpose in doing so was to undercut his political opposition. There has been no known response from either country.

Chou En-lai might well accept an invitation to visit Burma and India as a chance to encourage neutralist sentiment in both countries.

SOUTH ASIA

5. Afghanistan to delay oil-drilling operations near Soviet frontier:
To date there is no indication that the limited UN development and welfare projects in northern Afghanistan are being curtailed.
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6.
[PAGE 07]
7. Britain to seek Egyptian cooperation on Sudan constitution:
Prime Minister Nagib the Sudanese constitution, which is due to become effective on 8 November, and try to obtain his cooperation.

If Nagib appears willing to participate in a proposed international commission to observe the ensuing Sudanese elections but wants time to prepare, London will recommend that the elections be postponed for a few weeks. If he asks about the protection of his country's long-range interests, the British may suggest that the electoral commission become a continuing advisory group to the Governor General.

Comment: The military regime in Cairo, now primarily concerned with domestic problems, has so far taken no definite stand on major foreign issues. Despite Nagib's friendly gestures to the West, the extreme nationalism of several government members makes it doubtful that Egypt will readily accept the new British proposals.

8. Field Marshal Montgomery suggests reduction in Greek Army:
Deputy SHAPE Commander Montgomery reportedly told high Greek officials on 13 September that he believes an army of seven well-equipped divisions rather than the present ten divisions should be adequate for Greece. Montgomery suggested that Greece should present the problem of its excessive military budget to NATO because American aid would probably end within a year or two.
[PAGE 08]
Prime Minister Plastiras subsequently informed the American Ambassador that the armed forces would not be reduced. He reiterated that no important decision would be made without prior discussion with the US Embassy.

Comment: Montgomery made a similar suggestion last May which was immediately used by Greek officials to bolster requests for increased foreign aid to maintain the current strength of the armed forces. His unofficial suggestions may again encourage Greek maneuvers for additional aid either from NATO or the United States, which is on record as not favoring a reduction of Greek armed forces.
