Current Position of the Iraqi Communist Party

The Iraqi Communist party has entered into a new public dispute with Prime Minister Qasim--this time on the issue of his decision to grant amnesty on the occasion of a 16 June religious feast to a large number of Iraqis who had been "exiled" to various parts of the country. The party newspaper has complained that those banished included "feudalists and reactionaries who had participated in imperialist plots." A UAR message from Baghdad said about 2,000 people had been released.

Quarreling with the government's statement that stability and security prevail in Iraq, the Communist organ said that during the past two weeks there have been a series of violent assaults by "reactionary groups" against trade unions, peasant organizations and "other democratic bodies." It added that activities of the Popular Resistance Forces have been curtailed and that officials had been transferred to special units in governmental departments to "watch progressive movements."

Beginning with Qasim's rejection in May of Communist demands for governmental sanction of party activities and for appointment to the cabinet of acknowledged Communist party representatives, the Iraqi Communists have suffered a series of setbacks. These have included a governmental proclamation emphasizing that judicial procedures even in security matters are the province of the courts, a directive cautioning the press and radio to be prepared to substantiate charges published against individuals, and moves by the army command to assert tighter control over the Popular Resistance Forces. Leaders of the socialist National Democratic Party (NDP) have shown an increasing willingness to make decisions independent of the Communists, and Finance Minister Hadid, an NDP stalwart, has been elected chairman of the Communist-front Afro-Asian Solidarity Committee. The Communist-packed Iraqi delegation to promote fraternal relations with other Arab countries had its departure date twice postponed and so far has been circumspect in its public statements in other countries. Most important of all, there are indications of some gradual resurgence of anti-Communist groups throughout Iraq.

15 June 59
