[PAGE 01]
17 October 1959

Copy No. C 65

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

17 October 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The Soviet Government's decree of 15 October calling for a 42-percent increase over 1958 in production of consumer durable goods by the end of 1961 will not affect Soviet investment or military programs under the Seven-Year Plan (1959-1965). The Seven-Year Plan appears to be off to a good start. For the first nine months of this first year industrial output is claimed to be 12 percent over the corresponding period last year, while the plan called for a 7.7-percent rise. Without interfering with the planned goals, the leaders can devote any part of the overfulfillment to satisfying the popular desire for a faster rise in the standard of living.

Khrushchev: In an interview in Moscow on 13 October with Austrian President Schaerf, Khrushchev stated with regard to Berlin that absorption of West Berlin by West Germany is the only solution unacceptable to the USSR--any other could be worked out. He complained that Austria's failure to establish relations with East Germany does not correspond to its neutral status. Khrushchev referred to his discussions with President Eisenhower concerning the danger of "saturation" in military expenditures, but he warned that the West should not count on the burden of military expenditures as being too great for the Soviet Union to bear.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: A 15 October press interview granted by Military Governor Abdi appears to indicate that the Iraqi line regarding the assassination attempt on Qasim will be to charge the UAR with complicity. Reporting on the progress of investigations into the incident, Abdi alluded to UAR infiltrators sent into Iraq

[PAGE 04]
across the Syrian border, and added, in what is believed to be an unfounded allegation, that the UAR had moved a brigade close to the Iraqi border ten days prior to the assassination attempt. Communists and nationalists accuse each other of involvement in the attempt against Qasim. There are conflicting reports of the political alignment of the dead assailant found at the scene. Some allege he was a Communist; others say he was a Baathist.

Saudi Arabia: Crown Prince Faysal told the American ambassador on 14 October that the Saudi Government would not make concessions to reach a compromise settlement of its disputes with the Arabian American Oil Company. Faysal stressed that present conditions differ considerably from what they were when the company obtained its concession in 1933. He said it would be better for the company to give the government much more than 50 percent of the profits--he appears to be thinking of from 75-80 percent--than to "lose the whole operation."

17 Oct 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 05]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

New Soviet Consumer Goods Decree

The Soviet Government issued a decree on 15 October calling for a 42-percent increase in output of consumer durable goods by the end of 1961 over output in 1958. The decree gives scheduled output increases for 1960 and 1961 for refrigerators, sewing machines, vacuum cleaners, television and radio sets, motorcycles, and a host of similar products. Automobiles are not included.

The new decree, which apparently programs increases for most products only slightly above the high rates projected in the Seven-Year Plan (1959-65), covers only about 5 percent of Soviet industrial production and will not affect Soviet investment or military programs under the plan. The Seven-Year Plan has started off well. During the first nine months of this first year, industrial output was reported as 12 percent over the corresponding period last year, while the annual plan called for only a 7.7-percent increase. As long as industrial production keeps ahead of the 8.6-percent average annual increase required to meet the 1965 goal, the leaders can devote any part of the overfulfillment toward satisfying the population's desires for a faster rise in the standard of living.

The decree is one of a series, such as those on children's clothing and furniture, introduced during the past two years to provide benefits to the consumer at relatively small cost to the state.

17 Oct 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1

[PAGE 06]
Khrushchev Comments to Austrian President on East-West Issues

Khrushchev told Austrian President Schaerf in Moscow on 13 October that any solution of the "West Berlin issue" could be worked out except absorption of Berlin by West Germany. Turning to the disarmament question, Khrushchev referred to his discussions with President Eisenhower of the "saturation" situation in military expenditures, but warned that the West should not count on the burden of military expenditures being too great for the Soviet Union to bear. New arms, he stated, are becoming cheaper, although conventional forces continue to be very costly.

In response to Khrushchev's complaint that Austria's failure to establish relations with East Germany does not correspond to its neutral status, Schaerf said the relationship with West Germany was of great importance to Austria, and that this would suffer if Austria established ties with East Germany. Khrushchev, when asked at a news conference on 15 October whether any distinction could be made between military and political neutrality, replied, "Neutrality is neutrality, in all walks of life."

Throughout Schaerf's visit in the USSR the themes of peace and Austro-Soviet friendship were stressed. Apparently the Austrians failed to gain Soviet agreement to a further alleviation of their oil reparations obligations, but Moscow has reiterated its promise to consider including reparations goods in normal trade exchanges when reparations deliveries end in 1961.

The joint communique issued on 15 October at the close of the visit announced that Soviet President Voroshilov will pay a return visit to Austria, but no date was specified. Khrushchev told his press conference last year he had accepted Chancellor Raab's invitation to visit Austria himself and will do so "as soon as I am able."

17 Oct 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 09]
