[PAGE 01]
15 April 1961

Copy No. C 79

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
15 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

4. France-Algeria: PAG decision not to go to Evian reportedly strongly influenced by Moscow and Cairo. (Page iii)

6. Mongolia: Moscow's control in Mongolia further strengthened by new economic aid agreement. (Page iii)

7. Israel: Ben-Gurion's political position jeopardized by arrest of associate as spy for USSR. (Page iv)

9. France: Nuclear test postponed until 28 April; may be further postponed until end of UN General Assembly session. (Page iv)

[PAGE 04]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
*France-Algeria:
the decision of the PAG not to go to Evian was strongly influenced by Moscow and Cairo.
(Backup, Page 4)

Mongolia: Moscow's pre-eminent position in Mongolia has been strengthened by the extension of further economic aid for the Mongolian Third Five-Year Plan (1961-65). In an agreement signed in Moscow on 13 April, the USSR granted Ulan Bator new credits worth $135,000,000 and agreed to defer repayment of trade debts and previous credits. Last September, three months after Peiping boosted the amount of its Mongolian economic aid program, the Soviet Union granted a $154,000,000 credit to Ulan Bator. Total Soviet economic aid extended to Mongolia since 1945 amounts to about $665,000,000, compared with the Chinese contribution of $115,000,000--all of which has been extended since 1956. In addition, however, Peiping maintains a substantial technical assistance program in Mongolia which provides it with a considerable measure of influence in Mongolian industrial and agricultural development.

15 Apr 61
DAILY BRIEF
iii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Israel: Ben-Gurion's political position will be jeopardized as a result of the arrest of his unofficial personal military adviser on a charge of espionage for the Soviet Union. The prime minister, who heads a caretaker government pending elections next August, has already been widely criticized for his handling of the domestic crisis centering on the Lavon affair, which precipitated the elections. The revelation of the spy scandal will provide opposition parties with another issue to use against Ben-Gurion in the campaign.
(Backup, Page 6)

France: The fourth French nuclear test has been postponed until 28 April or as soon thereafter as meteorological conditions permit. This date has been established by the government on the assumption that the UN General Assembly session will have ended by then,

15 Apr 61
DAILY BRIEF
iv

[PAGE 08]
Prolongation of the session beyond 28 April--which seems likely--may cause a further postponement of the test.

Moscow has softened its earlier charge that further French testing would make a test ban treaty "pointless." The chief Soviet delegate at Geneva told a US newsman on 8 April that a French test would "hamper" the negotiations and said he had chosen this word deliberately rather than a stronger term implying a breakdown in the conference.

15 Apr 61
DAILY BRIEF
v

[PAGE 09]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 10]
Reported Soviet Influence on Provisional Algerian Government

reported on "guidance" given him by Soviet Deputy Premier Kosygin.

Kosygin advised the Algerians not to meet with the French unless the PAG were recognized as the sole representative of Algeria and were prepared to achieve a complete break with France, i. e., no bases and no French political or economic influence. Kosygin stressed that an independent Algeria should follow the pattern of Nasir and Touré, avoiding the "Bourguibaism" of Tunisia, and he warned the PAG to be wary of French moves and to treat with suspicion any overtures from the US. Algerian representatives who had consulted with Nasir also reported along similar lines.

presentation was reportedly very convincing, and, coupled with French Minister for Algerian Affairs Louis Joxe's confirmation that the French would consult with other Algerian groups, could have persuaded the PAG that it should at least delay the opening of negotiations.

De Gaulle reportedly was briefed on 6 April about the Soviet recommendations and the PAG reaction to them. His 11 April press conference, which further clarified but did not change his basic policy of self-determination for Algeria, may have reflected this knowledge both in its general casting of "Soviet imperialism" and in the "almost certain" extension of Communism to Algeria if the rebels chose a complete rupture with France. Joxe told the American Embassy in Paris prior to Tunisian President Bourguiba's February meeting with De Gaulle that the USSR was "complicating matters" by trying to insert itself into the general Algerian picture.

De Gaulle's speeches on his current provincial tour have continued his appeals to the rebel leadership to "be reasonable"

15 Apr 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 4

[PAGE 11]
and accept French offers of cooperation. Approximately one sixth of the Algerians detained in camps have been released this week in a further gesture of good intent. De Gaulle's Sunday speech in Bordeaux--being billed as a major address--may contain some new initiative.

15 Apr 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 5

[PAGE 12]
Israeli Spy Scandal Threatens Ben-Gurion

The accused spy is Dr. Israel Baer, who has been military correspondent for Haaretz, Israel's most respected newspaper, and professor of military science at the Tel Aviv branch of Hebrew University. A native of Vienna, he is a graduate of the Austrian military academy. He took part in the Austrian socialist uprisings of 1934, joined the international brigade in the Spanish Civil War, and reportedly was among those officers of the brigade who were to be sent to Russia for special training at the Frunze Military Academy. However, he allegedly became a convinced Zionist "almost overnight" and went to Palestine instead. He served in a military staff capacity during the Arab-Israeli war and in recent years has been an Israeli Army historian. Before becoming closely associated with Ben-Gurion, Baer was a member of the extreme socialist Mapam party in Israel.

The Israeli elections scheduled for 15 August were forced by the unwillingness of most other parties to serve again in a government under Ben-Gurion as prime minister. The Mapai party, however, refused to form a new coalition without the participation of its 74-year old leader. The prolonged crisis over the Lavon affair and Ben-Gurion's seemingly vindictive determination to crush Pinhas Lavon as a political challenger have alienated many of the prime minister's former supporters. His main political asset--his stature as pre-eminent defender of Israel's security--now is threatened by the espionage scandal. Even before this development, Mapai was expected to lose several parliamentary seats.

15 Apr 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 6

[PAGE 13]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 15]
TOP SECRET
