established two main barricaded strongholds within a quarter of a mile of each other--one at the University led by Assembly deputy and former paratrooper Pierre Lagaillarde, and the other at the Compagnie Algerienne bank, under Joseph Ortiz, a café owner and leader of the extremist French National Front. Cordons of paratroopers were thrown around the barricades, but access in and out of the redoubts and supplies to the insurgents were permitted.

Ortiz announced on 25 January that if De Gaulle publicly abandoned self-determination for Algeria and stated an intention to retain Algeria as a French province, the insurgents would lay down their arms. The US consul general reported on 26 January that most authorities in Algiers felt it was no longer possible to apply De Gaulle's policy for Algeria. During 27-28 January insurgent ranks swelled to between 4,000 and 6,000, but settlers were able to rally few Moslem supporters.

The insurgents have expressed the determination not to be robbed of the fruit of their efforts as they maintain they were after the May 1958 coup. According to Algerian deputy Philippe Marcais, demonstrations were planned for 25 January--not to attempt to reverse De Gaulle's policy, which was thought impossible, but "to raise the temperature" in Algiers with the purpose of mounting a revolt to overthrow De Gaulle.

Marcais stated on 27 January that Lagaillarde was "absolutely determined" to obtain a reversal of De Gaulle's policy and was prepared to initiate a civil war "with the cooperation of the army, if necessary."

This feeling of confidence was fostered by the government's censorship policy, which permitted the insurgents to believe they were winning support in France in the same way the 1958 coup unfolded. Because metropolitan France was in the dark on the seriousness of the situation in Algiers, the Algerian Deputies were emboldened to demand abrogation of the Algerian policy parliament had backed overwhelmingly in October.

The mainstay of insurgent confidence, however, was the belief in army backing. The insurgents rejected Delouvrier's impassioned appeal on the 28th for unity behind De Gaulle as a maneuver to take them in: "The army is with us and we will not budge." Lagaillarde and Ortiz were reported to believe

30 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
