De Gaulle--would not be opposed by the rest of the army, which is determined to maintain "unity of the army."

De Gaulle and the Army

De Gaulle was aware of this sentiment, but he miscalculated its intensity and the extent of his control over the army. His low opinion of the army's political pretensions is clear in a statement he made to Algerian rightist deputy Lauriol on 19 January: "This false atmosphere of tension has been entirely the creation of the military. I know the military and how they operate. They mounted the Dreyfus affair and they are mounting an Algerian crisis in order to serve their own purposes."

De Gaulle apparently wanted firm action to wipe out the barricades, but the issue split the cabinet. When Debré reported after a quick trip to Algiers on 26 January that the colonels had asserted their willingness to maintain order, but were not willing to move against the insurgents, De Gaulle appears to have changed tactics. He told a 27 January cabinet meeting it was probably a mistake to ask paratroops who have fought for five years to free Algeria to "shoot other Frenchmen who believe the same thing." Subsequent cabinet approval of orders to Delouvrier and Challe suggests that direct use of force is no longer demanded by Paris.

The government decision to take Delouvrier and Challe from Algiers during the night of 28 January seems to have been dictated by the need to remove them from an increasingly difficult situation--possibly including seizure by insurgents in the event a new government were proclaimed--and to establish a rallying point where the loyalty of the rest of the army and the other armed services could be demonstrated for the benefit of settlers and paratroops in Algiers.

Domestic Political Situation

The big political factor favoring De Gaulle is the absence of any individual leader or political grouping able and ready to take over the reins of government. Right-wing extremists and Algerian deputies were loudly critical of De Gaulle at first, but have had less to say publicly since police action was taken throughout France on 28 January against extremists. Initial public apathy has now given way, and support is mushrooming from a wide variety of political, labor, and religious groups and from the press. A

30 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 11
