evening of the 28th that the opposing positions were "irreconcilable." They were also reportedly "absolutely convinced" that the 10th and 25th Airborne Divisions--only one tenth of which are actually in Algiers, however--were prepared to fight for the insurgents, and believed other divisions would swing to their side. Insurgent leaders indicated that a move by De Gaulle against them would result in the establishment of a separate Algerian government.

The Army

The army had accepted De Gaulle's 16 September self-determination offer in silence, and majority army sentiment was probably correctly represented in a statement by Marshal Juin on 26 October that De Gaulle had acted unilaterally but that Frenchmen would have to accept the challenge since "the dice were thrown." Juin bowed to the idea of a referendum but maintained it could be held only after a cease-fire in which rebels "reconciled themselves to France and laid down their arms."

A colonel in the field in eastern Algeria in late 1959 flatly opposed rebel participation in the proposed referendum, and another colonel told an American that about 20 percent of the army was determined to maintain the French Army in Algeria "at any cost." A European deputy from Algiers claimed that if those officers actively opposed to De Gaulle's policies were to organize against him, the remainder of the military "would be carried along."

In mid-January a member of Delegate-General Delouvrier's staff said, "We are once more in the tunnel. This time I am truly discouraged." He lamented low army morale and exclaimed, "The entire army feels it can no longer continue the war without knowing why."

Massu's bitter attack on De Gaulle's policies reflected army fears that Algeria was being lost. He said flatly, "We no longer understand the policy of General de Gaulle." He thought De Gaulle's idea on the way to keep Algeria French "is certainly not ours," and threatened that the army would "forcibly intervene if the situation demands." He insisted the army would never leave Algeria.

As recently as 28 January high-ranking officers are quoted as believing that whatever action might be taken by the activist army minority--even a move from Algeria to France to overthrow

30 Jan 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10
