[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
14 March 1951

Copy No. C-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

2. UK and French delegations anxious for Foreign Ministers’ Conference (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Internal tension mounting in Albania (page 6).

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
2. UK and French delegations anxious for Foreign Ministers’ Conference:

At a tripartite meeting of the US, UK, and French delegations to the Deputy Foreign Ministers’ Conference in Paris, the Chief of the UK delegation, supported by the French, appealed strongly for doing everything possible, “excluding appeasement or the acceptance of the Soviet agenda,” to insure the holding of a Foreign Ministers’ Conference in an effort to buy time and avert war. The chiefs of the UK and French delegations admitted that they wanted “to make it easier” for Gromyko to seek revised instructions and for Moscow to accept the Western delegations’ agenda proposal, and insisted on agreeing to “demilitarization of Germany” as an item in the revised agenda proposal.

Ambassador Jessup anticipates that meetings will continue for some time while the Soviets wait for a break in the Western position. He believes that the situation is still in hand, but that if the apparent stalemate continues it might be difficult to keep the French and British from urging concessions that would be unacceptable to the US.

Comment: French and British public opinion expects that a Foreign Ministers’ Conference will be held, and both governments are under considerable pressure to explore every avenue to this end, regardless of the chances for reaching a modus vivendi at such a conference. These governments are not inclined to believe that concessions regarding the agenda would necessarily prejudice the Western position at the final conference.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Internal tension mounting in Albania:

The French Minister in Tirana reports that since November 1950 Albanian officials have progressively yielded control to “Soviet specialists,” whose numbers have increased daily. The Minister regards the adoption of Soviet-inspired laws for the reorganization of industry and agriculture as a tacit admission of the partial failure of the two year plan--which he believes is also responsible for the recent dropping of two young Communist militants from the cabinet.

According to the Minister, increasing aerial violations of Albanian territory and the discovery of a well-organized, well-supplied underground have given Albanian leaders concern for the internal solidarity of their regime. They have appealed to the police and the courts to intensify the prosecution of “enemies of the people” and have enacted further repressive decrees. In addition, the Albanian press and radio are making daily announcements of aggressive preparations on the part of Yugoslavia and Greece, apparently in order to justify overt Soviet control over Albania and to rally the people by appealing to their patriotic sentiments.

Comment: The French Minister in Tirana has reportedly noted previously a sharp increase in the number of Soviet civilian and military personnel in Albania, including Soviet air and armored force officers. A reported bombing attack by two Albanians on the Soviet Legation in Tirana on 19 February indicates active opposition and resistance to Soviet domination.

- 6 -
