[PAGE 01]
1 June 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
1. FURTHER DELAY IN FORMATION OF FRENCH GOVERN-
MENT SEEN

2. SITUATION ON TAIWAN

3. LEBANESE ELECTION SITUATION

6. PROSPECT OF RENEWED VIOLENCE ON CYPRUS INCREASES

1 June 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. FURTHER DELAY IN FORMATION OF FRENCH
GOVERNMENT SEEN

The American embassy in Paris estimated on 29 May that the current French political crisis would last another week or more, with a minority government more likely to result than one including either Socialists or Independents. Socialist spokesmen told the embassy on 30 May that they would prefer a coalition led by the Popular Republicans, including the Independents, but they do not completely exclude the possibility of Socialist rather than Independent participation. The Socialist National Council meeting to decide this question is likely to be held on 2 June.

A Paris press report of 30 May stated President Coty, reportedly "bitter" over the political parties' inability to agree on a new government, fears for the future of workable democracy in France and is considering a call to General De Gaulle "for consultations" if the crisis continues another two or three weeks. This reported attitude may at least have the effect of leading intransigent factions to modify their current positions.

The embassy points out that underlying factors not yet fully recognized by most deputies and certainly not by the general public are operating to force "radical treatment" in the near future. The embassy cites (1) the urgent need for new fiscal measures which would sharply undercut industrial expansion and could have early and explosive reactions in both labor and political fields; and (2) dawning awareness among some moderate leaders that France must make political concessions on its North African problems despite the unyielding nationalist attitude of many influential Frenchmen.

1 June 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. SITUATION ON TAIWAN

Ambassador Rankin reports that on the evening of 27 May two minor incidents took place in Taipei. In one, a crowd of about 200 stoned the house of an American official; in the other, a crowd of 50 to 60 stood in front of the house of an American shouting and making critical comments, but no damage was done. On 30 May an American MAAG sergeant, driving his car in the rain, struck and killed a Chinese woman pedestrian in Taipei. The case is under joint Sino-American investigation and attempts are being made to prevent wide publicity.

American officials on Taiwan agree that the situation remains serious, but that a recurrence of serious rioting is unlikely.

Chiang Kai-shek has requested Foreign Minister Yeh to express his personal concern to Ambassador Rankin over public suggestions that an influential agency or person was behind the riots. Chiang stated that the intimation was shocking and inconceivable. He assumed Chiang Ching-kuo was believed the person responsible, and asserted that if this were the case, Chiang-kuo would have been acting against the interests of the state and himself.

1 June 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. LEBANESE ELECTION SITUATION

Despite an opposition call for a general strike in Beirut on 31 May, most shops were open and quiet prevailed throughout the city following the bloody political riots of 30 May. Army units are patrolling the streets.

authorities have closed five pro-Egyptian opposition newspapers. Ex-prime minister Saib Salam, who is under arrest in the hospital, has declared a hunger strike until the Solh government resigns. Approximately 100 persons, including many Syrians and Palestinians, have been arrested following the rioting. The large number of Syrians and Palestinians involved strengthens suspicions of Egyptian complicity. The riots were against the Chamoun-Solh government, but were not anti-Western.

Reports are circulating in Beirut that the commander of the Lebanese army and main prop of the present government, General Chehab, is wavering in his loyalty toward President Chamoun. Such rumors may be inspired in an effort to cause dissension among government supporters. There is no evidence to support these rumors and, in fact, Chehab's forcefulness in suppressing the rioting indicates that he is strongly on the side of law and order

1 June 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5
[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. PROSPECT OF RENEWED VIOLENCE ON
CYPRUS INCREASES

Rejection by Great Britain of Archbishop Makarios' request for bilateral negotiations on the Cyprus issue may lead to a new anti-British campaign on the island, including a resumption of violence by underground EOKA. The American consul at Nicosia reports that propaganda activities have been stepped up by EOKA's political branch, by the Greek-Cypriot press, and by Athens radio, and that slogan-painters are again at work.

In rejecting the archbishop's offer, London stated it was always willing to discuss the Cyprus problem "with Cypriot representatives of whom Makarios might be one."

According to Ambassador Allen, the British attitude is based on a belief that Makarios' prestige is diminishing, a view with which Allen disagrees completely.

1 June 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 8
[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
