WESTERN EUROPE

7. Question of Germany's political status may delay defense contribution:

The French Government had not expected
to consider the problems involved in the
creation of a new political status for
Germany until after a decision was reached
on a German military contribution, according to the Political Advisor
to the French High Commissioner in Bonn. The French expect that
the German contribution to Western defense will be determined by
early fall, thus permitting a decision on contractual relations
with the Germans by the end of the year.

High Commissioner McCloy has pointed
out, however, that it is essential to reach definitive political con-
clusions on Germany at the prospective meeting of US, UK and
French Foreign Ministers in September and at the forthcoming NATO
Council meeting.

Comment: The Germans are strongly
opposed to concluding military agreements until they know fairly
definitely what changes in their political status are proposed. Agree-
ment could be reached on the military question prior to the con-
clusion of contractual agreements given a firm Allied declaration of
intentions in regard to Germany's political status. The French
Government seems increasingly convinced of German good faith with
respect to the European Army, and can be expected to favor rapid
agreement on political rights without, however, consenting to a
restoration of complete sovereignty until the conclusion of a peace
treaty.

8. French consider cut-back in defense program:

French officials are increasingly skeptical
of the fruitfulness of the current NATO
hearings on sharing the defense burden
and consequently believe French defense
plans must be either cut back or programmed over a longer period.
Any slow-down would affect production plans rather than French
commitments regarding Indochina, bases, or manpower. These
officials claim that none of the other NATO countries is undertaking
an additional defense effort involving any real risk to its economy,
and that therefore France is assuming a disproportionately large
burden.
