[PAGE 01]
18 April 1961
Copy No. C 79

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

USSR/Cuba: A Soviet government statement on 18 April said that continuation of the invasion of Cuba "may have the gravest consequences for world peace." The statement declared that the USSR "reserves the right to take all measures, with all states, to render the necessary assistance to the Republic of Cuba if the armed interference in the affairs of the Cuban peoples is not stopped." The Soviet government expressed the hope that the US government would understand that the invasion of Cuba could "endanger the peaceful life of the population of the United States itself." The statement demanded immediate consideration of the Cuban situation by the UN General Assembly.

[PAGE 04]
18 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Cuba. (Page i)
2. Laos. (Page ii)
3. Angola: American consul sees possibility of "chaos worse than Belgian Congo." (Page iii)
4. Communist China: Peiping may increase trade with Japan. (Page iii)
5. India: Differences among Communist leaders remain following 7-16 April party congress. (Page iii)
6. Israel: Arabs object to military parade in Jerusalem. (Page iv)
7. Turkey: Military regime faces problem of transition to civil government. (Page iv)

[PAGE 05]
CUBA

SELECTED RAILROAD

Caribbean Sea

CUBA: AREA OF INVASION
— Province boundary
Selected railroad

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Map Page

[PAGE 06]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 April 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*Cuba: (As of 0430) Castro forces have suffered "considerable casualties" and the loss of several coastal points in southern Las Villas province. "heavy arms are being brought in" by the attackers. a unit of the attacking forces had penetrated inland to the Laguna del Tesoro on the Matanzas provincial boundary. A Cuban radio station monitored by US press agencies issued an appeal for ambulances, "because there are many injured in Jaguey Grande," a town in Matanzas some 20 miles from the coast. Although the anti-Castro Revolutionary Council claims that the 17 April landings were intended largely to facilitate action by larger forces already within Cuba, there has as yet been no information of any significant action in support of the landing forces. continued arrests of suspected anti-Castro elements throughout the island.

Pro-Castro groups elsewhere in Latin America were quick to react to the outbreak of fighting in Cuba. Mobs stoned USIA offices in Buenos Aires and the offices of an American airline in the Chilean capital on 17 April. Anti-US demonstrations also occurred in at least six other Latin American cities on the same day and more demonstrations are scheduled. In Bogota, demonstrators were dispersed by gun fire in front of the US Embassy. The Venezuelan armed forces were alerted for demonstrations by the relatively strong pro-Castro groups in that country. Former Ecuadorean interior minister Araujo, addressing a pro-Castro rally in Quito on 17 April, called for volunteers to go to Cuba "to fight Yankee imperialism." Mexican ex-President Cardenas announced that he will go to Cuba as a personal gesture of solidarity with the Castro regime.

Both Moscow and Peiping have confined themselves to the standard non-committal statements of general support for the Castro government. The voluminous commentary has been general throughout the Bloc.

[PAGE 07]
NORTHERN LAOS
GOVERNMENT Forces in Contact
KONG LE - PATHET LAO
KONG LE - PATHET LAO AREAS

ROAD
TRAIL
STATUTE MILES
ROUTE NUMBER

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Map Page

[PAGE 08]
*Laos: In central Laos, the bulk of the government force from the Nhommarat area continues its disorganized withdrawal to Thakhek, although some elements have established new defensive positions along Route 12, about 11 miles from the town. In the confusion attending the withdrawal, bridges in the Nhommarat area, previously prepared for demolition, were not blown. Contact with enemy forces has been broken off. The government garrison at Mahaxay, about 25 miles due east of Thakhek, has been ordered to withdraw westward to avoid being cut off. Urgent requests have been sent to Vientiane general headquarters for dispatch of 105-mm. howitzers to reinforce Thakhek.

Southwest of Xieng Khouang town, enemy forces continue efforts to consolidate their position at Ban Pha.
(Backup, Page 1) (Maps)

18 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 09]
Angola: The American consul in Luanda reports that rebel terrorism and governmental counteraction have resulted in the death of hundreds of whites and thousands of Africans in the past month. He feels that despite Portugal's determination to restore order, it will be impossible to return to the status quo ante. He believes that Angolan Africans now would not be satisfied even with drastic reforms and that there is a possibility of a complete breakdown of law and order, leading ultimately to "chaos worse than the Belgian Congo."

Communist China - Japan: There are signs of a thaw in Sino-Japanese economic relations, obstructed since 1958 by Peiping's strict insistence upon prior political concessions from Japan. Actuated by a combination of economic difficulties at home and trade problems with the rest of the bloc, the authorities in Peiping now appear prepared to open the way for some recovery in Sino-Japanese trade, which dropped from $140,000,000 in 1957 to $23,000,000 in 1960. Publicly, however, Peiping still insists that any "large-scale" trade depends on Tokyo's meeting three conditions--that Japan stop being "hostile" toward Communist China, stop associating itself with the promotion of a "two Chinas scheme," and stop obstructing the normalization of relations between the Japanese and China.
(Backup, Page 4)

India: Indian Communist leaders made little progress in mending their differences during the party's congress from 7 to 16 April. Preliminary reports indicate that the congress adopted a moderate compromise resolution on the "present political situation" after postponing once again a decision on the party's future tactical "program"---a move reportedly recommended by top Soviet representative M. A. Suslov. Both actions constitute a setback for the extremist faction and indicate that Indian Communists will continue to be guided by the "peaceful, parliamentary" policy adopted in 1958. The moderate-rightist group consolidated its control by re-electing General Secretary Ajoy Ghosh despite his poor health.
(Backup, Page 5)

18 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 10]
Israel-Jordan: Israel has refused to abandon its plans to hold the state's 13th anniversary military parade in Jerusalem on 20 April despite a ruling by the UN Security Council that the parade, and a rehearsal that took place on 17 March, are in violation of the 1949 Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement. The Israelis have changed the intended route of the parade in order to avoid approaching the armistice line which bisects the city, but they remain adamant about including tanks and other heavy equipment in the procession contrary to armistice restrictions. The Israelis have consistently refused to accept the UN's authority on their side of the Israeli-Arab armistice lines. The parade plans have again fanned Arab--particularly Jordanian--resentment toward Israel.
(Backup, Page 7)

Turkey: The military regime, which seized power on 27 May 1960, has promised a transition to civil government and national elections by 29 October. tight surveillance of all political activities and swift apprehension of those who in any way express discontent with the military regime. Regardless of who wins the national elections, it is expected that the army will remain a major factor in Turkish politics.
(Backup, Page 9)

18 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF iv

[PAGE 11]
UNCLASSIFIED

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Map Page

[PAGE 12]
Situation in Laos

Pathet Lao influence appears to be growing among villages surrounding Vientiane. Communist guerrilla squads have been organized in more than a score of villages within a 25-mile radius and are making preparations for ambush attacks on government patrols. Meanwhile, Pathet Lao agent propagandists continue active in and around Vientiane.

The recent enemy attack on the government outpost at Ban Pha Pho in southernmost Laos may be more than an isolated incident.

Communist intent to consolidate guer- rilla assets in southern Laos for eventual combat operations against local government forces. the importance of the task and detailed a strategy of collecting strength to "wipe out places one by one in order to insure victory." Reference was made to military equipment and cadres available from "Central"--combined Pathet Lao - Vietnamese Communist headquarters, believed located somewhere along the northern Lao - Vietnamese border.

There has been a notable lack of incidents in southern Laos, where government garrison forces are spread thinly and Pathet Lao guerrillas have long exercised de facto control over much of the hinterland. However, these guerrillas---at the end of the Communist logistical pipeline--have always been the poorest equipped in the country. Moreover, Communist attention since last fall has been principally directed at consolidation in northern Laos.

With the government now increasingly on the defensive on all fronts, the Pathet Lao may feel free to divert additional troops and material from the northern sector for use in the south. Establishment of an open presence in southern Laos would bolster the Pathet Lao's posture as a nationwide force and would commensurately strengthen the Communist hand in any future negotiations. In this connection, Kong Le claimed in a speech at Xieng Khouang town on 15 April that the "government forces and Pathet Lao

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 13]
fighting units" had liberated two thirds of the country's territory.

Soviet Premier Khrushchev, in a recent discussion of world affairs with the Indian ambassador in Moscow, implied that the USSR had entered the Laotian struggle to prevent Chinese involvement. Khrushchev reportedly said that Chinese Communist involvement in Laos might have caused the conflict to spread "from Southeast Asia to the straits of Formosa," and eventually raise the question of the USSR's obligations under the Sino-Soviet defense pact. Khrushchev's purpose in referring to Sino-Soviet differences on policy in Laos probably was to impress New Delhi with the USSR's reasonableness and restraint in the Laotian affair and to underscore the need for accepting Soviet terms for negotiations.

Soviet spokesmen apparently took much the same line with Indian officials in the US in mid-February. In a 14 February discussion with an American official regarding Laos, the deputy chief of Indian Mission, Chatterjee, remarked that he had gathered the impression from Soviet colleagues in Washington that if Laos developed into another Korea, the Chinese Communists would necessarily control the situation. Chatterjee said that the Soviet spokesmen took pains to leave the impression that the USSR, by remaining in control of the Laotian situation, had forestalled Chinese intervention.

Burmese Premier U Nu and Chou En-lai endorsed the principle of "coordination and cooperation" against the Chinese Nationalist irregulars. Peiping and Rangoon mounted joint military operations against the irregular forces in Burma earlier this year. The reference to the Nationalist forces was probably sought by the Chinese Communists as an implicit expression of Burmese support for Peiping's expressed concern about the activities of these irregulars in Laos. Chinese Communist broadcasts have labeled the evacuation of irregulars from Laos to Taiwan "phony" and warned that only the old and ineffective were removed. Peiping radio also recently charged that Chinese Nationalist elements conducted a raid into China from Laos.

A divided Laos is unacceptable, according to a Chinese Communist journalist who periodically briefs editors of the Communist

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 14]
press in Hong Kong. In a recent briefing he asserted that there was no reason to divide the country like Korea or Vietnam when there was still a chance of getting a unified Laos.

Airlift flights continue to be scheduled at about the average level. Since 15 April, however, airlift activity has been curtailed by adverse weather conditions, a situation that will probably become more frequent with the approach of the monsoon season.

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 15]
Communist China Encourages Some Increase in Sino-Japanese
Trade

Taking the initiative in recent weeks, Peiping has offered Japan 60,000 tons of coking coal highly desired by the Japanese steel industry. For the first time since 1958 it has invited Japanese firms to send representatives to the annual spring trade fair in Canton. It has increased to over 70 the number of Japanese firms which are designated as "friendly" by the Chinese Communists and with which they will therefore do business. This is more than quadruple the number designated at the first of the year. In response to these moves, the Japanese have eliminated the requirement that this trade be conducted on a straight barter basis and eased clearing account procedures.

Conciliatory Chinese moves have been accompanied by continued reminders of the need for some initiative from Japan toward a political accommodation. Peiping hopes the bait of substantial trade will keep alive pressure in Japan on the Ikeda government to meet the Chinese conditions.

Within Japan, press and business circles have welcomed the moves by both governments and have renewed suggestions for a government-to-government trade agreement--which Peiping says can be signed only if Tokyo meets its political demands. Skepticism about Peiping's intention and tactics remains. Japanese business elements recognize that the government is not likely to make any move toward Communist China until after the prime minister's visit to the United States in June.

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 16]
Indian Communist Party Congress Fails to Repair Rift

The main stumbling block to agreement on the CPI's future tactics continued to be the degree of support which Indian Communists should give Prime Minister Nehru and certain "progressive" policies of his Congress party government. Several days of bitter debate on this basic issue failed to resolve the split between the moderates, who line up with Moscow in favor of exploiting Nehru's prestige domestically and internationally, and the leftist extremists, who echo Peiping's line that Nehru has sold out to the "reactionaries" and must be actively opposed.

The question of the party's long-range program was turned over to the newly elected National Council, in effect shelving the problem for the time being. Press reports indicate that the council comprises 56 "right-wing" representatives, 36 "leftists," and 18 who take a middle-of-the-road position.

The congress was confronted with three draft resolutions on the current political situation, reflecting the views of the rival factions. Prolonged discussion and maneuvering produced a compromise in which the moderate-backed "official" draft, drawn up during the executive meetings in February, was accepted with some concessions in emphasis to the left-wing dissidents. The amended resolution probably will reiterate much of the double talk characteristic of the February declaration.

A striking omission in the discussions and statements of the congress was any reference to the Sino-Indian border dispute, suggesting that antagonism between the "nationalist" and pro-Chinese "internationalist" factions is still too strong to be smoothed over in a compromise resolution. In addition, Soviet delegate Suslov reportedly had exerted pressure to prevent discussion of this issue.

While the party's official tactics for the national elections next February remain to be worked out, Ajoy Ghosh's closing address to the conference on 16 April indicates the line the CPI is likely to take under moderate leadership. Ghosh called on

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 17]
"progressive forces" in all parties, including the ruling Congress party, to form a common front to work for the progress of India. A report issued by the party secretariat, while promising a "big political battle" against the government's "anti-people" policies, also pointed out that most of the CPI's "potential allies" were inside the Congress party and should be drawn into "mass action."

Suslov's presence and his apparent role in the decisions of the congress point up Moscow's continued predominant influence in Indian Communist party affairs. Chinese suspicions of the Soviet Union's "soft" policy in regard to countries such as India may well be re-fired by the moderation of the program which was adopted at a congress which Moscow apparently went to some lengths to control. In any event, the results of the congress will hardly be looked upon with favor in Peiping.

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6

[PAGE 18]
Israeli Military Parade in Jerusalem

The Israeli-Jordanian armistice agreement signed on 3 April 1949 specifically excluded armored vehicles from a ten-kilometer (6.2 miles) strip on either side of the armistice demarcation line--which includes the divided city of Jerusalem. The Israelis have announced that their parade will include over 300 pieces of ordnance, headed by 14 recently delivered British Centurion tanks and including 18 Sherman tanks, 26 French AMX light tanks, heavy and light artillery including French SS-10 guided antitank missiles, and American 106-mm. jeep-mounted recoilless guns. Some of these units are already in Jerusalem. The column also will include motorized infantry and a marching contingent of 4,000 men and women from the Israeli armed services. There will be no air force overflights because of the closeness of the border.

In recent years Israel has held its anniversary parade alternately in Tel Aviv, Haifa, and Jerusalem on the Jewish calendar date which corresponds to 14 May 1948, when Israel attained its independence. This year the Israelis attempted to forestall the furor that arose in connection with the 1958 parade in Jerusalem by apprising the UN Truce Supervision Organization, and through it the Jordanians, of their plans, stressing that the heavy equipment to be shown is only for ceremonial purposes. The Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) subsequently condemned the Israelis for using tanks and heavy artillery in the 17 March rehearsal.

A Baghdad newspaper reported on 14 April that the Arab states might hold a joint military parade in the Arab sector of Jerusalem, with Jordan providing the major force and smaller contingents representing other Arab armies. The Jordanian foreign minister has since said that his government has definitely decided not to hold a "retaliatory" parade. However, he pointed out that failure to do anything would be interpreted both in Jordan and elsewhere in the Arab world either as weakness or as yielding to pressure from the United States.

On 15 April Jordan submitted a new complaint to the MAC regarding the Israeli heavy equipment which already is in

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7

[PAGE 19]
Jerusalem for the parade. The MAC indicated it would first consider a prior Israeli complaint on alleged Jordanian violations. The Israeli press, meanwhile, has been criticizing the UN Truce Supervision Organization for making an "issue" of the parade. A Foreign Ministry spokesman has said publicly that Israel will cancel its parade if Jordan will implement those clauses of the armistice agreement dealing with free Israeli access to the Wailing Wall and the Mount Scopus enclave.

The UN partition of Palestine on 29 November 1947 provided for putting the city of Jerusalem and its environs under direct international administration. The ensuing Arab-Israeli war prevented the carrying out of this resolution, but the General Assembly reaffirmed its recommendation on 9 December 1949. In accordance with these acts, the United States does not recognize Israel's claim to Jerusalem as the Israeli capital.

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8

[PAGE 20]
The Situation in Turkey

The Turkish public appears to be more apprehensive over the future course of events than at any time since the Committee of National Union (CNU) purged 14 of its 37 members last November. Civil leaders are moving cautiously to make sure that the CNU will have no occasion to back down on its promise to hold elections by 29 October. An American Embassy official stated recently that partisan sentiment seemed sure to become extremely disruptive either before or after elections. He also noted that one result of the political tension is a resurgence of xenophobia and an increase in private criticism of US-Turkish military cooperation.

The avowed main task of the regime is to restore civil government. Many Turks believe that this will be done but that the timing will be determined by the completion of trials and approval of the new constitution and electoral law. The electoral legislation passed the House of Representatives on 6 April and has been sent to the CNU. The House now is debating the draft constitution. When this review is completed, the draft will be submitted to the CNU for approval, and must then be approved by a popular referendum.

There can be little doubt that the military still determines the policy of the Turkish Government and that any cabinet minister who differs with the CNU must resign. The resignation of the minister of industry on 14 April suggests continuing discontent within the government over military rule. As one prominent Turkish politician observed, "For years to come, Turkish politicians will feel a bayonet at the backs of their necks."

Since the relaxation of restrictions on activities of political organizations, it has become increasingly apparent that the banned Democrat party (DP) of the former regime remains a significant factor in Turkish politics. The CNU is apparently alarmed by indications of DP strength and is trying to keep it under control without having to take openly repressive measures. New political parties have been warned not to identify themselves too closely with the outlawed party. Behind the scenes the DP,

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9

[PAGE 21]
which may represent up to 50 percent of the electorate, has maintained considerable party cohesion, and at least one of the new parties has reportedly offered itself as a continuation of the DP and has appointed former DP members to positions of influence.

Political observers anticipate the transfer of power from the CNU to the Republican People's party (RPP) of Ismet Inonu, but few believe such a transfer is possible in a truly democratic fashion. The CNU may regard such a transfer as the only way to provide stability for the country and assure safety for itself.

The political trials of the leaders of the ousted Bayar-Menderes regime, now in their seventh month, are approaching the critical stage of determining who was responsible for the use of force against the student demonstrators in Ankara and Istanbul and whether Bayar and Menderes are guilty of violating the constitution by creating the special investigatory committee and by other repressive actions. Some executions are probable; estimates run as high as 80, but this is probably exaggerated. In the final analysis the CNU's decision will depend largely on its assessment of domestic and foreign reaction.

18 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 10

[PAGE 22]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 23]
18 April 1961
Copy No. C 79

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
