[PAGE 01]
23 January 1957
Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. POUJADIST DISORDERS POSSIBLE IN 27 JANUARY PARIS BY-ELECTION (page 3).

2. APPOINTMENT OF NEW POLISH AMBASSADOR TO MOSCOW (page 4).

3. PLANS FOR FUTURE CONSERVATIVE COALITION IN SOUTH KOREA (page 5).

4. RENEWAL OF US-RUMANIAN TENSION FORESEEN (page 6).
[PAGE 04]
1. POUJADIST DISORDERS POSSIBLE IN 27 JANUARY
PARIS BY-ELECTION

Comment on:

Antitax leader Pierre Poujade's candidacy for the 27 January run-off ballot in the Seine district raises the possibility of further disturbances by ultranationalist groups. The Poujadists successfully used strong-arm tactics to break up a Mendes-France Radical rally before the first ballot, but they are likely to meet strong competition from the Communists, who can be expected to instigate their own disturbances.

Poujade, who has already condemned the Fourth Republic and demanded power in the name of his movement, did not run for election in 1956 but is seeking an assembly seat now ostensibly to defend the French army and particularly General Jacques Faure, involved with conspiratorial settlers in Algeria. Poujade is probably mainly interested in enhancing his own waning power and restoring cohesion to his organization, which has split badly since the assembly elections in January 1956. The extent of support from his own group may become apparent following the tentatively scheduled rally this Thursday; hundreds of his followers are reported to be flocking to Paris. However, Jean Le Pen, a Poujadist deputy from the Seine district, who is particularly influential among the students, is reportedly at odds with Poujade.

Since no candidate won a majority in the 13 January vote, a plurality will be sufficient to elect a candidate on the second ballot. Conservative candidate Tardieu was the front runner, while the Communist vote dropped sharply. Poujade's candidacy may jeopardize Tardieu's chances and improve the prospects for a Communist comeback.
[PAGE 05]
2. APPOINTMENT OF NEW POLISH AMBASSADOR
TO MOSCOW

Comment on:

Poland's appointment of Tadeusz Gede to replace Waclaw Lewikowski as ambassador to the Kremlin, announced on 21 January, probably heralds a new series of shifts designed to place men that Gomulka can trust in key positions. Earlier reports stated that Ambassador Spasowski in Washington would also be replaced.

Gede, whose post as deputy premier was eliminated in the streamlining of the government following Gomulka's return to power in October 1956, was minister of foreign trade from 1949 to 1952. Gomulka is probably drawing on Gede's experience in Orbit trade matters to ensure expert handling of Poland's vital economic relations with the Soviet Union.

Lewikowski was a politburo member of the wartime Polish Communist Party. He served as a deputy minister of security before his appointment to Moscow in 1953.
[PAGE 06]
3. PLANS FOR FUTURE CONSERVATIVE COALITION IN
SOUTH KOREA

Yi Ki-pung, speaker of South Korea's National Assembly and leader of the Liberal Party, plans to approach opposition Democratic Party leader Cho Pyong-ok concerning the formation of a coalition government to avert chaos following Rhee's death, according to a Korean newspaperman close to Yi.

Yi's plan reportedly is to allow Vice President Chang Myon, a member of the Democratic Party, to succeed to the presidency, but to put through a constitutional amendment providing for a parliamentary form of government which would make the president a figurehead. Cho Pyong-ok would then become prime minister--a post which was abolished by Rhee.

Comment

The passing of this information to an American official suggests that Yi may desire to ascertain the United States' reaction. Yi's plan reflects indications that the Democratic Party will emerge as the dominant conservative party in South Korea following Rhee's death and the expected disintegration of the Liberal Party.

Cho, at one time Seoul police chief and home minister under Rhee, has emerged as one of Rhee's most able and vigorous opponents.
[PAGE 07]
4. RENEWAL OF US-RUMANIAN TENSION FORESEEN

Comment on:

Official confirmation on 19 January of earlier hints that American observers would not be allowed at the Rumanian national elections on 3 February, coupled with other recent anti-American moves, is interpreted by the American minister in Bucharest as introducing a period of renewed tension in US-Rumanian relations.

Recent manifestations of a stiffened line toward the US include strong press attacks, hints at future restrictions on the legation's use of a USAF plane for travel out of the country, and greatly increased Rumanian secret police attentiveness to legation activities.

In conformity with the general Communist line, however, the Rumanian government appears to be attempting to keep cultural outlets open. Recent Rumanian government-sponsored concerts featuring an American cellist, postponed from last October, received good press coverage.
