[PAGE 01]
18.April 1951
Copy No. C1- - 'i
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Pro-French faction purges opposition nationalists in North Vietnam (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Iranian Shah plans strong measures in current crisis (page 3).
3. Comment on report of critical French-Moroccan relations (page 4)o

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Comment on Yugoslav preparations for a break in relations with Hungary (page 5).
5. Soviet controls tightened in Albania (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA

6. Commmt on political tension in Bolivia (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Pro-French faction purges opposition nationalists in North Vietnam: 3.3(h)(2)
Under the vigorous direction of Nguyen Van
Tam, Police Chief and close associate of
Premier Tran Van Huu, drastic personnel
changes have been made in the regional administration of North Vietnam. The Ust of expelled office-holders includes both members of the nationalist Dai Viet party and independent
nationalists who have opposed, or been suspected of opposing, the
policies of Premier Huu.

Comment; The reorganization of the North
Vietnam administration began with Premier Huu's successful campaign
to remove the able and intensely nationalistic Governor of North Vietnam, Nguyen Huu Tri. In late March, Tri was replaced by an official
of meager ability whose amenability to the policies of the Huu cabinet
has been demonstrated by his submissiveness to the purge tactics of
Police Chief Tamo The current ascendancy of Huu and Tam·, both of
whom are naturalized French citizens and pro,.. French in sentiment,
has undermined the effective North Vietnam administration that had
been built up under the leadership ot ex=governor Tri and has discouraged Vietnamese nationalists who oppose both Communism and
continued French domination of Vietnam.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2o Iranian Shah plans strong measures in current crisis: 3.3(h)(2) ,_, 
U.&Ambassador Grady in Tehran reported on
16 April that stg·nificant political changes in
Iran are anticipated in the very near future.
According to Grady, the internal situation is
becoming increasingly ominous -- with continued difficulties in the Isfahan textile industry and the general strike in Abadan - - and the
Shah, almost in desperation, may look to Seyyid
Zia Ed-Din Tabatabai as a successor to Prime Minister Ala. {"..rady
[PAGE 04]
suggests that the US shoulq consider its position in this eventuality, for
if the US.supports Se.yyid Z.ia, it will be stigmatized as identified with
British interests in Iran. On the other hand, if the US fails to support
him, Seyyid Zia .wilLbe deprived of an element of strength that he will
need if he is to bring about stability at this time. The Ambassador concludes that support of Seyyid Zia is t.o be preferred, despite the atten3.5(c)
dant risks. ,--------~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 3.3(h)(2)
I [ the Shah
-is prepared to install Seyyid Zia as prime minister wittun the next few
days and to have the Majlis dissolved as soon as it has confirmed this
appointment. This move is to be followed by decree rule and widespread
arrests, which should render impotent the National Front and the various
subversive elements in the country~ At this time, Iran will abandon its
neutrality policy and come out openly on the side of the West.

Comment: While Prime Minister Ala has appreciably strengthened his position in the last weeks and while the London press states that Ala has n·ow received a vote of confidence from both houses of Parliament, ~eyfid Zia and Qavam are continuing to maneuver politically to succeed Ala.. : The Shah's p1an to install Seyyid Zia as a
strong man, a plan consistently bac):{ed by the UK as the most feasible
method of reversing Parliament's recent approval of the nationalization
of Irants oil, presents many difficultieso The oil issue is so controversial that the appointment of Seyyid Zia, . with his reported UK connections, and dissolution of the Majlis witp.out a firm commitment to
hold new elections promptly would probably be followed by widespread
popular disapproval and by increased internal disorder.

3. Comment on report of critical French-Moroccan relations;
According to a special dispatch to the: New York￾Times, Reside!}t General Juin has been engaged in emergency consultations with th~~ government regarding the deteriorating relations between
France and the Moroccan nationalists, including the Sultan. Juin is reported to have claimed that his presence is required in the Protectorate
until at least 1 December to ensure order.

Jutn had been slated to assume the command of
the armed forces in the central sector of the European Army on 1 June.
[PAGE 05]
The New York Times article may have bee:n "inspired" by the French
because of (a) General Juin9 s. dissatisf acUol!1l with the importance of his
post in SHAPE, (b) .his fear that altlly successor might yield to some of
the Moroccan nationalist demandsll (c) his beUef that North Africa is
more important to French defense than Europell and (d) his suspicions
regarding US activities in Morocco.

It is co:nsidered Ulllllikely that the Moroccan
situation has deteriorated to the extelllt implied in the article. Although
the Moroccan nationalist parties have itormed an. alliance, no effective
campaign in the near future is possible~ iin view of the restrictions imposed on nationalist activity as well as the pressure of a French army
in Morocco large enough to put down. :native disorders.

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Gomment on Yugoslav preparaticms for a break in relations with Hungary:
The Yugoslav Government has announced that
the Swiss Government has bee:n asked and has agreed to protect Yugoslav interests in Hungary in the event of a rupture of relations between
Yugoslavia and Hungary. According to a governme:nt spokesman, this
action was taken because of the obvious intem.t of the Hungarian Government to worsen relations between. the two countries.

In 1949 the Cominform States and Yugoslavia
began to withdraw their chiefs of misRinns arnd gradually reduce their
diplomatic representations to token staff's. In November 19.50 Yugoslavia
suspended relations with Albania and closed the Albanian Legation i:n
Belgrade. With this exceptionll tlie Yugoslav acUo:n with respect to Hungary marks the first time that a!T!Y cou:ntry on either side of the quarrel
has prepared for a complete severance of relations. The Yugoslav
initiative may be an attempt to stre!llgthe:n Yugoslavia's propaganda position in the Weat _and, at the same time)) forestall an actual break in relations by placing Hungary i:n a disadvan11tageous propaganda position.
[PAGE 06]
5. Soviet controls tightened in. Albania:

According to the Albanian radio, pro-Soviet 3.3(h)(2)
Minister of Interior Mehmet Shehu has been
appointed. interim Minister of State Control
by decree of the Presidium of the Albanian
People's Assembly. Former Minister .of .State Control Manush Myftiu
. has been appointed Vice Premier. · ~---------~-~3.3(h)(2)
D in addition to harsh control measures previously instituted by the
Stalinist hierarchy under Shehu, all privately owned radio sets have been
seized and persons guilty of violating the current regulations concerning
radios will be s~verely punished. Since the bomb explosion at the Soviet
Legation on 19 February, all persons. are reportedly searched before
being permitted to enter any government office, "Spe.cial Police" units
have now returned to their various headquarters and have resumed
"normal activity," an action that may be a forewarning of mass arrests
of nationalist suspects.

Comment; The appointment of Moscow-favored
Shehu as Minister of State Control is a further indication of additional
Soviet controls over Albanian internal affairs. Reports in recent weeks
have revealed intensified Soviet efforts to maintain its_ domination in
Albania in the face of a marked growth· in-resi:stanceictivtty.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Comment on political tension in Bolivia:

A situation potentially dangerous to the stability
of the government has developed in Bolivia, where the administration
has thus far refused to allow the presidential candidate of the Nationalist
Revolutionary Movement, Paz Estenssoro, to return from exile. Politi￾cal tension has been mounting and there have been large-scale demonstrations by Paz supporters.

The Bolivian Minister of Government has stated
that the administration does not intend to impose a state of seige or
postpone the 6 May presidential elections. However, if it appears that
Paz will be prevented from running in the elections --- e·tther because he
[PAGE 07]
is not permitted to return to Bolivia or because his legal status as a
candidate is not clarified-,.. the Nationalist Revolutionary ;Movement
may resort to revolutionary activity. The government's ability to
control a revolutionary situation will depend in large part upon the
loyalty of the army.
