[PAGE 01]
10 March 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL IN TUNIS ATTACKED BY MOB

2. BRITAIN DEPORTS ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS

4. SOVIET LEADERS DISCUSS INTERNAL QUESTIONS

6. TUNISIANS OPPOSE DELAY OF NEGOTIATIONS WITH FRANCE

8. INDIA ACCEPTS SOVIET STEEL MILL

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

[PAGE 03]
1. AMERICAN CONSULATE GENERAL IN TUNIS
ATTACKED BY MOB

The reported attack on the American
consulate general and information
center in Tunis by French mobs on
9 March is evidence of the strong
anti-American sentiment dominating
French settler thinking. It reflects a general French
sentiment against American information activity, which
has been favorably received by the Arab population. This
attack is the second on an American installation within
the past nine months. The information center was bombed
on 28 June, at which time an unexploded bomb was found
at the residence of an American vice consul.

The French high commissioner in
Tunis, who was also attacked by the mob, recently in-
formed the American embassy in Paris that the French
population in Tunisia had not yet accepted the fact of full
Tunisian independence. The French settlers believe that
the United States has encouraged the nationalists in their
demands for full independence and intends to usurp France's
position and drive them out of Tunisia. They have been en-
couraged in this belief by recent statements made by
French foreign minister Pineau and Prime Minister Mollet,
who have claimed that France's policies are not fully sup-
ported by its allies. In view of the distrust of American
motives prevailing in France and French North Africa,
similar attacks on American installations in Algeria and
Morocco are possible.

[PAGE 04]
2. BRITAIN DEPORTS ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS

Britain's deportation of Cypriot
archbishop Makarios, in line with
its new tough policy, invites a new
wave of terrorism in Cyprus and
makes impossible any further nego-
tiations for a settlement. The an-
nouncement of Britain's move inter-
rupted Greek preparations for
Makarios' arrival for talks with Greek government of-
ficials and was followed by large-scale demonstrations
against the British in Athens and Salonika.

under a new government which is trying to develop popular
support, may seek to identify itself with public opinion by
some dramatic counter-move such as a rupture of rela-
tions with Britain.

The Greeks will give new encouragement
and support to violent resistance to the British on Cyprus,
and may also permit popular demonstrations against Britain,
Turkey and the United States.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
4. SOVIET LEADERS DISCUSS INTERNAL QUESTIONS

At a reception on 6 March, the top
Soviet leaders emphasized to Ambas-
sador Bohlen that under present con-
ditions in the Soviet Union collective
leadership is the only form of rule possible. Khrushchev
claimed that it was "absolute nonsense" that he was on the
way to becoming another "great leader," and Mikoyan later
made a statement along this same line.

Khrushchev admitted that certain ad-
justments in economic policy had been necessary, partly
because the Soviet leadership came to realize that dis-
armament was not an immediate prospect. Both Khrushchev
and Malenkov vigorously denied, however, that there had
been any "quarrel" between them on economic policy, and
Malenkov reiterated that lack of experience was the reason
for his resignation as chairman of the Council of Ministers.
Bohlen comments that although candor marked these dis-
cussions, he felt the statements on Malenkov were not en-
tirely frank.

Mikoyan described Stalin's later days
as "difficult times" and said that Stalin frequently made de-
cisions on his own without consultation "with any of us." He
said that by this procedure Stalin had abolished the princi-
ple of voting in party organs and in effect had destroyed
their usefulness. Khrushchev stated that decisions in the

[PAGE 07]
party presidium are now usually reached without vote, but
in the event of disagreement which cannot be ironed out in
discussion, a vote is "obligatory."

Mikoyan intimated that the process of
rewriting Soviet history might be quite far-reaching and said
that in all probability Lenin's testament--his last statement
on the succession problem--would be made public.

Comment
These remarks provide the best evidence
to date on how collective leadership ac-
tually operates within the top echelons of the Soviet hierarchy.

Trotsky claimed that Lenin's testament
called for Stalin's removal as general secretary of the party.
Publication of the testament could be used as a device to dis-
credit Stalin completely.

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
6. TUNISIANS OPPOSE DELAY OF NEGOTIATIONS
WITH FRANCE

The French government has requested
a recess of the current negotiations
with Tunisia during the National Assem-
bly debate on Algeria, according to
Tunisian deputy premier Bahi Ladgham. He told the Amer-
ican embassy in Paris that France was trying to tie Tunisia's
hands in defense matters, although he admitted that the two
governments were virtually agreed on the conduct of Tuni-
sian foreign affairs.

Ladgham fears that more than a week's
suspension would lead to an upsurge of Tunisian nationalism,
with many extremists joining the Algerian rebels. He said
that if an agreement were not reached before the Tunisian
elections are held on 25 March, the assembly then elected
would unilaterally declare the country's independence and
would abrogate the existing treaties with France.

Comment
Although an agreement in principle was
reached prior to the commencement of
these negotiations on 29 February, the deliberations ap-
parently have not gone smoothly. The French high com-
missioner in Tunis, who was in Paris at the time, informed
the American embassy on 7 March that Minister of State
Savary disapproved an American plan to send food and cloth-
ing into Tunisia because France's position would be greatly
weakened if the Tunisians gained the impression that they
could get material or financial support elsewhere.

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
8. INDIA ACCEPTS SOVIET STEEL MILL

The announcement on 8 March that
India has accepted the offer of a
Soviet steel mill indicates that New
Delhi is satisfied with Soviet terms
and equipment but that it has ac-
cepted only the original offer of a mill capable of pro-
ducing 1,000,000 tons of steel ingots annually. It ap-
parently has not yet accepted a recent Soviet offer to-
increase the capacity of the mill by 300,000 ingot tons,
though at least one news release suggests it may do so
later.

Completion of negotiations and com-
mencement of construction may lead to some loss of
public interest in the Soviet mill, which heretofore has
had a strong propaganda impact. The USSR may there-
fore search for another project of equal publicity value,
whose offer to India would keep public attention focused
on the USSR. Soviet interest in India's basic heavy indus-
tries suggests that any dramatic new Soviet offer might
deal with petroleum or mineral development.

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 9 March)

The American embassy in Tel Aviv believes
that Prime Minister Ben-Gurion's remarks in the Israeli par-
liament on 6 March, when he affirmed his government's inten-
tion to avoid a "preventive war," indicates Israeli leaders are
now concerned with restoring the public morale depressed by
earlier alarmist statements about growing Arab strength. The
embassy also believes Ben-Gurion's renewed rejection of pre-
ventive war, in the face of strong opposition criticism and
against the background of current border troubles, gives some
ground for believing that Israel may avoid "adventurous reac-
tions" for the time being.

An Israeli newspaper reported on 29 Febru-
ary that the first volunteer members of an international Jewish
force are expected to arrive in Israel in March. An appeal was
made early last November to Jewish communities abroad to send
100,000 immigrant youth to help defend Israel's borders.

Two factions have developed within the
Jordan Arab Legion, according to the American military attaché
in Amman. On the night of 6-7 March one faction attempted to
kidnap a leader of the other group. The basic cause of the fac-
tionalism is the question of officer assignments to replace de-
parting British personnel. The attaché comments that King
Hussain is probably caught in the middle of this struggle, and
that a coup by one of the factions is possible if a compromise is
not worked out. These developments, he believes, bode ill for
the future of the legion as a military force.

[PAGE 14]
