[PAGE 01]
8 February 1957

Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. EUROPEANS CRITICAL OF BRITISH TROOP CUT PLANS
(page 3).

2. BRITAIN ARRANGING FOR CEASE-FIRE TALKS IN YEMEN
(page 4).

ANNEX--Conclusions of the Watch Report of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
(page 5).

8 Feb 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2

[PAGE 03]
1. EUROPEANS CRITICAL OF BRITISH TROOP CUT PLANS

Comment on:

Officials of several West European countries have sharply criticized Britain's tentative plans for severe cuts in its military forces in Germany. At a 6 February meeting of the North Atlantic Council (NAC), Belgian, Netherlands, Norwegian, and German representatives were disturbed over Britain's intention to switch discussion of what was essentially a NATO military problem into the seven-nation Western European Union (WEU). In Bonn, a Foreign Ministry official has predicted the WEU members will resist substantial reductions.

The British representative deferred any commitment as to when a firm statement of plans might be offered in the NAC on the ground that the new Macmillan government required time to make up its mind. He stressed that reductions were a matter of parallel NATO and WEU interest, and strongly intimated that the first full revelation would be made at the WEU foreign ministers' meeting Britain has called for 26 February.

8 Feb 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 3

[PAGE 04]
2. BRITAIN ARRANGING FOR CEASE-FIRE TALKS
IN YEMEN

The British Foreign Office has informed the US embassy in London that Yemen is now ready to have cease-fire talks between local Arab leaders at the scene of the fighting on the disputed Aden Protectorate frontier. In the interest of getting the talks started, Britain is no longer insisting on an agreed agenda--thus giving the Yemenis an opportunity to assert their claim to the entire Aden Protectorate--and proposes to allow the Emir of Beihan to speak for the other Western Protectorate rulers without the presence of a British representative of the Aden government.

The Foreign Office states that London is considering making public the fact that Soviet bloc arms are being distributed to Yemeni army training centers.

Comment

The British earlier indicated their intention to try direct negotiation before turning to other approaches, such as recourse to the UN. Since most Arab and much Western opinion would be hostile to an all-out British military pacification of the area, London presumably wishes to show it has made very effort to arrange a peaceful settlement.

the Imam of Yemen is willing to negotiate a "cease-fire" but is determined to avoid a settlement and will continue his efforts to win over protectorate tribes and discredit protectorate rulers who maintain treaty relations with Britain.

the Imam's objective continues to be the assertion of his sovereignty over the whole of the Aden Protectorate. The Imam has also increased his efforts to expedite military aid from Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the Soviet bloc.

8 Feb 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4

[PAGE 05]
ANNEX

Watch Report 340, 7 February
of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee

Conclusions on Indications of Hostilities

On the basis of findings by its Watch Committee the Intelligence Advisory Committee concludes that:

A. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against the continental US or its possessions in the immediate future.

B. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country intends to initiate hostilities against US forces abroad, US allies or areas peripheral to the Orbit in the immediate future.

C. A deliberate initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is improbable in the immediate future.

8 Feb 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 5

[PAGE 06]
