[PAGE 01]
24 June 1956

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SHEPILOV AND NASR CONCLUDE MEETINGS (page 3).

2. PINEAU STRONGLY CRITICIZED IN FRANCE (page 4).

3. COMMUNISTS MAKE FRIENDLY OFFERS AFFECTING BERLIN (page 5).

4. POLITICAL TENSION IN VENEZUELA (page 6).

5. TITO REPORTED CONCERNED OVER FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN USSR (page 7).

6. NEW SYRIAN CABINET REPORTED DISINTEGRATING (page 8).

7. BRAZILIAN COMMUNISTS BREAK WITH KUBITSCHEK REGIME (page 9).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 10)
[PAGE 04]
1. SHEPILOV AND NASR CONCLUDE MEETINGS

The week-long visit of Soviet foreign minister Shepilov with Premier Nasr in Cairo ended on 22 June with a bland joint communique reaffirming friendship, professing agreement on political, economic and cultural co-operation and voicing a desire to promote international peace.

The communique, which probably reflects Egyptian drafting and which the Egyptian foreign minister reportedly hoped would not be received badly in the West, does not, however, alter the significant aspects of the meeting.

Shepilov's visit leaves no doubt of Moscow's appreciation and approval of the Nasr regime as the undisputed leader of the Arab world. Regardless of how general or specific Shepilov's offers may have been, they are giving Nasr new confidence in his ability to pursue an independent course.

Egyptian business circles are reported continuing to speculate on the possibility that new economic arrangements might have been made, including one on the Aswan High Dam. They are fearful that additional Soviet bloc deals will further disrupt their traditional commercial ties with the West.

Ambassador Byroade has been given the impression that Nasr is actually now becoming more moderate and is anxious to keep relations with the West from becoming any worse. Regardless of whether or not Nasr has concluded extensive new deals with the USSR and is merely awaiting the appropriate time to announce them, the Shepilov visit is another step in the process by which Egypt is being drawn into closer alignment with the Soviet Union.
[PAGE 05]
2. PINEAU STRONGLY CRITICIZED IN FRANCE

The reaction of Frenchmen to Foreign Minister Pineau's East-West policies and to the views he expressed in his Washington visit has been highly unfavorable, according to the American embassy in Paris. Many, ranging from Socialist Party to conservative deputies, strongly oppose actions which might weaken ties between France and NATO and especially with the United States and Britain.

In some quarters, Pineau is regarded as the worst French foreign minister since the war. Premier Mollet, whose popularity continues high and who is believed aware of the growing dislike for Pineau, is unlikely, however, to risk breaking up the cabinet by removing him.

Comment
The French probably regard the highlighting of wide differences between Secretary of State Dulles and Pineau on East-West problems as untimely and unwise, particularly since France now wants more than minimum American support for its position on Algeria. Pineau's views will also be considered as giving unnecessary aid to the French Communist Party's popular-front efforts. The growing conservative opposition to the Mollet government may now crystallize against its foreign policy rather than such domestic issues as increased taxes.
[PAGE 06]
3. COMMUNISTS MAKE FRIENDLY OFFERS AFFECTING BERLIN

The Soviet embassy in East Germany informed the West Berlin government on 21 June that the USSR was prepared to return the Rundfunkhaus radio station in the Western sector, which the Russians have held since the end of the war. He said there were no strings attached to this offer. The embassy also hinted that permission might be granted for the West German airline to use West Berlin's Tempelhof Airfield rather than Schoenefeld Airfield outside of East Berlin.

On 22 June East German interior minister Maron disclosed to the press that measures would soon be taken to ease control and travel regulations throughout Berlin.

Comment
During recent years the Soviet Union has refused to participate in the four-power administration of the city and has, in fact, declared that Berlin is the capital of East Germany. It has never, however, actually disclaimed Berlin's quadripartite status. By these friendly gestures the Soviets may wish to ensure a preservation of the quadripartite status of the city and hence their own interest in the affairs of West Berlin.
[PAGE 07]
4. POLITICAL TENSION IN VENEZUELA

The present political situation in Venezuela is believed to be serious, but not critical; there is an unusual degree of tension, with "the possibility that significant developments may take place." The tension is ascribed to discontent among the military over recently announced promotions, increasing popular vexation over large-scale government graft, inefficiency throughout the government, and "disaffection of National Guard commander Tamayo Suarez;" the possibility of a developing "opposition front" with some military support, or of a palace coup sparked by Tamayo and exiled Colonel Moreno.

President Perez Jimenez believed that the 8 June rumors of a revolt led by armed forces chief of staff Fernandez might have been a premature revelation of a real plot. As a result, the president immediately put into effect a successful emergency plan, including effective control of all strategic installations and direct contact between the garrison commanders and himself.

Venezuelan exiles may see in the tense situation an opportunity to make a push now for a return to power of the outlawed Democratic Action Party. They probably believe that the assassination of high government officials, particularly President Perez Jimenez and security chief Pedro Estrada, would be sufficient to bring about a popular revolution. The Venezuelan exiles can also probably count on at least moral support from President Figueres of Costa Rica, who has begun again to inveigh against "the colonels," in which category he places Perez Jimenez, President Somoza of Nicaragua and Generalissimo Trujillo of the Dominican Republic.
[PAGE 08]
5. TITO REPORTED CONCERNED OVER FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS IN USSR

Yugoslav president Tito has considerable doubts as to the future course of events in the USSR; he is by no means sure the "younger generation in party leaders, such as Shepilov, Suslov, Saburov and others" are serious in their intention to continue the present course of liberalization in Soviet internal and foreign policy.

Tito fears that when they supplant the older members of the Soviet presidium, who he feels are sincere in changing Stalin's policies, they may "perhaps unconsciously revert more to the Stalinist methods in which they have been uniquely trained."

Soviet attempts during the visit to present Yugoslav relations, particularly in the military field, as closer than they actually were had been resented by the Yugoslavs and that Tito was concerned by the possible effect his visit would have on his relations with the United States.

Comment
Tito has often disclosed in private conversations with Westerners his suspicions regarding the intentions of certain unnamed members of the Soviet hierarchy. He has emphasized, however, the need to encourage the present Soviet policy changes, maintaining that any strong public criticism would only strengthen the Stalinist faction in the Soviet leadership.
[PAGE 09]
6. NEW SYRIAN CABINET REPORTED DISINTEGRATING

The new Syrian cabinet headed by Prime Minister Sabri al Asali, which was formed on 15 June, probably will be short-lived and may not even last long enough to obtain parliamentary confirmation. The conservatives initially agreed to a "national" cabinet representing all political groups. They are now opposed to giving the Foreign Ministry and National Economy portfolios to the left-wing, anti-Western Arab Socialist Resurrection Party and to its proposal that the ministerial statement include advocacy of some form of Syrian union with Egypt. The conservatives are reportedly now considering withdrawing.

On the other hand, powerful army spokesmen are demanding that proposed minister of defense Raslan be dropped. The army, if not satisfied, may force the formation of a cabinet amenable to its wishes. The dominant officer group in the army is strongly nationalist, opposes collaboration with the West and any association with Iraq, favors a tough policy toward Israel, and desires close co-operation with Egypt.

The embassy has a report that the conservatives were trying to prevent the formation of a responsible cabinet at this time. In this way they planned to make it impossible for Soviet foreign minister Shepilov to negotiate an agreement while in Syria. However, even without any planned disruptive tactics, the deep-seated differences in the cabinet, which includes archconservatives and outright leftists, suggest that bickering and disintegration will be inevitable.
[PAGE 10]
7. BRAZILIAN COMMUNISTS BREAK WITH KUBITSCHEK REGIME

The central committee of the Brazilian Communist Party on 20 June decided to "break completely" with the regime of President Kubitschek; the Communists have decided their policy of attempting to gain party objectives through influencing members of Congress and by means of public demonstrations has been a failure and that emphasis should be shifted to penetration of government ministries and agencies and the labor unions.

President Kubitschek has taken some strong measures during the past month which have probably caused this change in Communist policy. Through his influence a broad amnesty measure which would have benefited the Communists was narrowly defeated in Congress; Kubitschek publicly blamed the Communists for the recent student riots in Rio de Janeiro; the federal courts have revived the trial in absentia of leading Communist leader Prestes; and the administration has closed down two important Communist fronts. Ambassador Dunn on 21 June commented that these anti-Communist actions are noteworthy in view of Brazil's strategic position in the East-West struggle and the importance the Communists are known to attach to their operations there.

In spite of these measures, Kubitschek's success in controlling Communism will depend on the economic conditions in Brazil. Should the economic position deteriorate further, the Communists would probably gain both in numbers and in influence, particularly since many of Kubitschek's opponents--including conservatives and ultranationalists--have been willing to go to any extremes to embarrass his administration.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 24 June)

An Israeli army spokesman said two Israeli soldiers were killed on 24 June during several hours of fighting on the Israeli-Jordanian border about 12 miles northeast of Tel Aviv. Jordan claimed Israel was trying to burn Arab crops and said the incident was a fight between Israeli and Jordanian farmers. (Press)

During a recent Israel-Lebanon Mixed Armistice Commission meeting concerned with incidents on this border which presumably resulted from a family feud, the Israeli representative truculently criticized the Lebanese for not controlling the border villagers and threatened "official" retaliatory action by Israel if incidents there continued, according to the American army attache in Beirut. The attache believes the Lebanese, aware of their military weakness, will "bend over backwards" to prevent further incidents.
