III. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese Political Crisis

A small leftist minority, consisting primarily of labor unionists and radical students, has continued to demonstrate against Prime Minister Kishi and the US-Japanese security treaty, but except for strong press condemnation of the government, there has thus far been no large-scale public reaction. The press, while generally critical of Kishi for forcing ratification of the treaty in the lower house of the Diet, assesses the Socialist resort to violence in the Diet and student attacks on Kishi's official residence as added blows to parliamentarianism in Japan. One of the nation's three largest newspapers is demanding Kishi's resignation.

Kishi, for the moment at least, has been substantially weakened, but says that he will surrender his aspirations for a third term as Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) president--tantamount to the prime ministership----only if the entire party is agreed that he do so. The LDP policy board chairman has commented that Kishi is the only conservative leader who has majority support in the party and that no logical successor is in sight.

Nevertheless, several party factions are calling for Kishi's resignation, and there are indications that, once final treaty ratification is secured, such pressure may be intensified with the participation of some party members now supporting Kishi. The extent of public criticism of Kishi probably will determine the ultimate success of a move to oust him, and could advance the party presidential elections from January 1961 to a date soon after the Diet adjourns in mid-July.

Legislative deliberations now focus on the upper house, which has 30 days in which to act; after this time the treaty is automatically ratified. The Socialist party seems intent on a complete boycott of the deliberations, but the moderate Democratic Socialist party (DSP), which already has been damaged in the early phase of its political life by vacillation on the treaty issue, remains undecided as to its next step. The Socialists have announced their strenuous opposition to a visit by President Eisenhower, and the DSP also is advising against it.

24 May 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
