[PAGE 01]
3 July 1951

Copy No. CI-7

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

USSR

FAR EAST

NEAR EAST

5. Iran has strengthened its military forces in oil field area (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Role of Czech Army seen as defensive (page 7).
7. Yugoslav Government requests stoppage of strategic metal shipment to Czechoslovakia (page 7).
8. Western officials observe no alarming Yugoslav activity regarding Albania (page 8).
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST

5. Iran has strengthened its military forces in oil field area:

The US Military Attache in Tehran reports that, as of 1 July, the total Iranian ground force at Abadan is estimated to be 2,500. Its equipment consists of small arms, mortars, machine guns and 11 tanks mounting 75mm guns. Naval strength is placed at 500 men with several small vessels, whose largest guns are four inch. The bulk of the Tenth Iranian Division is located at Ahwaz, some 80 miles away from Abadan (three hours distant in time).

The Military Attache believes the troops now in Abadan are completely adequate to preserve order. The Iranians are apparently not awed by the British cruiser with its six inch guns off Abadan and would resist any British efforts to land military forces. Personnel from the British cruiser have already been denied landing permission. There is no doubt, according to the Military Attache, that any British effort to land would result in Iranian military action that would cease only when sufficient British forces were brought in to defeat Iranian units.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: This latest US military estimate of Iranian deployment and Iranian determination to resist is fully corroborated by all available reports. Iran's moves to strengthen its military forces in Abadan and elsewhere are, however, also aimed at preventing internal disorders.

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Role of Czech Army seen as defensive:

The US Military Attache in Prague estimates that owing to the absence of strong leadership, the shortage of modern equipment and the low morale of the average soldier, the Czechoslovak Army is at present better adapted for a defensive than an offensive mission. He also expresses the opinion that Soviet failure to make a determined effort to reorganize and re-equip the Czechoslovak army indicates that the USSR intends to keep Czechoslovakia as a supply base for the present.

Comment: Previous evidence has indicated an effort in Czechoslovakia, as well as in the other Soviet European Satellites, to improve the size and quality of the armed forces. Of the Satellite armies, the Bulgarian and Rumanian seem to be relatively better prepared ideologically and technically to carry out Soviet aggressive designs.

7. Yugoslav Government requests stoppage of strategic metal shipment to Czechoslovakia:

The Yugoslav Government has requested that US-British authorities in Trieste and Austria stop a 150 ton railroad shipment of Yugoslav
[PAGE 08]
ferro-chrome, rerouted to Czechoslovakia from Trieste by a Western European firm to which it had been sold. According to the US Political Adviser in Trieste, the ferro-chrome shipment is being held in the British Zone of Austria pending a decision on its final disposition.

Comment: Although Yugoslav trade with the Soviet Orbit has progressively decreased since 1948, points to the continued purchase through intermediaries of Yugoslav non-ferrous metals by both Czechoslovakia and Hungary. No firm evidence is available that this trade is being carried on with the knowledge and consent of the Yugoslav Government.

8. Western officials observe no alarming Yugoslav activity regarding Albania:

US Ambassador Allen in Belgrade reports that his British and French colleagues concur with his opinion that Yugoslavia is not currently instigating any pro-Tito moves in Albania and that the Tito government is keenly aware of the danger of provoking a situation that might invite Soviet intervention. Allen advises that, if a demarche to the Yugoslav Government on its Albanian political activity is still considered advisable, it should be drafted as a general statement that the US opposes all foreign adventures in Albania. Allen expresses the opinion that nothing would arouse Yugoslav sensibilities or discourage Albanian resistance more than the implication that Soviet control would be supplanted by some other foreign influence.

Comment: Several reports have recently pointed to increased Yugoslav efforts to organize and support Albanian refugees in Yugoslavia for subversive activity in Albania. Investigation of these reports by the US Embassy in Belgrade has thus far failed to reveal any Yugoslav-sponsored militant activity among the Albanian refugees. It is improbable that the Tito government would sponsor such activity to the point where it might result in the overthrow of the Albanian regime and thus invite Soviet intervention.
