Khrushchev - De Gaulle Talks

The German question remained the major point of disagreement in the second series of private conversations between De Gaulle and Khrushchev, according to French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville. The Soviet premier repeated his threat to sign a separate peace treaty if he fails to obtain agreement on a treaty with both German states. De Gaulle countered by rejecting any recognition of East Germany and stressing that there was no reason to upset the status quo.

Khrushchev endorsed De Gaulle's view that disarmament should begin with both a cessation of nuclear tests and an agreement to convert stocks of nuclear weapons. He expressed approval of De Gaulle's Algerian policy, but was noncommittal on the French leader's ideas for joint East-West aid to underdeveloped countries and for acceptance of the concept of noninterference in internal affairs of any other countries. Apparently in response to De Gaulle's publicly stated views regarding Sino-Soviet differences, Khrushchev made a "considerable point" of Moscow's continuing good relations with Peiping.

In preparing the communiqué at the end of the visit, France insisted on inserting a reference to "progressive settlement" of the question of Germany and Berlin, but refused to include a more explicit definition of a European security "system"--which it felt might indicate the Rapacki plan or a Warsaw-NATO nonaggression pact. Discussions on trade, cultural, and scientific exchanges were included at Khrushchev's insistence in order to demonstrate that the talks covered a wide range of subjects.

De Gaulle found Khrushchev clever, intelligent, and well-informed, but not of Stalin's stature. In a television broadcast on 4 April, Premier Debré took pains to state that Khrushchev's final speech on TV was required by "the laws of hospitality" and that the visit was a necessary step in preparation for the summit. He used the occasion also to deny that the communique was "of meager substance," to state that "absolute priority" must be given to disarmament, and that the West cannot be asked to abandon its position on Germany and Berlin as a prerequisite to a detente.

6 Apr 60 Page 3
