Iraq-Jordan Union Problems

Internal politics in Jordan and Iraq may prevent formation for the nascent Arab union of a strong central cabinet, which Jordanian Foreign Minister Rifai considers essential for the ultimate success of the new state. Other recent comments by Rifai also suggest that the union may not be a going concern for "several months" beyond the mid-May target set when the union was provisionally established in mid-February. While Jordan and Iraq at that time moved swiftly to offset the fanfare given Nasir's UAR, their strictly constitutional pace since then has contrasted increasingly with Nasir's bold and dramatic moves to speed integration with Syria.

The union will evolve in a series of steps which include new parliamentary elections in Iraq on 5 May, approval of the new constitution on 10 May, formation of the union's parliament with appointees from the Jordanian and Iraqi legislatures, selection of the cabinet, and installation of King Faysal as head of state. On the basis of this schedule, the new state could not be constituted even on a formal legal basis before the first week in June. The union government even then would not be in a position to assume responsibilities now discharged by the individual states, particularly in defense and finance.

Jordan's chronic economic and security problems have again been highlighted by the Saudi decision for economy reasons to discontinue the $14,000,000 annual subsidy and to reduce its 3,500-4,000 troops in Jordan. Although Iraq has agreed to pay 80 percent of the union's defense costs, Jordan will need Western aid to meet its share of the burden. A serious winter drought during Jordan's usual rainy season has already reduced the grain crop by one third and damaged grazing lands even more severely. Should April rains not materialize, the loss may run much higher. Although Iraq has surplus wheat, Rifai believes that it might be unwilling to deliver it as a gift, especially before the union becomes effective.
