The US Legation in Helsinki believes that parliamentary approval of the amendment would operate to discourage firms from seeking western markets.

Comment: Such legislation would strengthen the Soviet Union's economic ties with Finland. At the present time the USSR is not only Finland's second largest customer, but it is also an important source of wheat and petroleum imports which Finland obtains primarily in exchange for products of the metal and shipbuilding industry.

FAR EAST
5. Yoshida government expected to survive present crisis:
A number of Diet leaders have advised Ambassador Murphy that Prime Minister Yoshida's Liberal Party will close ranks to defeat the proposed Socialist motion of no confidence in Foreign Minister Okazaki and thus see the cabinet through the present crisis. Murphy reports that both the Hatoyama and Yoshida factions of the Liberal Party, as well as the Progressives, are beginning to realize that new elections now would be advantageous only to the Socialists.

An influential member of the Hatoyama faction has advised Murphy that next spring will be the opportune time for a major move to defeat Yoshida.

WESTERN EUROPE
6. Schuman expected to resume Saar negotiations with Adenauer next week:
A high French Foreign Ministry official has told the American Embassy in Paris that Foreign Minister Schuman will probably resume French-German negotiations on the Saar next week by addressing a letter to Chancellor Adenauer asking for German views.

Comment: The last letter in these negotiations was Adenauer's message of 16 October, in which he proposed a French-German commission to study adaptation of the French-Saar conventions to the anticipated European status of the Saar. Schuman has delayed his answer pending disposition of the Saar election problem.

The British Foreign Office feels that pressure should now be put on the French to accept early technical discussions of their coal and steel needs during a transitional period, and Foreign Secretary Eden has told French Ambassador Massigli that, despite the Saar election results, time is not on the side of the French.
