Although the Yugoslav view that the victim of aggression would participate in EMA consultations has been accepted, the Yugoslav delegate has heretofore registered no other serious objections to the plan, which is now nearing completion. The last minute Yugoslav objection suggests that Yugoslav leaders have only recently realized that their government might not be in complete control of UN military operations to resist aggression against its territory.

WESTERN EUROPE

3. US officials concerned over renewed Soviet campaign for German unity:

US officials in Germany warn that the Soviet effort to deny West German support to Western policy objectives is probably moving into high gear. The tentative opinion of the US officials is that the current Soviet-East German unity proposal, unless adroitly handled by the West, will cause more trouble than previous unity offers. They point out that the Western Allies will be handicapped in the contest for Germany if the USSR maintains the initiative on the unity issue or wins substantial segments of West German opinion to the view that integration with the West closes the door to unification except through civil war.

Comment: The East German unity offer, with its tacit implication that a united Germany could avoid participation in a new war, undoubtedly appears attractive to many West Germans. The current unity proposal is intended to capitalize on doubts of the benefits to be gained from participating in European defense.

4. Prospective aid to France inadequate for meeting US objectives:

The ECA Mission to France is "firmly convinced" that the 170,000,000 dollars which now seem to be the limit of US economic aid to France for fiscal 1952 will not be adequate to maintain the level of economic activity considered by the US to be essential for building Western defense. In view of grave inflationary pressures and the stringent financial situation, France may be obliged to cut back its military program if sufficient external resources are not forthcoming.

- 4 -
