[PAGE 01]
State Dept. review completed

23 December 1956

Copy No. 112

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ARMY REVOLT IN INDONESIA

2. SYRIAN RIGHTISTS MAY ATTEMPT COUNTER-ACTION

3. BRITISH SUPPORT FOR PAKISTAN BECOMING FIRMER
[PAGE 04]
1. ARMY REVOLT IN INDONESIA

The announcement by Col. Simbolon, Indonesian army commander in north-
ern and central Sumatra, that he is no
longer responsible to Djakarta's author-
ity may spark defiance of the government by other terri-
torial commanders or their subordinates. Simbolon, who
is now backing the revolt begun on 20 December by one of
his regimental commanders, is one of the army's ablest fig-
ures and commands widespread respect in military circles.
Any further defections would be most likely to occur in com-
mands comprising the areas of southern Sumatra, Borneo,
western Java, and the Celebes.

Premier Ali's government has little capa-
bility of forcefully restoring its authority in areas outside
Java. It is faced, moreover, with the prospect that certain
[PAGE 05]
Indonesian political groups, particularly the two major Mos-
lem parties, may take advantage of the situation to bring a-
bout the government's downfall. These groups share the army's
grievances against governmental corruption and central author-
ity.

Evidence of the opposition's growing strength
is apparent in the attorney general's announcement on 22 Decem-
ber that Foreign Minister Abdulghani has been officially charged
with corruption. When the accusation was first made in August,
the government maintained there was insufficient evidence a-
gainst him to press charges. It apparently is now bowing to
general pressure, possibly in an attempt to conciliate criticism
among the major parties, as well as the army.
[PAGE 06]
2. SYRIAN RIGHTISTS MAY ATTEMPT COUNTER-ACTION

The resignation of the Asali cabinet in
Syria on 22 December and the announce-
ment on the same date of the arrest and
and pending court martial of Syrian politi-
cians and army officers allegedly involved in an Iraqi-spon-
sored coup may drive rightist elements to attempt counter-
action. The new cabinet is likely to be dominated by leftists,
although Asali himself may be asked to form it. The court mar-
tial may be the signal for a concerted leftist effort to obliterate
rightist influence.

The rightists may feel they must act now
if a complete consolidation of leftist, pro-Egyptian influence
is to be prevented. Their chances of staging a successful coup,
however, appear slim. Leftist elements under Colonel Sarraj
appear to have already fairly well consolidated their position in
the army.
[PAGE 07]
3. BRITISH SUPPORT FOR PAKISTAN BECOMING FIRMER

Britain's policy of support for Pakistan,
whose continued co-operation in the
Middle East it regards as extremely
important, is becoming firmer. British
officials have suggested that the breach between London
and New Delhi over Suez would make it necessary for Lon-
don to reassess its relations with India.

In this connection, Britain evidently in-
tends to abandon its efforts to keep Pakistan from pressing
the Kashmir question in the UN. A spokesman for the Com-
monwealth Relations Office indicated on 21 December that
the British cabinet has now in effect authorized general sup-
port for Pakistan in any Security Council discussion of Kash-
mir by agreeing that the UN should seek a new solution and
by recommending that a UN observer visit the area. Plans
are being made in London to favor Pakistan over India in sup-
plying arms.
[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
