Angola: The American consul in Luanda reports that rebel terrorism and governmental counteraction have resulted in the death of hundreds of whites and thousands of Africans in the past month. He feels that despite Portugal's determination to restore order, it will be impossible to return to the status quo ante. He believes that Angolan Africans now would not be satisfied even with drastic reforms and that there is a possibility of a complete breakdown of law and order, leading ultimately to "chaos worse than the Belgian Congo."

Communist China - Japan: There are signs of a thaw in Sino-Japanese economic relations, obstructed since 1958 by Peiping's strict insistence upon prior political concessions from Japan. Actuated by a combination of economic difficulties at home and trade problems with the rest of the bloc, the authorities in Peiping now appear prepared to open the way for some recovery in Sino-Japanese trade, which dropped from $140,000,000 in 1957 to $23,000,000 in 1960. Publicly, however, Peiping still insists that any "large-scale" trade depends on Tokyo's meeting three conditions--that Japan stop being "hostile" toward Communist China, stop associating itself with the promotion of a "two Chinas scheme," and stop obstructing the normalization of relations between the Japanese and China.
(Backup, Page 4)

India: Indian Communist leaders made little progress in mending their differences during the party's congress from 7 to 16 April. Preliminary reports indicate that the congress adopted a moderate compromise resolution on the "present political situation" after postponing once again a decision on the party's future tactical "program"---a move reportedly recommended by top Soviet representative M. A. Suslov. Both actions constitute a setback for the extremist faction and indicate that Indian Communists will continue to be guided by the "peaceful, parliamentary" policy adopted in 1958. The moderate-rightist group consolidated its control by re-electing General Secretary Ajoy Ghosh despite his poor health.
(Backup, Page 5)

18 Apr 61 DAILY BRIEF iii
