Unusually Large Increase in Soviet Military Construction
Possibly Related to Missile Deployment

(In a feature article on 9 August in the Soviet military journal Red Star, Maj. Gen. A. Shalimov, new head of the Chief Directorate of Defense Construction (Glavvoenstroy) of the Ministry of Defense, reported a 30-percent increase in construction-installation work for the first six months of 1959 as compared with the first six months of 1958.)

(No known Soviet military construction program could account for such a large increase--double the rate of increase in construction work for the economy as a whole. Since the rise comes at a time when it is estimated that operational deployment of new types of guided missile systems is taking place, a considerable part of this increase may result from construction related to this effort.)

(The deployment of a new surface-to-air system, elements of which have recently been observed at various locations in the western USSR, may well account for part of the increase; construction of IRBM and ICBM launching facilities may also be involved. Projecting the six-month increase to a full year and assuming a 30-percent rise in construction-installation work for the entire Ministry of Defense, the increase would be 1.2 to 1.5 billion rubles. Thus, the estimated 1959 expenditure by the Ministry of Defense on construction would be 5.2 to 6.5 billion rubles. In comparison, construction from 1953 to 1956 of the rings of "herringbone" surface-to-air missile sites around Moscow is estimated to have cost about one billion rubles and the cost of the Soviet airfield construction program was about two billion rubles annually at its peak from 1954 to 1958.)

(Shalimov's directorate is believed to be the larger of two construction directorates in the USSR Ministry of Defense--the other being the Chief Directorate of Airfield and Special Construction (Guass)--which may be collaborating on the construction of operational launching sites and facilities. Most missile test range construction has been handled by Guass--or by an organization which)

5 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
