USSR Apparently Preparing for Space Flight Event

the range is in an advanced state of preparedness for another launch operation. Moreover, on 4 September, Moscow control of the KGB administrative network (RQC) established hourly schedules with stations at Khabarovsk and Petropavlovsk, which suggests that a space vehicle may be involved. Similar activity by KGB has preceded Tyura Tam's previous space vehicle launchings by 5 to 130 hours, but was not noted in ICBM firings. Optimum time for launching a lunar probe vehicle from Tyura Tam is estimated at approximately 0100 GMT on 6 September or 0200 GMT on 7 September 1959.

Professor L. I. Sedov, head of the Space Research Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, stated on 1 September in London that another announcement about Russian space flight could be expected at any time. This statement, together with other evidence, suggests that the Soviet Union may be planning a space venture prior to or during Premier Khrushchev's visit to the United States. It has been about eight months since the launch of Lunik on 2 January.

In recent months Soviet have alluded to several types of operations which are considered to be within the USSR's present capabilities. These include: recovery of an animal-carrying capsule from orbit; a lunar operation involving impact, soft landing, a lunar satellite, or circumlunar flight including photography of the far side of the moon; or possibly recovery of a man from vertical or suborbital space flight.

The recent arrival in the Soviet Far East of four Soviet merchant ships after an unusually rapid passage of the Northern Sea Route may also be related to some forthcoming space activity. These ships, which now are in Petropavlovsk, Kamchatka, underwent an eight-month conversion in Leningrad, where they were fitted with extensive electronic and scientific equipment.
In addition to possibly providing a seaward extension of the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range, these ships may be equipped to recover objects from the water.

5 Sept 59 Page 2
