Somali Republic Turns to UAR for Arms Aid

While moderate leaders in the Somali Government have frequently expressed a preference for Western military assistance, they feel compelled--for national prestige reasons as well as for internal security needs--to accept such aid from non-Western sources. To date, Western assistance in this field is limited largely to one shipment from Italy of small arms--3,000 Enfield rifles and 120 light machine guns.

Tripartite discussions among interested Western powers--Italy, Britain, and the US--have been held periodically in an effort to agree on a division of responsibility in the provision of both economic and military aid to the Somali Republic. The military aspect of these discussions has been particularly difficult and recently hit a snag. Rome initially indicated a willingness to send a military training mission to Mogadiscio and to bear the cost of training 120 Somali officers and specialists annually. Italy maintained that the UK and US should assign military attachés to assist the mission and should share with Italy the cost of arming and equipping the Somali Army. London, however, offered only to provide $420,000 in arms aid on a one-time basis, contingent on the assigning of the Italian military mission. Rome subsequently withdrew its earlier offer, partially because of London's position but also because Washington is concentrating its aid effort in the economic sphere and limiting its arms support to the Somali police.

At the ceremony on 12 April marking the Somali Army's first anniversary, Minister of Defense Mohamed proclaimed the need for a strong army, to protect the country from its aggressive Ethiopian neighbor and praised the UAR for providing arms and equipment for this purpose. In addition to a quantity of small arms--probably including 5,000 rifles and ammunition--the UAR has provided five light tanks, approximately 14 armored cars and Bren gun carriers, and at least one propeller-driven training aircraft of the two promised last fall.

1 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
