[PAGE 01]
16 November 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. NEW ANTI-BRITISH VIOLENCE ON CYPRUS (page 3).

2. INDONESIAN CABINET WINS CONFIDENCE VOTE (page 4).

3. DIEM GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL RECOMMENDS PLACING OF FRENCH FORCES UNDER SEATO (page 5).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 6)
[PAGE 03]
1. NEW ANTI-BRITISH VIOLENCE ON CYPRUS

There was a new outburst of anti-British violence on Cyprus on 14 November, springing from a Cyprus court's refusal to reprieve a Cypriot Greek who was sentenced to death for killing a policeman. It is likely that some terrorism will continue as long as the issue of self-determination is unresolved.

Negotiations between the British and nationalist leader Archbishop Makarios on the future status of Cyprus appear to be making some progress. There is a strong possibility, however, that the terrorist organization EOKA and other extreme nationalists will repudiate the archbishop if he agrees to any plan which does not grant the island immediate self-determination. The British appear willing to discuss only gradual moves toward self-determination.

The Greek government has announced its intention to continue its support for self-determination of Cyprus. Athens also stated that it would appeal again to the United Nations if no solution were reached by January.
[PAGE 04]
2. INDONESIAN CABINET WINS CONFIDENCE VOTE

Parliamentary approval of the Indonesian cabinet on 15 November by a vote of 135 to 2 makes it likely that Prime Minister Harahap will stay in office until the new parliament elected in September is seated next spring.

Rather than face a legislative defeat, the opposition, numbering 99 deputies, chiefly of the National and Communist Parties, boycotted the 15 November session of parliament.

The National Party, if it shows markedly increased strength in the 15 December elections for a constituent assembly, may make a determined effort to unseat the cabinet before the new parliament convenes. Should election returns be about as evenly distributed as they were in the 29 September parliamentary elections, the Nationalists will probably demand only that the new parliament meet as soon as possible.

The Masjumi-led Harahap cabinet may be expected to continue a friendly policy toward the West and to implement its anticorruption and trade-improvement programs.
[PAGE 05]
3. DIEM GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL RECOMMENDS PLACING OF FRENCH FORCES UNDER SEATO

The South Vietnamese under secretary of state, in a memorandum on the withdrawal of French forces from Vietnam and the continuation of the 1954 Geneva cease-fire agreements, has recommended retention of a French Expeditionary Corps in Vietnam under the SEATO framework and continuation of French responsibilities under the armistice. If the French withdraw all their forces, however, the Vietnamese would assume responsibility for logistical and security support of the International Control Commission.

Comment

The cease-fire agreement for Vietnam places various responsibilities on the high commands in both zones. The Diem government has already indicated a readiness to assume military responsibilities under the cease-fire agreement, but this implies no willingness to enter into political negotiations with the Viet Minh.

The French are seeking a clear-cut transferal to the Vietnamese of all responsibilities for maintaining the cease-fire.
[PAGE 06]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 15 November)

No significant military activity has occurred during the past 24 hours. Israel, however, is giving increasing evidence of irritation over incidents along the Jordan border, and is engaged in antiterrorist activity on a country-wide basis. The chairman of the Israeli-Jordan Mixed Armistice Commission believes the Israelis may be planning to carry out their threat of "serious repercussions" against Jordan for the recent dynamiting of Israeli houses near the Jordan border. The Israeli chief of staff told the British ambassador that Israel expects an increase in the number of incidents on the Jordan border, and laughed in disbelief when the ambassador replied that the Arab Legion was doing its best to prevent trouble. An Israeli-inspired incident on the Jordan border appears likely.

major items of Soviet bloc military equipment will have arrived in Egypt by the end of this month.
[PAGE 07]
Press reports of 15 November from Damascus that Syria is in the final stages of concluding an arms purchase deal with Czechoslovakia, similar to the Egyptian-Czech deal, may be true.

France may deliver 12 Mysteres to Israel at an early date

The American embassy in Rome reports that press statements that the Egyptians had signed a contract to buy 30 new Vampires are inaccurate, but that the Saudi Arabians were trying to purchase 25 surplus Vampires and have them reconditioned.

In reference to British prime minister Eden's offer to mediate the Arab-Israeli dispute, Prime Minister Ben-Gurion has denounced it as promoting the "dismemberment" of Israel.

A high Israeli Foreign Ministry official in Geneva said on 14 November that Israel was determined to bring about the downfall of Egyptian prime minister Nasr. This statement repeats one made by Foreign Minister Sharett on 13 October. In another statement which is probably part of Israel's continuing psychological pressure campaign, the official said that if Israel's demands for arms and a security guarantee from the West are not granted, Israel intends to trap Nasr into a fight by sending a warship up the Gulf of Aqaba. If the Egyptians fired on it, Israel would then reply in kind, claim Egypt was the aggressor, and demand the assistance of the West.
[PAGE 08]
