Japan-USSR: Tokyo apparently is prepared to break off the current annual fishery negotiations with the Soviet Union and to conduct fishing operations in the western Pacific without an agreement if Moscow refuses to agree to reasonable quotas for the Japanese salmon catch. In addition, partly as a result of the growing influence and increasing activity of former Prime Minister Yoshida, Kishi and other government leaders have forbidden any Japanese initiative--and have ordered their negotiators to resist any Soviet move--which would link favorable fishing terms to a peace treaty requiring surrender of Japanese territorial claims. (Page 4) (Map)

Arab League - France: The UAR-dominated Arab League Council will hold an emergency session in Cairo today to discuss, among other questions, an Arab states boycott of French goods and the freezing of French assets, as a protest against French nuclear tests. In mid-March Cairo quietly banned further permits for importing French goods, and Saudi Arabia reportedly has followed suit. Since economic relations with France are important to many Arab states, the league members present probably will remain split over the issue, and unanimous action by all Arab states appears unlikely. Some members of the league, however, may follow Cairo's lead and boycott French goods. Afro-Asian UN members are continuing their campaign for a special General Assembly session.

III. THE WEST

Cuba - Sino-Soviet Bloc: The Castro regime is evidently preparing to accept its first ambassador from a Sino-Soviet bloc country. Czechoslovakia will ask for agrement for Vladimir Pavlicek, a career diplomat in Latin American affairs who, as minister to Mexico, arranged for the shipment of Czech arms to the Arbenz regime in Guatemala in 1954. This move probably signals plans for relations with other satellite countries. There is no evidence that the USSR has followed up the reference in the Mikoyan Castro communiqué to a resumption of Cuban--Soviet diplomatic relations at an "appropriate" time. (Page 5)

9 Apr 60 DAILY BRIEF ii
