[PAGE 01]
25 March 1961
Copy No. C 78

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

USSR: An earth satellite vehicle--Sputnik X--was successfully launched from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at about 0054 EST 25 March. Preliminary evidence suggests that the payload was landed intact, after about one complete orbit of the earth, in an area approximately 200 nautical miles west of Sverdlovsk.

Sputnik X among other frequencies which have been identified with biological payloads in earlier satellites. Identification of the payload will have to await detailed analysis of the intercepted telemetry. Preliminary field analysis indicates an object which in general appearance resembles a helmet and the size and proportions appear to match those which would be expected if a man were aboard
[PAGE 04]
25 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Laos. (Page 1)
2. Congo: UN postpones plan to re-enter Matadi. (Page 3)
3. Ethiopia: Emperor's prestige damaged by concession on army pay. (Page 5)
4. South Korea: Demonstration against proposed anti-Communist law. (Page 6)
[PAGE 05]
NORTHERN LAOS

GOVERNMENT Forces in Contact
KONG LE - PATHET LAO
KONG LE - PATHET LAO AREAS
X SITE OF C-47 SHOOTDOWN

---- ROAD
- - - TRAIL
( ) ROUTE NUMBER

STATUTE MILES

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Map Page
[PAGE 06]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 March 1961

DAILY BRIEF

Laos: Moscow has not yet broadcast, as it has done in the past, either a summary account or an interpretative commentary on President Kennedy's remarks on Laos at his recent press conference. A Home Service broadcast announced that a statement on Laos was made at the press conference, and Izvestia reported the event without further elaboration. Moscow's silence probably reflects an unwillingness to make a public statement on the issue before a reply has been made to the British note on Laos. Premier Khrushchev only arrived in Moscow on 24 March following his tour through the New Lands area. Peiping has broadcast a news item on the press conference charging that the President "blatantly clamored for further actions to save the rebellious clique." Hanoi has not commented on the press conference but on 24 March, for the second time in three days, broadcast a statement by Souvanna Phouma suggesting that the ICC might be reactivated without being preceded by an international conference.

An American C-47 aircraft was shot down on 23 March in the Plaine des Jarres area. Seven Americans were killed and one was captured after parachuting to the ground. According to another report, the aircraft was flying at an altitude of about 6,500 feet when hit. A missing USAF C-47 which was engaged in reconnaissance in the course of a flight from Vientiane to Saigon. The aircraft reportedly carried eight American air force and army personnel.

(Backup, Page 1) (Map)
[PAGE 07]
Congo: The UN plan to re-enter Matadi has been postponed. According to high officials in the UN Secretariat, the decision to move more slowly was made partly because Hammarskjold's plan was opposed by his military officers in the Congo on grounds they did not have sufficient military strength.

(Backup, Page 3)

Ethiopia: The Emperor's decision of 22 March to yield to the demands of army elements for an increase in the enlisted pay scales has lessened--at least temporarily--the threat to his regime. The Emperor, however, has suffered a loss in prestige by surrendering to a threat of force. This incident, moreover, may serve as a precedent for future threats to the regime by other dissatisfied groups. One such group, consisting of army officers, is rumored to have met to formulate demands for the retirement of older inactive officers and a promotion system based on merit.

(Backup, Page 5)

South Korea: Scattered violence and the appearance of pro-Communist themes in the later stages of a demonstration in Seoul on 22 March are probably the result of organized subversion. This demonstration, like others in major South Korean cities against a proposed anti-Communist law, failed to attract wide public support. However, it did succeed in arousing considerable emotion stemming from fears of a return to the repressive practices of the Rhee regime and led the press to take a common position opposing the bill. The government has reportedly decided to drop the proposed legislation. The police showed some improvement in their ability to control limited crowds but they still appear incapable of handling large-scale disturbances.

(Backup, Page 6)

25 Mar 61 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 08]
Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma, now in Paris, has told reporters that he was "slightly disquieted" by President Kennedy's press statement on Laos. Souvanna said he hoped that the contacts he would be having with French and British officials would help to limit the conflict in Laos--a country already "transformed into a battlefield by foreign intervention." Souvanna reiterated his claim to have the support of 90 to 95 percent of the Laotian people.

In the discussions held with Ambassador Harriman in India recently, Souvanna was emphatic on the need for including the Pathet Lao in the government. Souvanna said that the original error was in attempting to suppress the rebellion by force of arms and that the Pathet Lao were so interspersed among the people that the government had no way to take direct action. He mentioned that only when he had taken the Pathet Lao into the government in 1957 did the Vientiane government regain control over Phong Saly and Sam Neua provinces.

Souvanna outlined to Harriman his solution for the Laotian problem: reconvene the ICC to establish a cease-fire and stop outside military assistance; convene a 14-nation conference; and, simultaneously, form a coalition government in Laos--by agreement among the Laotians themselves--to prepare general elections. Souvanna insisted he is still prime minister and justified his absence from the Laotian scene by the need to inform world leaders of the true situation in Laos. He said he planned after visiting London to go to Prague, Warsaw, Moscow, and Peiping.

French officials have indicated that although the French Government has no objections to the recent British démarche to the Soviet Union, Paris feels that a meeting between the "principals" involved in Laos--the US, USSR, France, and "possibly" the UK--must be the first step in any solution there. De Gaulle's diplomacy has consistently favored calm deliberations and big-power decisions on a global basis. Therefore, while Paris is not opposed to holding a 14-nation conference, recalling the ICC, or seeking a cease-fire in Laos, it believes that

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
any or all of these efforts would be meaningless in the absence of a prior agreement with the USSR on the basic outline of a Laotian settlement.

Bloc airlift operations into Laos continue.

The Soviet transport reportedly shot down by Meo tribesmen on 17 February was an IL-14. On that day Hanoi requested that "all elements make a thorough search for aircraft 042." The number apparently refers to Soviet IL-14 registration number 52042, which arrived in North Vietnam with the first group of five Soviet IL-14s on 2 December last year.

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Situation in the Congo

One UN official in New York implied that if tensions lessen as a result of Kasavubu's current visit to the Lower Congo area, a military operation might not be necessary. However, civilians in the UN Command in Leopoldville continue to press local officials to permit a return to Matadi. The UN administrative officer said on 23 March that the command had had not information concerning the arrival of goods in the port since its officers were forced out early in March. As a result, it has issued no instructions for shipping goods inland. Officials of OTRACO, the company which operates the port facilities and the railroad to Leopoldville, apparently believe that the UN has deliberately refused to issue forwarding instructions, since to do so would weaken its claim that a UN presence in Matadi is necessary.

The heads of state of the twelve "Brazzaville powers"--the former French territories in tropical Africa with the exception of Guinea, Mali, and Togo--are to meet at Yaounde in Cameroun from 26 to 31 March. At this time they hope to develop a common policy on the Congo. The Ivory Coast's Felix Houphouet-Boigny, the prime mover of the Brazzaville grouping, stated recently that he plans to make a determined effort to persuade his associates to contribute contingents to the UN Command.

Cleophas Kamitatu, a former ally of Gizenga who has been cooperating with the Leopoldville government, reportedly is to leave the capital for Stanleyville on Saturday for negotiations with the Gizenga regime. Optimism is high in Leopoldville that a reconciliation can be reached; however, Gizenga's opposition to the central government and its supporters apparently has hardened. He has expelled the five Western consuls from Stanleyville and reportedly told a visiting journalist that there was "not the slightest possibility of reaching a compromise" between his regime and Leopoldville.

In preliminary talks with Hammarskjold's personal representative in Brussels, Belgian Foreign Ministry officials took the position that the only way to settle the question of withdrawing

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Belgian officers from areas controlled by Kasavubu is to have the three parties involved "thrash out the question of individual officers." Even if such a conference could be organized, it is doubtful that it would prove productive.

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
Haile Selassie Capitulates to Army Demands

The announced pay increases, which equal the amount promised by the short-lived rebel regime last December, are also to apply to the 28,500-member police force; they apparently do not extend, however, to the air force and the navy. The latter services, which to date have not been involved in significant antiregime activity, apparently are not to receive higher pay because of budgetary considerations. In the future, however, they may join forces with civil servants, whose salaries are to be cut to defray the cost of the army and police pay raises, to create further difficulties for the regime.

The US Embassy believes that the events of the past few days were well organized. Government officials in Addis Ababa reportedly believe that a group of civilians--as yet unidentified--planned the palace demonstrations on 21 March involving about 500 enlisted army personnel.

Other observers believe a group of army officers instigated the recent disorders. Earlier information indicated that a group of army officers was joining the increasing numbers of malcontents who favor the reformist objectives of the December coup and who sympathize with General Menghistu--former commander of the disbanded Imperial Body Guard. Menghistu, whose trial has been in progress since 27 February, is gaining acceptance as the symbol of reform in Ethiopia. Should he be executed, as expected, a new crisis will confront Haile Selassie.

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
Demonstrations in South Korea

The demonstrations on 22 March were conducted by about a thousand reformist political agitators and students, but a small, hard-core subversive group is believed to have been responsible for the appearance of pro-Communist slogans favoring Korean unification and for several clashes with the police which occurred during the last stages of the demonstrations.

The demonstrations were staged to protest efforts by the Chang Myon government to tighten the law passed in June 1960 which prohibited membership in or conscious support of Communist groups. One draft law would have punished persons who praised or encouraged antistate organizations--not clearly defined--and their members, or who were in any way involved in defections to North Korea. This law would have increased the maximum penalty for illegal entry from North Korea from five years' imprisonment to death and would have authorized military intelligence agencies to investigate civilians suspected of violating security laws.

A second draft bill would have limited public demonstrations to one-half hour's duration and prohibited demonstrators from blocking public buildings, using loudspeakers, or conducting demonstrations in front of foreign official buildings and private residences.

As a result of its failure to pass the draft legislation, the government presumably will depend on stricter enforcement of existing regulations and more effective police work to control demonstrations, disorders, and subversive activities.

American Ambassador McConnaughy comments, however, that such countermeasures provide no fundamental cure. Underlying public apprehension about security legislation is gradually increasing dissatisfaction with the Chang government for its failure to move quickly in the field of economic reform. A demonstration in Seoul on 23 March by 2,000 members of the Korean

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 14]
Unemployed Association criticized the government for its preoccupation with antisubversive measures and called for speedy implementation of the National Construction Service program, which is designed to utilize large pools of unemployed persons in nationwide public works projects. Further demonstrations are expected in April to celebrate the first anniversary of the ouster of the Rhee government.

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 16]
