I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Again Defends Peaceful Coexistence Policy

Khrushchev's somewhat rambling speech to Soviet journalists at a Kremlin reception on 14 November, the text of which was published on 17 November, underscored the theme that has dominated the Soviet premier's foreign policy pronouncements since his visit to the United States--growing Western recognition of the necessity of peaceful coexistence. As in his major policy address to the Supreme Soviet on 31 October, Khrushchev attributed this shift in Western policies and attitudes toward the USSR to the deep impact of Soviet military and technological achievements.

These statements appear to reflect Khrushchev's confidence that there is an irresistible drift in the West toward an accommodation which the USSR can exploit to win at least tacit Western recognition of the status quo in Eastern Europe and East Germany.

Khrushchev expressed satisfaction that East-West relations "have taken a better turn" and indicated confidence that the "present incipient lessening of international tension" will continue. He asserted that a comparison of his talks with President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Macmillan this year with his discussions with British and American leaders at the Geneva summit meeting in 1955 shows important progress toward Western "understanding of the necessity of peaceful coexistence."

As an example of the "mighty weapons" at the USSR's disposal, Khrushchev stated that "in one year 250 missiles with hydrogen warheads came off the assembly line in the factory we visited." The context implied he was referring to the Soviet ICBM production. However, available evidence suggests that only the 700-nautical-mile missile has been in production long enough to permit achievement of such a production rate.

In this speech, Khrushchev again appeared to be seeking to justify the correctness of his peaceful coexistence posture. Perhaps in response to expressions of misgivings within the

19 Nov 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
