II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran- CENTO: General Bakhtiar, chief of the Iranian intelligence organization, SAVAK, stated recently that CENTO (the Baghdad Pact) would become a more realistic force for regional cooperation if the UK were to withdraw to observer status comparable to that of the US. He feels that such a move would destroy the effectiveness of Soviet propaganda against the organization, open the door for other regional members, and enhance the opportunity for Iranian leadership. This would be in line with the "little entente"--Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey--recently discussed by an Iranian delegation visiting Pakistan. Bakhtiar's views on US and UK membership will probably be further developed by the Iranian delegation, to include Bakhtiar, in Washington.) (Page 4.)

Morocco: King Mohamed V may move toward a change in the Ibrahim government after the conclusion--probably about 10 September--of the Arab League meeting in Casablanca. The King, who usually temporizes and maneuvers behind the scenes, is reported to have been angered by strong criticism of the Royal Moroccan Army and security forces by the left-wing Moroccan students' group. Right-wing supporters of the King also are reported to be discussing the advisability of forcing a showdown with left-wing members of the government. (Page 5)

Cambodia: The attempt to assassinate Queen Kossamak with a bomb disguised as a gift has aroused strong emotions among the monarchy-worshiping populace and could have international repercussions. Cambodian expatriates Sam Sary and Son Ngoc Thanh, remnants of the abortive Dap Chhuon plot against the Sihanouk government last spring, will probably be prime suspects. South Vietnam and Thailand, which have supported the Cambodian dissident movement in varying degrees, may by extension be implicated. It is possible that the attempt was engineered by the Communists in order to further embroil Cambodia with these neighbors. The extent of the consequences of the attack will be largely determined by Premier Sihanouk's reactions.
