4. Completion of a branch line from the Hunan-Kwangsi railway to Fort Bayard in the Luichou Peninsula, west of Canton, has made available at least four and possibly five railway engineer divisions, which may move to Fukien to work on the Kueichi-Foochow railway and its Amoy branch line; one of the five may already have moved to Fukien. Three such divisions have been working on the Fukien rail lines, to which the Chinese Communists appear to have assigned a high priority. In announcing completion of the line to Fort Bayard, Peiping last week boasted that it would facilitate the "liberation" of Formosa. The Communists may intend to use Fort Bayard as a supply port to relieve strain at Canton, the only major port in southern China.

5. In his final interview with General Chase, Chiang Kai-shek explained his reasons for overruling Chase in regard to reinforcing Quemoy by one division. Chiang stated that he regarded the reinforcement as essential on military grounds in order to sustain troop morale in the event of a Communist attack against which the US did not intervene. The reinforcement, he maintained, would convince the troops that they could successfully defend the island even without adequate air and naval support. In addition, Chiang stated that, from the political viewpoint, public knowledge of American opposition to the reinforcement would lead to the conclusion that another Tachen-like withdrawal might take place. Chiang indicated that he did not propose to transfer the division immediately.

6. Soviet and Chinese Communist spokesmen have continued to endorse Chou En-lai's bid for direct Sino-American negotiations. Peiping's recent comment has emphasized that "the question now rests with the United States." Peiping appears to be awaiting reports on the US attitude from intermediaries Krishna Menon and U Nu.

7. Consistent Soviet attention to the Formosa question and the related question of Communist China's exclusion from the United Nations suggests that the USSR will raise these issues at the BIG Four talks. Soviet and Chinese Communist propaganda has also identified a number of other outstanding Far Eastern issues, and Soviet officials have mentioned the possibility of an
