CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 MARCH 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Soviet ships for Indonesia: Seven small Soviet general
cargo merchant ships are southbound in the East China Sea.
The secrecy surrounding the movements of these ships sug-
gests that the USSR is quickly fulfilling its agreement to
provide Indonesia with vessels for interisland shipping. The
first of these ships could arrive in Indonesia as early as
15 March. (Page 2)

Yugoslavia - USSR: Yugoslav-Soviet relations are
likely to take a marked turn for the worse. In preparation
for their April party congress the Yugoslavs have published
a new party program, aggressively reaffirming their inde-
pendent road to socialism and implicitly criticizing Moscow.
Such a "revisionist" program will undoubtedly be a target
of the new international Communist journal which has just
been established in Prague. (Page 3)

Watch Committee conclusion--Indonesia: There is no
evidence of Sino-Soviet intention to become militarily in-
volved in the Indonesian situation. The Djakarta govern-
ment is proceeding with military measures to subdue the
dissidents, but an early resolution of the issue is unlikely.
The general situation continues to favor the Communist
position on Java and exploitation by the Sino-Soviet bloc.

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: A deliberate
initiation of hostilities in the Middle East is considered un-
likely in the near future. Serious incidents could arise, how-
ever, from continuing border tensions, inter-Arab political
frictions, or the possible formation of a Palestinian state in
Gaza.

Egypt - Yemen: Yemen’s affiliation with the United Arab
Republic may be followed shortly by dispatch of Egyptian
naval ships to be based in Yemeni waters. Yemen
is constructing a "military area" on the coast at the
southern entrance to the Red Sea.
artillery pieces have been brought
into the coastal area, where emplacements were observed
last summer. In mid-February a Soviet survey team is
reported to have visited the area for the purpose of laying
out a military installation. (Page 7) (Map)

Colombia: The 16 March congressional elections, the
first since last May’s overthrow of the Rojas dictatorship,
may be marked by considerable violence, despite the mili-
tary junta’s precautionary measures. (Page 14)
