USSR Agrees to Foreign Ministers' Conference to Prepare for Summit Talks

The USSR has abandoned its adamant opposition to a foreign ministers' conference and has proposed discussions on this level for April 1958 limited to questions relating to the "organizational side of preparation of a meeting at the summit." Presentation of the proposal in an aide-memoire to the US ambassador probably was designed to meet President Eisenhower's call for an end to "repetitive public debate" and his suggestion that the impasse in the summit exchange "can be broken by less formal and less publicized contacts...."

The foreign ministers, according to Gromyko, should work out an agenda for the summit conference, determine its composition, and fix its time and place. He asserted that "approximately" the same countries should be represented in the foreign ministers' talks as will participate in the summit meeting and offered two alternatives: all members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact, plus such neutrals as India, Afghanistan, Egypt, Yugoslavia, Sweden and Austria; or a "narrower" conference to include the United States, Britain, France, Italy, the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Rumania, plus India, Yugoslavia, and Sweden. Gromyko gave no hint of future Soviet insistence on Chinese Communist participation.

The Soviet foreign minister repeated Bulganin's nine-point agenda proposals but added a new item entitled "conclusion of a German peace treaty." This apparently was intended as a "concession" to Western insistence that the German question must be discussed. He stated that representatives of the two German governments should participate in the discussion of this question. Gromyko, however, carefully drew a distinction between the peace treaty question and the unification issue. He repeated the long-established Soviet position that unification must be negotiated by the two German states alone and cannot be discussed at a summit meeting.

Moscow may be preparing to put forward a draft peace treaty which would define the future international status of a reunified Germany. Its terms probably would include neutralization, ceilings on armed forces, withdrawal of foreign troops, and a prohibition on nuclear weapons and missiles.

1 Mar 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
