[PAGE 01]
3 March 1961
Copy No. C 78

Approved for Release:

[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.

[PAGE 03]
3 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

1. Congo: Ambassador Timberlake concerned over the
explosive atmosphere developing between the UN com-
mand and Congolese forces. (Page 1)

2. France-Algeria: Bourguiba reportedly convinced
Abbas should respond to De Gaulle's overtures; some
rebel leaders still distrustful of negotiations with
France. (Page 3)

3. UAR: Two shipments of Soviet arms received since
late January. (Page 5)

4. Laos. (Page 6)

[PAGE 04]
Republic of the Congo

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Map Page

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 March 1961

DAILY BRIEF

*Congo: Ambassador Timberlake is extremely concerned
over the explosive atmosphere developing between the UN com-
mand and Congolese forces. He says the UN command seems
increasingly likely to use a display of force which he fears would
complicate rather than solve the problem and could spell dis-
aster for the UN effort in the Congo. Press reports that Ham-
marskjold has asked UN special representative Dayal to remain
for "some months," if confirmed, will exacerbate the situation
in view of the already acute antipathy between Dayal and the
Congolese government.

Belgium's "announcement that it will withdraw its troops
from the Kamina and Kitona bases by 15 March and "invite"
Belgian mercenaries to return home will probably be regarded
by pro-Gizenga states in the UN as only token acceptance by
Belgium of demands that all Belgian military personnel and ad-
visers be removed from the Congo. Hammarskjold has indicated
he hoped the Belgian announcement would meet Indian conditions
for furnishing more troops to the UN Command. The Belgian
action will not necessarily influence the numerous Belgian ad-
visers to Tshombé in Katanga, or the nearly 1,000 non-Belgian
Europeans reportedly serving in Tshombe's army.

Tshombé and his vice president and rival, Jean Kibwe, are
reportedly quarreling over the agreement Tshombé signed with
Ileo and Kalonji on 28 February, and over the role to be played
by French Colonel Trinquier, who was offered the post of com-
mander of Katanga's military forces on 2 February. This was
apparently done over Tshombe's objections, and Trinquier re-
portedly has now arrived in Elisabethville despite Tshombe's
efforts to have him detained by the British in Rhodesia. Kibwe

[PAGE 06]
opposes any accord with Leopoldville, and Tshombé is said to
fear that Trinquier may assist Kibwe and others to take over
the Katanga government.
(Backup, Page 1)
(Map)

France-Algeria: Tunisian President Bourguiba now seems
convinced that De Gaulle has decided all aspects of colonialism
must disappear from Algeria, even to the point of full independ-
ence. Bourguiba reportedly went from Paris to Rabat deter-
mined to induce rebel premier Ferhat Abbas to respond to De
Gaulle's overtures. Bourguiba is presumably aware that some
rebel leaders are distrustful of negotiations with France.

Previous reports have raised the question whether all rebel
military commanders would comply with orders to end the
fighting, should such orders be given by the provisional Algerian
government in the course of negotiations with De Gaulle. The
1 March joint communique issued by Abbas, Bourguiba, and King
Hassan of Morocco declaring that the way is now open to direct
negotiations for Algerian independence in a North African frame-
work suggests that Tunisia and Morocco desire to have some role
in French-rebel negotiations.
(Backup, Page 3)

USSR-UAR: The USSR is continuing military aid deliveries
to the UAR. In addition to a shipment of at least 12 MIG-19 jet
fighters to Alexandria in late January, another Soviet merchant
ship arrived with an 1,800-ton cargo of arms in late February.
Two more Soviet vessels, whose destinations are not yet known,
have loaded an additional 6,200 tons of military equipment at the
Black Sea port of Nikolaev.
(Backup, Page 5)

*Laos: Souvanna Phouma, who returned to Phnom Penh on
1 March after a week in northern Laos, is reported to have reached
a decision with his supporters in Pathet Lao-held territory that
a 14-power conference is the only means to a peaceful solution of

3 Mar 61 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 07]
the Laotian crisis. The object of this conference would be to discuss the formation
of a neutralist all party government for Laos, excluding Phoumi
and all military figures; the Pathet Lao are said to be insistent
on Souvanna Phouma as prime minister of such a government.
General elections would then be held as soon as possible under
the supervision of the 14 nations. General Phoumi meanwhile
says he still hopes to confer with Souvanna, but is proceeding
with separate plans to revamp the Boun Oum government re-
gardless of Souvanna's attitude toward accepting a post.

Souvanna is reported to have found the Kong Le - Pathet
Lao troops "extremely well organized," with high morale, and
actively recruiting new personnel. The Plaine des Jarres area
held by these troops is said to have been completely brought
under the Communist way of life; Communist slogans and left-
ist youth groups are prominent throughout the area.

SELECTED INTELLIGENCE
REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US Courses
of Action With Respect to Laos. U. S. I. B. SNIE 58-61.21
February 1961. 0036778.

Prospects for Iran: Stability of the Shah's Regime, the Role
of the Military, the Economy, and Foreign Policy Toward US
and USSR. U. S. I. B. NIE 34-61. 28 February 1961.

Comparison of Capital Investment in the US and the USSR,
1950-59. Bibliography, graphs, tables. O. R. R. CIA/RR ER
61-7. 57pp. February 1961. (UNCLASSIFIED)

3 Mar 61 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 08]
Situation in the Congo

Ambassador Timberlake believes that Hammarskjold
and his staff have been so conditioned by Dayal's reporting
that they might consider any incident to be the "final straw"
and feel that the time had come for a display of force.

Dayal has recently been described by the Indonesian
representative in Leopoldville as in a "revengeful mood" for the
attacks and humiliation he has suffered.

Although Congolese soldiers lack the will to fight each other--
as illustrated by the recent Luluabourg incident--they would
probably fight UN troops, especially in the present atmosphere
of Congolese suspicion and distrust of the UN. Kasavubu's
speech of 27 February "mobilizing" the country against UN
"tutelage" and calling for volunteers has, according to a Brus-
sels broadcast of 2 March, already produced over 12,000 re-
servists and volunteers--probably more than the Leopoldville
government can arm. Ambassador Timberlake feels that UN
troops would win any actual battle with Congolese forces--but
that Congolese troops elsewhere would retaliate against Euro-
peans and isolated UN personnel.

The British consul in Elisabethville reports that Kibwe
was conspicuously absent from a luncheon given by Tshombé
for Ileo and Kalonji on 28 February. The consul also corrob-
orated that Colonel Trinquier was in Salisbury, Southern
Rhodesia, on 28 February, along with other officers, and
that Tshombé had asked him to arrange for Trinquier to be
detained there.

Other reports state that Trinquier left Paris for Elisabeth-
ville, via Brussels, on 26 February, after having given his word
to French Minister of Armies Messmer that he would not leave
France for two weeks. Trinquier reportedly took with him 12
former Free French army officers holding ranks from captain
to lieutenant colonel. Reports in January indicated that if
Trinquier accepted the position as commander of Katanga's

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 09]
positions in the army, plus one to be attached to each ministry
of the Katangan government.

three Fouga Magister jet trainers of French manufacture being assembled without
difficulty. The commander of the Katangan air force said that he
had opposed the purchase of these planes, as their range is insuf-
ficient for support of ground troops operating in northern Katanga
and there is only one airfield in Katanga currently capable of
handling them. The Katangan commander said that although the
aircraft had wing racks for training bombs and rockets, the gov-
ernment of Katanga has no armament nor any prospects of re-
ceiving any. He admitted that the "bombs" dropped near Manono
on 30 January had been made from pipes filled with TNT, and had
been employed at the insistence of the minister of defense "to scare
the natives." The commander concluded that these aircraft were of
little use other than to increase the prestige of the Katangan gov-
ernment. The rest of Katanga's air force consists of six Piper
cubs, nine other assorted propeller-driven planes, and five hel-
icopters.

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 10]
De Gaulle - Bourguiba Talks

One of De Gaulle's major objectives in inviting Bourguiba
to visit Paris was to convince the Tunisian President of his
willingness to negotiate a settlement of the Algerian war and
to have this impression conveyed to the leaders of the provi-
sional Algerian government. De Gaulle probably hoped thereby
to strengthen the moderate wing of the rebel movement and en-
courage steps toward negotiations on terms acceptable to France.
De Gaulle has in the past indicated that he will insist on guaran-
tees for the Europeans in Algeria and for certain French eco-
nomic interests and military base rights.

Following his Paris conversation with De Gaulle, Bour-
guiba told Ambassador Averill Harriman in Rabat he believed
there was no longer any real difficulty on the French side. He
said De Gaulle understood the necessity of preventing a recur-
rence of the stalemate last June when preliminary talks failed
to settle even matters of protocol. Bourguiba is optimistic
that De Gaulle will free rebel leader Ben Bella and give sym-
pathetic consideration to the release of political prisoners de-
tained by the French in Algeria.

In an effort to move the rebels to negotiations, Bourguiba
has broadcast to the Algerians in Tunisia stressing his convic-
tion of the genuineness of De Gaulle's intentions. Bourguiba
apparently has in mind, however, that negotiations could fail
because of the inability of the moderate leaders to control all
factions of the rebel movement. Some 15,000 to 20,000 rebel
fighters operate in Algeria with only a minimum of coordina-
tion and control by the rebel government in Tunis. If these
forces object to a moderate settlement and continue military
and terrorist activities, De Gaulle might halt political negotia-
tions.

In another report on the Bourguiba - De Gaulle conversation,
Habib Bourguiba, Jr., recently nominated as Tunisian ambas-
sador to the US, said that De Gaulle "silenced" French Premier
Debré, whose statements had nearly prevented the Bourguiba -
De Gaulle meeting. Debré, while on a visit to the Sahara, said
in a public statement that France intended to remain there.

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 11]
According to Bourguiba, Jr., Debré also made difficulties dur-
ing Tunisian Secretary of State for Information Masmoudi's
earlier trips to Paris to arrange the Bourguiba - De Gaulle
meeting.

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 12]
Soviet Arms Deliveries to the UAR

The last large-scale Soviet deliv-
eries to the UAR were made to the Syrian region in the fall of
1958 under an agreement concluded prior to the formation of the
UAR. Moscow may now be prepared to provide Cairo with some
of the materiel it has asked for since then, including T-54 me-
dium tanks, additional naval equipment, and more jet aircraft.
The UAR reportedly expects early delivery of three Soviet sub-
marines. Moscow has also promised more jet fighters, pre-
sumably MIG-19s.

Since late November there has been a large increase in the
processing of military cargo for export at the Black Sea port of
Nikolaev. Most of this has been shipped to Iraq, but recently,
although large quantities of materiel continue to arrive at Niko-
laev, shipments consigned for delivery to Iraq have fallen off.
Arms shipments to Cuba have been at a low level since the ex-
tensive deliveries last fall, and shipments to Indonesia under
the January arms agreement have not yet begun in quantity. Fur-
thermore, two of the ships which recently loaded arms cargoes
at Nikolaev normally are used in Middle East traffic by the USSR.
This suggests that the current preparations are for shipments to
the UAR.

3 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

Department of Justice
The Attorney General

The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 14]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
3 March 1961
Copy No. C 78
