British-Icelandic Fishing Dispute

Britain is making a new attempt to get Iceland to enter negotiations on the dispute over Iceland's 12-mile fishing limits. London denies Reykjavik's right to establish such limits unilaterally, and feels obliged to provide naval protection to its trawlers operating on "the high seas." Nevertheless, the Macmillan government finds the issues annoying rather than critical, recognizes the inherent threat to Iceland's cooperation with NATO, and hopes to end the dispute short of complete capitulation.

Britain now has indicated its willingness to negotiate on the basis of Iceland's 1958 proposal for a 12-mile fisheries limit, with a period of three years for phasing out historic rights and revising certain base lines. Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd has sent a personal letter to Prime Minister Thors to press this proposal.

While there is some opinion within Iceland's Conservative-Social Democratic government in favor of opening negotiations with Britain, the majority probably holds that such a move would not be accepted by the public at this time in view of the continued agitation by Communists and other extremists. The strategy of these groups apparently is to embarrass the government and discredit Iceland's membership in NATO by insisting that the US defense force intervene and protect Iceland from "aggression."

In May, Iceland's justice minister told a member of the US Embassy that Iceland would withdraw from NATO if British naval vessels again entered the 12-mile zone. Feelings in Iceland have been aggravated by several violations in late June and early July of a British Trawlers' Federation three-month ban on fishing inside the 12-mile limit, instituted to provide a quiet period for negotiations to start. In one case an Icelandic vessel fired live shells through a British trawler's funnel.

Although no incidents have occurred since 15 July when the trawler owners accepted government advice to forcefully renew their instructions not to enter the disputed waters, the truce expires on 13 August. The Macmillan government may be expected to encourage an extension, but the Foreign Office is skeptical how long the current lull can last without some progress toward negotiation.
