Situation in Laos

Government troops that withdrew from Vang Vieng shortly after midnight of 22 April, after being under heavy enemy attack all day, now are moving southward. Stocks of POL and ammunition were destroyed prior to the withdrawal. Vientiane is sending several companies of troops northward to reinforce defensive positions some distance south of Vang Vieng.

A government rout north of Phou Khoun junction on 22 April apparently was forestalled only by the commander's threat to turn his artillery on his own men if they fell back farther. Government troops in this area now are planning a diversionary attack to assist the forces withdrawing southward from Vang Vieng.

In Luang Prabang Province and southern Nam Tha Province, increased enemy military activity was apparent on 21 April. These probing actions, although possibly only a temporary show of force, may presage more widespread enemy activity in these areas in the near future. Kong Le -- Pathet Lao forces are also continuing their pressure on government troops south of the Plaine des Jarres. In the Thakhek area of central Laos, no recent change in the military situation has been reported.

After Soviet officials had agreed with the British ambassador to issue on 22 April a cease-fire appeal, invitations to a conference, and an approach to Nehru on reactivating the ICC, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin requested that action be deferred until 24 April, ostensibly to give the USSR additional time to inform interested posts.

The communique' issued on 22 April at the end of Souvanna's visit to Moscow noted that "real conditions now exist to normalize the situation in Laos." The general line the USSR will take in the forthcoming negotiations was foreshadowed in the statement that both "governments" agreed that a political settlement should be based on the Geneva Agreements of 1954; the Vientiane agreements of 1956-57, which governed the "integration" of the Pathet Lao into the Laotian government and armed forces; and the joint

24 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5
