Pathet Lao Instructions Regarding Laotian Elections

in connection with the 24 April National Assembly elections, that the fundamental requirement during the campaign is to "(expand) the United People's Front and (construct) a working alliance between us, the various factions, and progressive distinguished persons opposed to America and the CDNI,"
it would be preferable for former Premier Phoui's Rally of the Lao People (RLP) to win control of the assembly and suggested that the "least reactionary" of the RLP candidates should be supported in districts where no Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS), Santiphab, or other "progressive" candidate was running.

To implement this program,
the launching of a widespread political campaign until the first session--10 May--of the new National Assembly. Personnel presumably being trained at various bases were to be returned to their villages "so that they can participate in the general elections and ... avoid a situation of being illegal, . . ." "All armed units" were to be reorganized and "spread between various areas of the enemy rear and our main bases," a measure possibly envisaged as a counter to Laotian Army security sweeps in progress in various sections of the country since 1 January. Subsequent Communist propaganda has followed rather closely the lines laid

the Communists' anticipation of the possible dissolution of the RLP, with one fragment aligning itself with the CDNI and the balance of the party membership becoming more vulnerable to NLHS approaches for a new parliamentary working alliance. Hope is held out that "we can destroy the other alliance and win over the regular party members of the (RLP)." This apparent expectation of a split in the anti-Communist ranks is probably an important calculation behind the Communists' seeming willingness thus far to allow the elections to be carried out in relative peace even though the NLHS and allied elements can only hope to win a small number of seats.

11 Apr 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
