Indonesian Communist Party Presses for Leftist Cabinet

The Indonesian Communist party, while continuing its lavish praise of President Sukarno, has launched a vigorous campaign for a leftist cabinet. Party Secretary General Aidit strongly criticized the government in an 8 July statement and called for a cabinet reshuffle. Two Communist dailies have published lengthy editorial assessments of the existing cabinet charging that it is unprogressive and inefficient and that it "must move further to the left."

The party has seized particularly on the issues of foreign policy and the nation's economy. It charges that the government has failed to oppose "imperialist" nations such as the United States and Australia and has even played into their hands; it urges that the cabinet work toward better relations with Peiping and that it take a more aggressive position on Indonesia's claim to West New Guinea. The Communists are also criticizing the cabinet's efforts at monetary reform, pointing out that the government has failed to carry out its promise to provide sufficient essential supplies throughout the nation, and that the economic and financial condition of the country is generally deteriorating.

Foreign Minister Subandrio, reacting quickly to the Communist attack, has stated that while there indeed are differences of opinion between him and the Communists, this divergence had been exaggerated by the party's distortion of facts. The government has made no response as yet to the Communist charges on the economy. The economic situation, characterized by continuing inflation, shortages, maladistribution and rising unemployment, is more difficult to defend.

The Communist campaign seems timed to take advantage of Sukarno's apparent displeasure with anti-Communist leadership over the latter's recent opposition to some of Sukarno's policies. Since Sukarno is widely believed to favor a cabinet reshuffle which would include Communist representation, the party's campaign is probably designed to stiffen Sukarno's resolve and demonstrate mass support for his plans in the event of a showdown with the army,

12 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
