[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

14 December 1959

Copy No. C

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bulgaria: Changes in party and government organiza-
tion decreed by the central committee of the Bulgarian Com-
munist party on 8 and 9 December appear designed to over-
come lags in the economic "leap forward" program, as well
as to strengthen First Secretary Zhivkov's control. No lead-
ing party or government officials were purged, but a number
of Zhivkov proteges were appointed to leading party organs,
and middle-rank party functionaries apparently loyal to
Zhivkov are to be moved into key positions in the economy.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia - Communist China: Indonesia's reply to the
latest Chinese Communist protest against resettlement of
Overseas Chinese clearly reaffirms Djakarta's intent to pro-
ceed with its ban on alien retailers in rural areas. Foreign
Minister Subandrio, while reiterating Indonesia's readiness
to implement the long-pending citizenship agreement with Pei-
ping, firmly rejected Foreign Minister Chen Yi's protest over

1
[PAGE 05]
the "intolerable" treatment of Chinese nationals in Indonesia
and accused Chinese Communist Embassy officials of inter-
ference in the domestic affairs of Indonesia. Peiping will
probably attempt to increase pressure on Djakarta by renewed
hints of economic retaliation and intensified propaganda against
"reactionary" forces in Indonesia.

Morocco: Crown Prince Moulay Hassan has asked the
United States to sell him secretly up to $600,000 worth of small
arms for distribution to "pure and uncontaminated elements"
in case of trouble during the King's absence from Morocco next
month. The American ambassador comments that the crown
prince may intend to arm rightist elements who are as likely to
provoke as to resist the increasingly aggressive Moroccan left.
Members of the prince's entourage are known to believe that the
King should replace the present civilian cabinet with one com-
posed of "nonpolitical" army officers and technicians.

(Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Brazil: The Brazilian presidential office has ordered "the
same official attitude" toward all foreign countries, including
the US and the USSR.
Pressures have been growing for such a move in the belief that
it would contribute to Brazil's economic improvement and en-
hance its importance in world affairs. There has been no con-
firmation that Brazil means to modify its long-standing policy

14 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
support of the US, although Rio de Janeiro has recently shown
disappointment over its economic relations with Washington.

Paraguay: The government of dictator Stroessner, aware
of plans for the invasion attempts of 12 December by Paraguayan
exiles in Argentina and Brazil, placed security forces on "un-
usual alert" on the night of 11 December, and has announced
defeat of the attempt. The armed forces are believed capable
of handling the situation, and present indications are that the
military remain loyal to the Stoessner regime. Attempts to oust
the increasingly unpopular dictator can be expected to continue,
however.

Nicaragua: Further guerrilla incursions into Nicaragua
are planned for late this month or early January. Rebels are
believed active in both the southern and northern border areas,
where Costa Rican and Honduran armed forces are inadequate to
control them.
rebel plans for
a landing on the Caribbean coast by Nicaraguan rebels from Cuba
to coincide with planned border crossings. The Nicaraguan
armed forces are believed capable of suppressing the expected
incursions, which will probably involve fewer than 100 rebels.

14 Dec 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Bulgaria Shakes Up Leading Party and Government Bodies

Probably in reaction to difficulties encountered since the
reorganizations last spring, and specifically to problems brought
out at central committee plenums since last summer, the Bul-
garian party central committee on 8 and 9 December proposed
organizational changes which apparently will strengthen party
First Secretary Zhivkov's control over the country's efforts to-
ward achieving the economic "leap forward." The proposed
changes in the government will be formalized by the National
Assembly on 21 December.

The Committee on Industry and Technical Progress, the
Committee for Construction and Architecture, and the Minis-
try of Trade--all concerned with areas of the economy which
have been under severe criticism during the year--have been
split into a number of new committees and ministries. The
professional qualities of the chiefs and deputy chiefs appointed
to these newly formed organs--most of whom were important
party officials in the provinces--cannot be judged. Their loyalty
to Zhivkov--whose "leap" has apparently not enjoyed wholehearted
support within the party--can be safely assumed, however.

No leading party figure appears to have suffered a loss of
power by the proposed changes. Stanko Todorov was relieved as
a party secretary but was appointed candidate member of the po-
litburo, a deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers, and head
of the State Planning Commission. He has been active this year
and is probably committed to support of Zhivkov. Tano Tsolov,
one of two new party secretaries, was once minister of heavy in-
dustry and, since last spring, has been head of the Committee
for Industry and Technical Progress. The other new secretary,
Boris Velchev, has been first secretary of the Sofia Okrug
(District) party committee. With these appointments, four of
the five party secretaries probably can be considered Zhivkov
proteges.

14 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Moroccan Crown Prince Asks for Secret Supply of Small Arms

Moroccan Crown Prince Moulay Hassan has proposed to
the American Embassy in Rabat that the United States sell him
urgently and secretly a small quantity of arms, including rifles
and machine guns. Presumably he is making a similar approach
to other sources. This request is unrelated to an earlier one by
the prince, who is chief of staff of the army, that the United States
equip five battalions of shock troops. The prince proposes to
distribute the small arms to "pure and uncontaminated elements"
for use in case trouble develops while King Mohamed V is tour-
ing the Middle East in January. The prince claims to have $600,-
000 in cash in secret funds unknown either to the Moroccan de-
fense or finance ministers.

The US ambassador believes that the arms desired by the
prince probably would be distributed to rural tribesmen or right-
ist elements in the Casablanca area, who are as likely to provoke
as to resist leftist action. The ambassador feels that existing
army and police forces are capable of dealing with any disorders
arising in the near future from leftist sources.

The prince unsuccessfully urged the King late last summer
to use army and security forces to suppress increasingly aggres-
sive leftist elements. Officers in the prince's immediate entour-
age have indicated to American officials their belief that the King
should oust Premier Abdallah Ibrahim and replace the present
cabinet with army officers and nonpolitical technicians.

The King, who is planning to visit Cairo, Damascus, Amman,
Riyadh, Baghdad, and Beirut from 5 January to 4 February, may, as he
has in the past, include potential trouble-makers in his entourage
in order to lessen the likelihood of disturbance during his absence.

14 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Brazilian Foreign Policy Shift Toward Neutralism Reported

Under a new policy emanating from the presidential office,
Brazil, acting as a "third force," will now treat all nations--
including the US and the USSR--with "the same official attitude,
following the policy of other neutralist nations."

Such a policy directive has not yet been spe-
cifically reported by other sources and probably would be op-
posed by some presidential advisers, but pressures for such a
move have been strengthening in Brazil.

The policy change is said to result from Rio de Janeiro's
disappointment with Washington's current policy, which, they
charge, "has failed to give Brazil the favored treatment Brazil
has traditionally given the US." Specific complaints mentioned
were US aid to African coffee production and "apparent US favor-
itism toward Argentina"--the latter a persistent expression of
Brazil's traditional concern over Argentine competition for lead-
ership in Latin America.

Another reported reason for the shift is Brazil's estimate
that the future world political split will be between the Afro-Asian
and white blocs rather than between the US and the USSR. Brazil
considers its racial make-up of white, black, and yellow suitable
for maintaining a neutralist position.

Pressures for enhancing Brazil's international position and
economic situation through neutralism have influenced but not
controlled President Kubitschek's proposal for a joint inter-Amer-
ican campaign against underdevelopment--"Operation Pan Amer-
ica,"--and the sending of a trade mission to Moscow. On 9 Decem-
ber this mission signed a draft agreement calling for $107,000,000
worth of trade each way during 1960-62. The first secretary of
the Uruguayan Embassy in Moscow stated that, from contacts with
the Brazilian mission, he has gained the impression that the mis-
sion's visit is a prelude to resumption of diplomatic relations,
which may take place in about six months.

14 Dec 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 11]
