[PAGE 01]
24 March 1958
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
24 MARCH 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR may be preparing to announce
suspension of nuclear tests

Another Soviet nuclear test noted
near Semipalatinsk

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia - Military situation in North Sumatra remains fluid, but
central government appears to
have upper hand

Lebanese President's effort to run
for second term may lead to civil

United Arab Republic - Bizri re-
signs as commander of UAR First Army in Syria

Chinese Nationalists may take
further action against Japan in
connection with Tokyo's private
trade agreement with Peiping.

Laos - Communists may make
good showing in 4 May assembly
elections.

III. THE WEST

France - Communists may be
seeking understanding with De
Gaulle.

Haiti - Attempt to oust Duvalier
government may occur shortly.

LATE ITEM

Saudi Arabia - King, as a result
of family pressure, yields "full powers" to Crown Prince Faysal
in domestic, foreign, and finan-
cial policies.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 March 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR - possible suspension of nuclear tests: The
USSR may be preparing to announce some form of suspen-
sion of nuclear tests. In early March Khrushchev told a
Western official that the Soviet Union was going to stop
testing and production of thermonuclear weapons, and the
Soviet ambassador to Vienna recently told Chancellor Raab
that Moscow would soon announce suspension of nuclear
weapons tests. The tempo of Soviet nuclear tests in the
first three months of 1958 has been the highest yet observed.
Kremlin leaders probably feel that unilateral action--
which could later be reversed if the other nuclear powers
fail to follow suit--would have a tremendous psychological
impact. They may also believe that it would undercut West-
ern efforts to enforce any ban on tests through an inspec-
tion system. (Page 1)

Soviet nuclear tests continue: The Joint Atomic
Energy Intelligence Committee issued the following state-
ment at 1600 22 March:

The Atomic Energy Detection System has re-
ported that an explosion occurred at 0750 hours GMT
(0250 EST) on 22 March 1958, in the vicinity of
Semipalatinsk.

This test is the
sixth to have occurred in the past nine days and the third since 20 March, activity having been divided between the Novaya Zemlya and Semipalatinsk proving grounds.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: The military situation in North Sumatra
remains fluid, but central government forces appear to
have the upper hand in that area and to be pressing their
advantage. Their main objective, however, is the Padang-
Bukittinggi area in Central Sumatra. There are reports
that the Russian merchant ships which recently arrived
in Djakarta carried small arms.
(Page 2) (Map)

Syria: The resignation of Lt. Gen. Afif Bizri as
commander of the United Arab Republic First Army in
Syria removes the last of the prominent pro-Soviet Syrians
influential in Syrian politics at the time of the recent union
with Egypt and reflects Nasir's firm control. Nasir claims
that he had suspected pro-Soviet Bizri of being controlled
by "outside forces," and when Bizri submitted a hasty res-
ignation over the issue of army appointments, Nasir quickly
accepted. (Page 3)

Lebanon: President Chamoun's determination to try
for a second consecutive term may lead to civil disorder.
He says that he is providing arms to Christian elements
as a counter to Moslems armed by Syria and Egypt and
that he is aware that a major conflict may develop. The
gendarmerie and army should be capable of handling any
disturbances. (Page 4)

Laos: The Communists could make a good showing
in the 4 May elections for 21 new seats in the National As-
sembly. The two leading conservative parties have been
unable to resolve their differences and still have 53 candi-
dates in the field. The Communists, in contrast, have been
working hard, avoiding controversial issues, and are posing
as the champions of Buddhism, the crown, and established
Laotian traditions. (Page 5)

24 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Japan - Taiwan - Communist China: The Chinese Na-
tionalist Government may take further action to pressure
Tokyo to deny any Chinese Communist trade delegation the
right to fly Peiping's flag in Japan. Such action might include
an attempt to promote a boycott by pro-Nationalist Overseas
Chinese of Japanese goods and attempts to seize Japanese
shipping bound for Communist China.
(Page 6)

III. THE WEST

De Gaulle - USSR: Efforts to foster an understanding
between General De Gaulle on the one hand and the French
Communist party and Moscow on the other appear to be
under way in France. Soviet ambassador Vinogradov has
been active in this respect, and a leading Gaullist has tried
to sound out the French Communist party. De Gaulle has
frequently proclaimed his hostility to Communism. The
French Communist party, however, might see his return as
precipitating a popular front, and Moscow may see pos-
sibilities of weakening NATO and facilitating a French-
Soviet rapprochement.
(Page 7)

Haiti: There are indications that an attempt to oust the
weak Duvalier government may be made shortly by a
combination of Duvalier's political rivals and former army
strong man Kebreau. Dominican dictator Trujillo may be
involved in the plot, which could result in considerable
bloodshed.
(Page 8)

24 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
LATE ITEM

Saudi Arabia: Mecca radio's announcement on 22
March that King Saud had granted "full powers" to Crown
Prince Faysal in formulating and executing domestic, for-
eign, and financial policies of the Saudi Arabian Govern-
ment indicates that the King has yielded to family pres-
sure to relinquish his highly centralized authority. Exer-
cise of greater influence by Faysal would probably result
in a relaxation of tensions with the United Arab Republic and
in a more critical approach to relations with the United States.
(Page 9)

24 Mar 58 DAILY BRIEF iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Hinting Unilateral Suspension of Nuclear Tests

In early March Khrushchev told a Western ambassador
that the Soviet Union was going to stop producing and testing
thermonuclear weapons since its present bomb design "func-
tioned perfectly" and it "already had enough to blow up the
world." He added that tests of "normal bombs" would be con-
tinued. The Soviet party chief, in a speech on 14 March,
predicted that public pressures will eventually force govern-
ments to undertake unilateral stoppage of weapons manufac-
ture. The Soviet ambassador to Austria recently told Chan-
cellor Raab that the USSR will make a unilateral declaration
suspending nuclear tests.

While such statements might be deliberately designed
to "soften" the current Western position on disarmament,
there are certain factors including impending United States
tests including thermonuclear weapons which make a uni-
lateral Soviet suspension of thermonuclear tests particularly
timely. The current series of Soviet thermonuclear tests
has been conducted at a rapid pace, and achievement of the
immediate objectives of the USSR's thermonuclear weapons
development program may be imminent. The Kremlin prob-
ably estimates that the public impact of its demonstrations
over the past six months in the field of weapons systems
would eliminate any appearance of military weakness which
a unilateral action might otherwise suggest.

A major advantage, from the Soviet point of view, of a
unilateral declaration in the nuclear weapons field would be
to undercut Western efforts to enforce a suspension of tests
or weapons manufacture through an inspection system. So-
viet leaders probably believe that a test suspension would
also have a heavy impact in Britain, where the Labor party
is advocating a temporary test suspension and some of its
members are publicly demanding a complete halt in nuclear
weapons production.

Such a declaration would require a dramatic setting.
The most obvious occasion would be the convening of the new
Supreme Soviet, which has been hurriedly called for 27 March.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Indonesia

Central government forces in North Sumatra continue
to encounter dissident resistance in the Medan area, but
reinforcements have arrived, and the government appears
to hold the advantage.

Meanwhile, the Atjehnese in the northern-most area
of Sumatra, who have long been in revolt against Djakarta,
appear to have made deals with both the dissidents and Lt.
Col. Gaharu, the local pro-government army commander.
Gaharu reported on 15 March, for instance, that he had reached an agreement with the Atjehnese for the main-
tenance of the truce which has existed since June 1957.

Dissident commander Hussein in Central Sumatra is
reported relieving officers in his command who are only reluctantly supporting his movement or who are suspected
of aiding Djakarta. A group of army troops and police under two of these officers has already moved "into the hills" and is generally understood to have declared itself out of the dissident movement.

The Indonesian ambassador in Moscow has requested
permission from Djakarta to grant visas for 36 Soviet pilots
to deliver 14 aircraft to Indonesia, The request probably refers to a ferry flight of unidentified aircraft which has been arranged for early April.

There have been reports that the recently arrived
merchant ships purchased from the Soviet Union carried
small arms. The Indonesian Government, however, continues to refute the charge that it has made any direct purchases of arms from the USSR.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 12]
Nasir Accepts Bizri's Resignation

Lt. Gen. Afif Bizri submitted his resignation in a
"huff" over Cairo's insistence on overseeing the appoint-
ment of personnel under his command in the United Arab
Republic's First Army in Syria.

Bizri, the last of the prominent pro-Soviet Syrians,
had used the tactic before, but this time Nasir quickly ac-
cepted and announced it in the Cairo press without Bizri's
knowledge.

Nasir is also reported to have stated that he had
given Bizri many chances to "prove himself" following
the union of Egypt and Syria, but he believed Bizri was
controlled by "outside forces." He added that he had deter-
mined earlier to dispense with Bizri, and took advantage
of this opportunity.

It was generally believed that Nasir would not allow
Bizri to remain in any prominent position for long and his
recent promotion to lieutenant general and command of the
First Army was considered a "kick upstairs." The fact
that he forced the resignation at this time demonstrates
Nasir's confidence that his authority in the military and
political affairs of the new union is absolute.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 13]
Lebanese Internal Crisis Approaching

Opponents of Lebanese President Chamoun are pre-
dicting "bloody civil war" if he tries in May to push through
parliament a constitutional amendment allowing him to run
for a second consecutive term as president. These opponents,
known as the "Third Force" and including Christians as well
as Moslems, are reported to have prepared an ultimatum
to be presented to Chamoun on 27 March. They argue that
the president's withdrawal would strip anti-Western and pro-
Nasir extremists of their best campaign issue. If Chamoun
refuses to withdraw, the group plans to call a general strike
which would end in violence. Chamoun has stated that as a
counter to Egyptian and Syrian arming of Moslems in Lebanon,
he is providing friendly Christian elements with weapons.

Chamoun, who appears to believe that Lebanon's pro-
Western orientation can be preserved only by his continuance
in office, is conducting his campaign in a manner deliberately
calculated to portray his opposition as enemies of the tradi-
tional pro-Christian character of Lebanon. His objective is
to make the Christians believe that their survival depends on
his retaining the presidency.

While there is a good possibility of civil disturbances
in the next few weeks, widespread open conflict is not likely.
The gendarmerie and army could cope with local outbreaks,
and Christian-Moslem strife probably would be averted by
the intervention of army chief General Fuad Shihab, who might take over the government for an interim period pend-
ing new parliamentary elections. A similar situation arose
in 1952, when President Khuri was forced to resign.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 14]
Communists in Laos May Make Good Showing in
May Elections

Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma estimates that the
Communist-dominated Neo Lao Hak Zat party (NLHZ) will
win from four to eight seats in the critical 4 May national
elections for 21 new National Assembly seats. Unless the
two main conservative parties--the Nationalist and Independ-
ent--are able to compose their present differences, the
prospects are that the Communists will do even better.

The winning of five seats by the NLHZ would be re-
garded in Laos as a good showing for a party so recently
organized. Victory in ten or more constituencies would
be considered an upset and put the Communists in a strong
position to demand greater participation in the government.
It would also greatly enhance their prospects in the 1959
elections for all 60 assembly seats.

The NLHZ is pressing its campaign with zeal. It is
attempting to pose as the true champion of Buddhism, the
crown, and established Laotian traditions. Except for its
strong advocacy of neutralism, it is avoiding controversial
issues and de-emphasizing its Communist complexion.

The Nationalists and Independents who were supposed
to have agreed to the formation of a consolidated slate by
1 April still have 53 candidates in the field. Moreover, a
meeting of party leaders on 21 March to work out a joint
propaganda campaign, establish provisional headquarters,
and devise methods of popularizing candidates ended in
failure.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 15]
Chinese Nationalists May Take Further Action Against Japan

Nationalist China's Foreign Minister George Yeh has
informed Ambassador Drumright that he is under "increas-
ing pressure" to step up retaliatory measures against Japan
designed to prevent the flying of Peiping's flag by a Commu-
nist Chinese trade delegation in Japan. Yeh said that Na-
tionalist legislators and others were urging "drastic steps"
including a boycott of Japanese goods, but that he prefers
to limit action to suspension of trade between Taiwan and
Japan and is not encouraging these proposals.

Whether Yeh will succeed is doubtful. The Japanese
ambassador is scheduled to return to Taipei about the end
of March with an explanation of Tokyo's position. During
the interim, Chiang Kai-shek may decide to increase pres-
sure for a favorable reply by promoting an Overseas Chi-
nese boycott of Japanese goods. He also may order seizure
of Japanese shipping bound for Communist China.

Ambassador MacArthur reports that the Japanese
Government tentatively plans a public statement by Prime
Minister Kishi next week, approving the trade agreement and promising the government's support and cooperation
to the Communist trade mission, but announcing that the
government is unable to "take cognizance of the raising of
the national flag of Communist China on the building of its
private trade mission." Such a statement almost certainly
would not satisfy Chiang Kai-shek.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 16]
III. THE WEST

Communist Efforts to Promote Understanding With De Gaulle

Efforts to establish some sort of understanding between
General de Gaulle on the one hand and the French Commu-
nist party (PCF) and Moscow on the other have been reported
recently.

Soviet Ambassador Vinogradov is actively
cultivating French business leaders and advocating a "nation-
al independent position" for a De Gaulle-led France. He
promises Soviet "support" for a solution of North African
problems to enable France to assume a strong position be-
tween the US and the USSR. Vinogradov may have mentioned
this during his recent visit to De Gaulle.

Senator
Edmond Michelet has adopted Vinogradov's suggestion that the
PCF be sounded out concerning its attitude toward the general.
Michelet appears to feel that De Gaulle's "liberal" ideas for
an Algerian solution will ultimately alienate many rightists,
but may stir up substantial support among leftists.

De Gaulle himself has attacked Communism both pub-
licly and privately. Nevertheless, the PCF, while continu-
ing its public opposition to De Gaulle, might consider his re-
turn desirable in the long run as facilitating its hitherto futile
efforts to rally leftist parties in a popular front. Further-
more, Moscow sees in De Gaulle's return possibilities of
weakening NATO and fostering a French--Soviet rapproche-
ment.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 17]
Dominican Republic May Be Involved in Plans to Oust
Haitian Government

General Kebreau, former Haitian strong man who
was relieved as army chief of staff by President Duvalier
on 12 March, may be the key figure in plans by Duvalier's
political rivals and by Generalissimo Trujillo of the Do-
minican Republic to oust the seriously weakened Duvalier
regime. Trujillo has long distrusted Duvalier and had
hoped to use Kebreau to control the president.

Despite categorical denials by Dominican officials
including the generalissimo himself, Kebreau
is either in the Dominican Republic or somewhere on the
Haitian-Dominican border. The Dominicans have given
Kebreau a clandestine radio station at a border hideout where he is working with
followers of Clement Jumelle, a bitter rival of Duvalier.
Another indication of Dominican intrigue was the arrival
in Port-au-Prince on 19 March of John Abbes, head of
Dominican intelligence who directed Dominican subversion
in Guatemala last year.

Underground activity by followers of Jumelle is
being "feverishly organized," Duvalier's other principal rival Louis Dejoie
has indicated, Kebreau can count on his support. A determined move
against the government now would have a good chance of
ousting Duvalier. The army is divided and the public al-
ready apprehensive.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
[PAGE 18]
LATE ITEM

King Saud Delegates Broad Powers to Crown Prince Faysal

In granting unprecedented broad powers to Crown Prince
Faysal on 22 March, King Saud has apparently bowed to pres-
sure from key brothers and uncles to relinquish much of the
authority which he had gradually concentrated in his own hands.
The extent to which Saud's authority has been diminished, how-
ever, is not yet clear since he apparently retains the loyalty
of the armed forces. The King's previous conduct of affairs
was particularly galling to Faysal, who, although prime min-
ister and foreign minister, had been largely excluded from
policy formulation in recent months. Faysal's apparent will-
ingness to effect a reconciliation with the King indicates an
awareness by all that the increasingly serious split in the
royal family gravely threatened the future of the Saudi dynas-
ty.

Faysal, in his new role, may try to lessen the tensions
with the United Arab Republic, but his active participation
may be limited by his poor health. He will probably re-ex-
amine Saudi relations with the United States, possibly modi-
fying them along more nationalistic lines. Chances are in-
creased that diplomatic relations may eventually be resumed
with the Soviet Union. In response to widespread criticism
of Saud's mismanagement of the economy, he will undoubted-
ly make an effort to strengthen the country's finances.

24 Mar 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 9
[PAGE 19]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
24 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

Laos: The Communists could make a good showing
in the 4 May elections for 21 new seats in the National As-
sembly. The two leading conservative parties have been
unable to resolve their differences and still have 53 candi-
dates in the field. The Communists, in contrast, have been
working hard, avoiding controversial issues, and are posing
as the champions of Buddhism, the crown, and established
Laotian traditions.
(Page 5)

Haiti: There are indications that an attempt to oust
the weak Duvalier government may be made shortly by a
combination of Duvalier's political rivals and former army
strong man Kebreau. Dominican dictator Trujillo may be
involved in the plot, which could result in considerable
bloodshed.
(Page 8)

Soviet nuclear tests continue: The Joint Atomic
Energy Intelligence Committee issued the following state-
ment at 1600 22 March:

The Atomic Energy Detection System has re-
ported that an explosion occurred at 0750 hours GMT
(0250 EST) on 22 March 1958, in the vicinity of
Semipalatinsk.

This test is the
sixth to have occurred in the past nine days and the
third since 20 March, activity having been divided
between the Novaya Zemlya and Semipalatinsk proving
grounds.
