[PAGE 01]
23 December 1960

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]23 DECEMBER 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR--Earth satellite launching attempt fails.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--USSR considering calling for resumption of ICC.
Morocco--Possible recognition of North Vietnam and North Korea seen.
Ethiopia--Situation returning to normal[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: A probable earth satellite vehicle was launched from the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at about 0245 EST (0745 GMT) on 22 December 1960. The vehicle did not go into orbit and impacted in North Central Siberia.

This is the first launch from Tyura Tam since that of Sputnik VI on 1 December. The objective of the 22 December launching cannot be determined at this time, but it may have been similar to that of Sputnik VI, which contained dogs and other material related to the investigation of systems for support of manned space flight.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos:
the USSR was considering calling for a resumption of the ICC in Laos. It is considered likely that Moscow will decide to do this.
Six additional Soviet AN-12 heavy transports have been scheduled to fly from Irkutsk to Peiping. These aircraft probably will continue on to Canton with supplies destined for Laos.
(Page 1)
[PAGE 05]
Morocco: The government of Morocco will soon recognize both North Vietnam and North Korea as a further demonstration of "positive neutrality," according to statements made to the American charge by a Moroccan diplomat close to palace circles. In view of Morocco's expanding ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc, the government, and particularly the impetuous crown prince, might see recognition as a counterbalance to Morocco's receipt of US aid and the relatively close relations which it has maintained with the West. (Page 4)

Ethiopia: The military and political situation throughout Ethiopia is rapidly returning to normal. The greatest impact of the abortive coup is likely to be felt by the small, educated group which was sympathetic to or implicated in the coup and which is now suspect in the Emperor's eyes. Unless changes in Ethiopia's political and social system occur, the "intelligentsia" will probably eventually make another effort, according to the US military attache in Addis Ababa. (Page 5)

23 Dec 60
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
The Situation in Laos

the USSR was considering calling for the resumption of the ICC in Laos. Soviet charges that responsibility for the civil war rested in the United States for giving military aid to Phoumi's forces and stated that Souvanna Phouma represented the only legal government of Laos remarks, which included a reminder that North Vietnam had called for a new Geneva conference, are part of an initial bloc maneuver to discredit US policy in Laos and to generate international apprehensions over the situation which would lead to a political settlement of the crisis favorable to the Communists. A recent Soviet propaganda commentary expressed fear that Laos may become a "second Korea" and that continued US assistance to the Boun Oum party "may touch off a conflagration" throughout the area. The article concluded by issuing an "imperative call" for a new conference of the 1954 Geneva participants.

Issuing his order of the day for the 16th anniversary of the North Vietnamese Army, Hanoi's Minister of Defense General Vo Nguyen Giap charged on 22 December that the US is trying to convert both Laos and South Vietnam into colonies. Echoing tones of the recent Communist conference in Moscow--"imperialism and colonialism are entering the days of complete collapse"--Giap said "blatant US intervention" in Laos threatened both China and North Vietnam. Giap stated that North Vietnam, "as a signatory to the Geneva Agreements," could not "remain indifferent to these brazen acts." He ordered North Vietnamese army men to "defend our frontiers and be ready to shatter all dark designs of the enemy." Communist China's minister of defense had issued a similarly unspecific warning on the previous day.

The USSR apparently is substantially increasing the capability of the bloc airlift in support of Laos. As many as nine
[PAGE 07]
Soviet AN-12 military transports have been scheduled to fly to the Soviet Far East from the European USSR. At least six of these aircraft had been scheduled to fly from Irkutsk to Peiping on 22 December. Two of the three AN-12s which flew to Communist China from the USSR on 17 and 18 December now are operating in the Soviet Far East also. All eleven AN-12s may be engaged in ferrying supplies to Communist China for shipment to Laos. Collectively they are capable of carrying a minimum of 165 tons of cargo--a major addition to the current capability of the Soviet and Chinese aircraft now engaged in the operation.

Through 22 December, Soviet and North Vietnamese transports continue to be scheduled for flights to the Vientiane area and Sam Neua. There are indications that some supplies are being ferried to southern Laos. One Soviet IL-14 which flew to Vinh, North Vietnam, on 21 December is the first Soviet aircraft known to have flown into this area.

The planned attack by Phoumi's forces on those of Captain Kong Le appears to have been delayed, although lead elements under Major Siho are believed to be continuing to move forward. The delay may have been occasioned by difficulties of coordination at the staff level, a chronic problem in the Laotian Army.

Kong Le may retreat farther up the road to Luang Prabang before attempting to reorganize his forces.

the drop zone for that day would be Van Vieng. Van Vieng is about 80 miles north of Vientiane, in an area reputed to be a Pathet Lao center of strength.

In Vientiane, General Phoumi has indicated that he may be more favorably disposed to suggestions that the National Assembly formally invest the Boun Oum government so as to make it unmistakably constitutional.

Phoumi appeared to
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]recognize that the new government would fare much better internationally if there were no question as to its legality. Phoumi had previously insisted that the assembly no longer existed because his Revolutionary Committee had dissolved it, and that he planned to revise the constitution and hold new elections[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
[PAGE 09]
Morocco May Recognize North Vietnam and North Korea

The government of Morocco will soon recognize both North Vietnam and North Korea as a further demonstration of "positive neutrality," according to statements made to the American charge in Rabat. The source, a former minister to Washington and now Moroccan ambassador to New Delhi, is close to palace circles.

Morocco's continued need for US aid and the desire for good relations with the West frequently professed by both King Mohamed V and the crown prince would seem to militate against such a step. Moreover, Morocco would be unlikely to offend South Vietnam, whose first ambassador to Morocco presented his credentials less than six weeks ago, or to align itself with Cuba as the second free world country to recognize North Korea.

However, Morocco's ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc have been expanding and its relations with the West, especially France, deteriorating. Shipments of cobalt have been made to Communist China, and Rabat announced on 15 November that the USSR would furnish jet aircraft. These planes are expected to arrive in the near future.

Consequently, the Moroccan Government, and especially the impetuous crown prince, who apparently asked the Soviet ambassador for the jet aircraft without consulting the cabinet and only vaguely informing the King, might see this recognition as a means of increasing bloc ties or as an appropriate response to the Soviet veto of Mauritania's UN admission. Any unfriendly Western act, such as countermeasures reportedly planned by the French against Moroccan threats to their base rights, could precipitate such recognition.
[PAGE 10]
Ethiopian Progressives to Suffer From Coup

The progressive younger elements in Ethiopia may lose considerable influence because many of the more enlightened ministers and intellectuals were involved in the abortive coup against the Emperor, according to an Ethiopian member of the UN staff. In this event, efforts to increase personal freedom, improve living standards, and accelerate economic development would be set back several years. The Emperor's public remarks suggest a lenient attitude toward rebel sympathizers, but in view of his suspicion of the progressives, he is expected to rely for advice increasingly on representatives of traditional Ethiopian society.

Notices posted at the University College in Addis Ababa state that any student signing a letter of apology to the Emperor will be allowed to continue his studies, although he may be subject to later punishment. The students were strongly in favor of the coup and demonstrated in its behalf on 15 December.

The American military attache in Addis Ababa reports that the situation is rapidly returning to normal, although troops are still hunting down two coup leaders and some 325 missing Bodyguard personnel. Of the 5,000 men in the Bodyguard, about 475 were reported killed or wounded in the fighting in Addis Ababa and 1,800 are held by the army or police. The remainder have been released. The attache believes that the Bodyguard will be broken up, but that the Emperor will probably have to re-create a household guard--perhaps by using the two battalions of Bodyguard troops in the Congo as a nucleus--to act as a counterpoise to the army.

He adds that unless reforms are carried out by the government, the "intelligentsia" will organize another revolt within the next year or two in an attempt to overthrow Ethiopia's feudalistic government.
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
