[PAGE 01]
20 March 1952
Copy No. 43

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Greek Government may fall on issue of executing Communists (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Russian jets "buzz" British plane in Austrian air corridor (page 6).

7. Schuman and Adenauer expected to reach agreement on Saar issue (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
4. Greek Government may fall on issue of executing Communists:

Acting Prime Minister Venizelos is certain that the issue of whether to execute eight condemned Communists will cause the fall of the EPEK-Liberal coalition government within a week or ten days. He is determined, however, to follow the recommendations of the Board of Pardons, whose report is expected by 22 March. After conferring with influential EPEK leaders, Venizelos predicted that twenty to thirty EPEK deputies would resign if the executions were carried out.

Comment: There has been dissension in EPEK over the possible execution of the leaders of the Communist spy ring recently sentenced to death by a Greek court.

One of the EPEK's aims is to attract the extreme left; therefore, it does not want to share responsibility for the executions in view of the inevitability of new elections.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. Russian jets "buzz" British plane in Austrian air corridor:

The British High Commissioner in Austria has delivered a strong protest to the Soviet Headquarters against the interception of a British plane by Soviet jet-fighters on 16 March. The plane, which was checking radio controls within the authorized air corridor between the British zone and Vienna, was twice approached by Russian jets near Wiener Neustadt, and shots were fired in its "vicinity" during the second interception.

The American Air Attache asserts that range checking within flight corridors is a normal operation and does not require prior notification.

Comment: This incident closely follows Western rejection of a Russian proposal to shift the air corridor away from Wiener Neustadt, whose Soviet air installations are subject to air observation. The Soviet High Commissioner warned at that time that the Western powers would have to suffer the consequences of this rejection.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
7. Schuman and Adenauer expected to reach agreement on Saar issue:

A French Foreign Office spokesman expects Foreign Minister Schuman and Chancellor Adenauer to issue a conciliatory statement on the Saar after their present talks, during which the two may agree to drop the Saar question from the agenda of the Council of Europe Ministers' Committee.

The British Ambassador in Paris told the American Charge that Foreign Secretary Eden is making an informal approach to both Adenauer and Schuman on the Saar issue.

Comment: The French have taken steps to avoid open discussion of the Saar by the Council. If the case should reach the Council, the pro-French Saar Government is prepared to present a rebuttal of the German position.

Adenauer's request to the German press to avoid emphasizing the problem and his Deputy Foreign Minister's recent public statement that the Council of Europe would not be asked to discuss the matter are additional indications of a desire to reach an agreement with Schuman.

- 7 -
