[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

9 May 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British press release adversely affects Iranian-United States relations (page 4).
5. Turks displeased with handling of Tunisian issue (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British press release adversely affects Iranian-United States relations:

The British Embassy in Tehran released to the Iranian press on 5 May purported extracts from a Department of State press conference in Washington on military aid to Iran. The transcript, as released by the British without prior notification to the American Embassy, quoted the Washington spokesman as saying that the non-payment of Iran's troops was a problem which does not concern the United States.

Ambassador Henderson reports that the Iranians interpret the release as evidence that the United States is "indifferent if not rather smug" about their difficulties. He believes that the release has undermined Iranian goodwill towards the United States, and points out that the Iranian press has interpreted the release as evidence of American-British collusion against Iran.

Comment: The British release inaccurately attributed to a State Department spokesman a remark made by a correspondent during a 29 April press conference. The British, however, apparently consider that the military aid agreement has strengthened Mossadeq and have already expressed strong resentment over its conclusion.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
5. Turks displeased with handling of Tunisian issue:

Turkish UN delegate Sarper told the American delegate that Turkey's decision to abstain on the Tunisian item was partly caused by its reluctance to antagonize France so soon after being accepted in NATO. He added that he was so concerned over his country's difficult position vis-a-vis NATO and the Arab-Asian group that he had almost persuaded Ankara to vote against inclusion of the item on the agenda. Turkey's standing with the Arabs, Sarper hinted, was being increasingly impaired.

Comment: Turkey's abstention was influenced by its desire to maintain solidarity with the Western powers, particularly the United States. Turkey, however, would have preferred to have the question dealt with outside the Security Council through direct negotiation.

Many leading Turks share Sarper's conviction that Turkey would be more useful to the West if it did not openly align itself with Western policies in the area.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
