Terrorist Attacks in Angola

Africans in Angola, who outnumber the whites there 4,300,000 to 200,000, have been increasingly excited by the progress being made by other African territories toward independence. They have formed two emigré nationalist organizations--the UPA with headquarters in Leopoldville and the pro-Communist African Revolutionary Front for the Independence of Portuguese Colonies (FRAIN), which is based in Conakry, Guinea. FRAIN, which has devoted much of its attention to Portuguese Guinea, has received active support from Guinea's President Sekou Touré; but Portuguese Guinea appeared quiet as of 14 March.

Led by Roberto Holden--an exiled Angolan also known as Jose Gilmore--UPA reportedly planned its attacks to coincide with the UN Security Council debate on Angola in an attempt to focus world attention on the rising public discontent in Portuguese Africa. the dissidents received some weapons--including 25 machine guns and 150 grenades--from Tunisians in the Congo, who may also have provided some training.

Portuguese authorities can be expected to move ruthlessly against these infiltrations. Recent army reinforcements from Portugal include two companies of commando-type troops, which arrived in Luanda in February. Following last year's mutiny of Congolese troops against their Belgian officers, the Portuguese began with steps to increase the ratio of white troops to Africans. They have also sought to exploit the traditional hostility between northern and southern Angolans by assigning troops from the south to northern units and vice versa.

Although born in Angola, Holden has spent most of his life in the Congo. His last visit to Angola--in 1956--was cut short when he learned of Portuguese plans to arrest him.

Holden claims to be a moderate and to have advised UPA against resorting to terrorist tactics. He claims that while he was a delegate to the January 1960 meeting of the All-African Peoples' Conference in Tunis, he spurned an offer by officials of FRAIN to combine forces with UPA. As a result,

18 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 4
