[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1.

FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communists suggest new approach to POW issue in Korea (page 3).

3.

4. Papal delegate in Indochina says Tam government cannot last long (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. French politicians see Pinay's downfall certain this year (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1.

FAR EAST

2. Chinese Communists suggest new approach to POW issue in Korea:

Former Indian Ambassador to Peiping, K. M. Panikkar, reportedly states that the Chinese Communists want to avoid appearing as sponsors of any plan involving the neutral rescreening of unwilling POW returnees at Panmunjom. It is inferred, however, that the Communists would consider this approach if it were advanced by UN negotiators.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
SOVIET UNION

1.

Comment: Chinese Communist propaganda adopted a more optimistic line toward developments at Panmunjom earlier in the week, but over the week end it shifted back to vilifying the United Nations.

3.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]
4. Papal delegate in Indochina says Tam government cannot last long:

The American Consul in Hanoi was told by the Apostolic Delegate in Indochina that the government of Nguyen Van Tam is widely unpopular and cannot last long. The Consul comments that the Archbishop is considered "perhaps the most cautious man in Indochina."

Comment: Conflicting reports have been received on the stability of the Tam government. The consensus of these reports is that, while Tam's close relationship with the French has won him an enduring unpopularity, the attitude of the Vietnamese population has changed somewhat during the first month of his premiership from one of intense hostility to one of watchful waiting.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. French politicians see Pinay's downfall certain this year:

A confidential survey by the US Embassy in Paris shows that spokesmen for the major French political parties are unanimous in the belief that the Pinay government will fall before the end of the year. These politicians expect a similar rightist-dominated coalition to replace the present government when the failure of Pinay's economic policies becomes more apparent.

They envisage no fundamental change in foreign policy, but agree that Schuman will not head a ministry; Bidault is mentioned either as his successor or as the next premier.

Comment: Although Pinay has so far successfully confounded his critics, his program stops short of the drastic reforms necessary to stabilize the French economy.

Dissatisfaction with Schuman has become increasingly vocal in France during the past few months. Bidault's appointment to the Foreign Office would assure continuity of the program for which he and Schuman have carried the responsibility since 1945, but his failing health makes his political future uncertain.

- 5 -
