[PAGE 01]
23 February 1959
Copy No. C 03

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
23 February 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Peiping to grant $5,000,000 in aid
to Algerian rebels.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Shah of Iran enraged by Khrushchev’s
criticism.
Nasir’s speech reflects preoccupation
with UAR-USSR relations.
Lebanon — Government concerned over
increased UAR activity; seeking top-
level meeting with UAR.
Cambodia — Dap Chhuon formally breaks
with Sihanouk; military showdown may
be hastened.
Ceylon — General strike postponed but
tension remains high.
Somalia — Violence possible during
early-March elections; police taking
emergency measures.
Moroccan nationalist leader resigns as
ambassador to Cairo; returning to
strengthen Istiqlal right wing.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
23 February 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Algeria: Communist China plans to
give the Algerian rebel government $3,000,000 worth of arms
and ammunition, "provisions" valued at $1,000,000, and
$1,000,000 in "foreign currency,"
The arms possibly
include light weapons of US manufacture as requested by the
Algerian rebel mission which visited Peiping in December.
Deliveries may be made through the United Arab Republic,
which in the past has often acted as middleman in arms sup-

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iran— USSR:
The Shah is enraged by the strong public
attack made on him by Khrushchev on 17 February. Iranian
Prime Minister Eqbal believes that the Soviet Union's tough
propaganda campaign against the Shah may have considerable
internal repercussions and has again asked for American sup-

UAR-USSR: Nasir's 21 February speech in Cairo con-
cerned largely domestic and Arab affairs, but it also reflected
his preoccupation with Soviet relations. The recent letters ex-
changed between Nasir and Khrushchev show that both are di-
rectly interested in containing their differences and consequently
are likely to make further appropriate gestures in that direc-
tion. However, their divergent policies, including those toward
Iraq, are likely to continue creating problems in their relation-
ship. (CONFIDENTIAL)

[PAGE 05]
Lebanon: Arrangements are being worked out for high-
level Lebanese-UAR discussions, possibly between President
Shihab and Nasir. Increased UAR clandestine activity is a
threat to Lebanon's precarious security situation and Lebanese
awareness of this may be the reason why Beirut is interested
in discussions with UAR officials, which could occur this week
while Nasir and his entourage are in Damascus.

Cambodia: General Dap Chhuon has formally declared his
"dissidence" against the Sihanouk regime in a letter to the King.
The contents of the letter, while unknown, are probably con-
cerned with Chhuon's terms for calling off a planned general up-
rising, which include Sihanouk's withdrawal from politics and
the reorientation of Cambodia's policies toward a firmly anti
Communist position. While Chhuon apparently hopes for a ne-
gotiated political solution, his action may bring a military
showdown nearer. A government military convoy of about 70
armored cars and trucks was observed moving from Phnom
Penh toward Siem Reap, site of Chhuon's headquarters, on the
night of 21 February. (SECRET NO FURTHER DISSEMINA-
TION)

Ceylon: The one-day general strike planned for 23 Febru-
ary has been postponed, possibly until 3 March. Tension re-
mains high, however, and powerful plantation labor unions are
reported willing to join Colom-

Somalia: Violence is anticipated during elections for a
legislative assembly in the Italian trust territory of Somalia
from 4 through 8 March. The 90-member assembly selected
will draft the constitution and make other preparations for in-
dependence in 1960. The opposition party, boycotting the elec-
tion in protest against questionable electoral methods employed by
the Somali Youth League--the ruling party--may engage in vio-
lence, including attacks on foreigners and destruction of foreign
installations. Police are aware of the threat and are taking emer-
gency measures. (SECRET)

23 Feb 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
Morocco: Abdelkhalik Torres, an important nationalist
leader and Moroccan ambassador to Cairo, intends to resign
and return to active politics. Torres' decision probably has the
approval of the King, who may look on Torres as a conserva-
tive and as an acceptable future premier. Premier Ibrahim
had wanted Torres to remain in Cairo, but was presumably over-
ruled by the King. An adherent of the Istiqlal party's right wing,
which is still struggling with the left wing for party control,
Torres will try to strengthen the right wing's following in north-
ern Morocco. If he fails, he may try to reconstitute the Islah,
his former party, which had a wide following in the North.

23 Feb 59 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

CONFIDENTIAL

[PAGE 08]
