Egypt will make no concessions on the Middle East Command proposals.

The British suggestion that Anglo-Egyptian negotiations depend on the end of terrorism in the Canal zone is not realistic. According to the Ambassador, the Egyptians believe that they can eventually force the British to withdraw by continuing their commandos tactics, and are therefore in no hurry to negotiate. He points out that the British base at Favid is not operative at the present time, and he warns that it eventually may even become untenable.

The Ambassador reiterates his previous warnings that events in Egypt cannot stand still but will continue to deteriorate, with the prospect that they will ultimately lead to "reoccupation, revolution, and general chaos."

5. British interested in Iraqi solution to Egyptian situation:

British Foreign Office officials are agreeably surprised at the latest Iraqi proposals for a solution of the Anglo-Egyptian crisis and are considering recommending that Foreign Secretary Eden encourage the Iraqi Prime Minister in his efforts. They hope that the suggestions can be brought more into line with the Middle East Command proposals.

The Foreign Office does not like the Iraqi idea of an alliance restricted to five years nor the flat statement that Egypt could take over the air defense of the Suez Canal zone at some future date. It believes that Egypt will reject the suggestion that the Sudanese be left to decide on their future relations with Egypt free from either British or Egyptian pressure.

Comment: The parts of the Iraqi proposal appealing to the Foreign Office are evidently those stipulating that terrorism in the Suez Canal zone be ended and an allied military storage depot be established there. A depot would satisfy some of the requirements of the Middle East Command proposals, which the British have consistently seen as the most suitable arrangement for the defense of the Canal.

Should agreement be reached on essentials, the British would apparently be willing to evacuate some of their troops according to their own time schedule. The British are, however, unwilling to concede that Egypt alone is capable of undertaking any aspect of the defense of the Canal zone.
