The Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma, dissatisfied with Pathet Lao observance of the cease-fire, has authorized an immediate attack against Pathet Lao positions in Phong Saly Province. During the past few days Laotian Army troops have carried out guerrilla actions in southeastern Phong Saly as a prelude to operations to retake two posts lost to the Pathets. A resumption of fighting in the province could lead to at least a temporary halt in negotiations with the Pathets, since a cease-fire was one of the preconditions Souvanna set before beginning substantive talks on 13 October.

Souvanna says he is planning to follow-up his "house arrest" of Kong Le by transferring the captain from command of the 2nd Paratroop Battalion, Kong's power base, to a spot in the Ministry of Defense, where he can keep an eye on him. It is unlikely that Kong would agree to any move that actually threatened his authority over the paratroops, although he might go along with some purely nominal arrangement.

Information from General Ouane that Souvanna was requesting, through the Soviet delegation now in Vientiane, the return of the International Control Commission (ICC) is apparently without substance. Hammarskjold's personal representative in Laos, Zellweger, has revealed that Souvanna is interested in increasing the UN presence there, at least in part to forestall Communist bloc pressure for a return of the ICC. Souvanna particularly wanted military observers who would be available to investigate any North Vietnamese incursions or border incidents that Hanoi could seize upon as a pretext for intervention.

According to Zellweger, Souvanna has instructed his top negotiator with the Pathet Lao that he will not countenance any Pathet effort to undermine the UN mission in Laos. The Pathets might well raise the issue, since the Communist bloc argues that the 1954 Geneva agreements form the basis for peace in the former Indochina states, that the ICC should be in Laos to police these international agreements, and that the UN has no legal role in Laos. Bloc interest in the return of the ICC stems from the fact that prior to its adjournment in 1958, the ICC limited the
