[PAGE 01]
2 September 1959

Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
Indonesia: Devaluation and other monetary measures announced on 24 August will be largely ineffective in coping with the problem of mounting inflation in Indonesia unless complemented by more far-reaching reforms. Although follow-up measures such as increased taxes and enforced savings reportedly are planned for the near future, the government's ability to implement them is dubious. While the Communist party has thus far given qualified approval of devaluation, it has admonished the government to take more extensive steps and will probably intensify its efforts to discredit the army-influenced cabinet. New reports of army corruption are also likely targets for Communist exploitation.

2 Sept 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 04]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Indonesia's Monetary Measures

Djakarta's remedial monetary measures, which included partial devaluation and the freezing of 90 percent of all bank deposits, will be largely ineffective in coping with Indonesia's problems of mounting inflation and scarcity of goods unless complemented by more far-reaching reforms. The measures, announced on 24 August, devalued by 90 percent the two highest denomination banknotes of 500 and 1,000 rupiahs, reset the official rate of exchange from 11.4 rupiahs to the dollar to 45 to the dollar, and froze 90 percent of all bank deposits over 25,000 rupiahs, for which debentures are to be issued. Complicated export regulations were abandoned, and import duties were revised to encourage essential imports and continue discouragement of luxury items.

President Sukarno strongly implied in a 26 August radio address that three follow-up measures would shortly be undertaken. He enumerated them as stabilization of the budget by cutting or postponing less urgent expenditures; an increase in taxes; and compulsory savings. It is doubtful, however, that the government has the capability to implement these measures. The resignation, without explanation, of Lukman Hakim, governor of the Bank of Indonesia, on 1 September is probably indicative of the uncertain attitude of knowledgeable Indonesian officials over the reforms.

The freeze on bank deposits has not been lifted, although machinery is being set up to entertain applications for exemption. The result is a near paralysis of business and foreign exchange transactions owing to the lack of fluid capital. Devaluation will have little effect on the upward pressure of prices.

The Indonesian Communist party has given qualified approval to the government's measures although it has emphasized the financial losses inflicted on peasants, laborers, and small businesses and has admonished the government that additional reforms are necessary. Should government efforts to solve fiscal problems falter noticeably, the Communists are likely to intensify their criticism in an attempt to discredit the army-influenced cabinet. New reports of army corruption are also obvious targets for Communist exploitation.

[PAGE 06]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 07]
