is scheduled for October 1961, at Bordj In Eker. Two tunnels
are being bored in granite for underground testing. The first
shot will be a device tested in a 1200-meter tunnel, of which
900 meters has been completed, while the second underground
test, about one month later, will be an experimental bomb
which is expected to be tested in another tunnel of 1400-meter
length, of which 600 meters has been completed. French ex-
perts are also planning to test an atomic bomb, capable of be-
ing dropped from a Mirage IV aircraft, in April 1962. (Map)

Argentina-Cuba: Argentina has decided to send special
envoys to the United States and Cuban governments to seek
means of alleviating "tension" between the two countries, de-
spite its previous skepticism regarding the value of single-
country mediation efforts. This action is probably intended
to counter the apparent bid of Brazilian President Quadros for
Latin American leadership through a play to leftist sentiment.
Although officials have denied that domestic political considera-
tions are responsible for the move, it is probably also influ-
enced in part by the recent electoral triumph in Buenos Aires
of a Socialist deputy who campaigned on a pro-Castro platform.
(Backup, Page 2)

Bolivia: President Victor Paz Estenssoro told American
Ambassador Strom on 5 March that his government plans exten-
sive arrests of Communist trade union leaders if the Confedera-
tion of Urban Teachers--which is reported under strong Com-
munist influence--continues its strike for higher wages after the
morning of 7 March. Anticipating possible violence, Paz is
asking for tear-gas grenades, machine-gun ammunition, and
small bombs for use in P-51 aircraft, from the United States.
A substantial wage increase for teachers would strengthen
wage demands from other government employees and impede
the Paz government's drive to increase the country's production.
The powerful unions of the nationalized tin mines are threaten-
ing to strike beginning 8 March.
