[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

17 January 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. MOSCOW MAY SEEK OIL CONCESSION IN LIBYA

3. BURMA MAY ACCEPT SOVIET HELP IN ESTABLISHING
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES

17 Jan 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
2. MOSCOW MAY SEEK OIL CONCESSION IN LIBYA

The new Soviet ambassador to Libya
has indicated to the chairman of the
Libyan Petroleum Commission that
the USSR desires to apply for oil con-
cessions in Libya, according to the American embassy in
Tripoli. The Libyan petroleum law gives a country which
holds a concession the
right to establish and
utilize airstrips and
radio stations within
the concession areas.

The chairman of the
Petroleum Commission
stated that it would be dif-
ficult if not impossible to
refuse a Soviet application
for concessions in Cyrena-
ica, in an area in which no
other company has yet ex-
pressed any interest.

Comment
This demarche, made in the first weeks
of Ambassador Generalov's assignment
in Libya, suggests that Moscow intends to move quickly to
establish a foothold. Generalov was ambassador to Australia
at the time of the Petrov incident.

The USSR also has asked Libya,
to
grant it exclusive rights to use one of the abandoned World
War II airstrips in the vicinity of Tripoli for Soviet courier
planes. Granting the USSR an oil exploration concession in
eastern Libya will almost certainly result in Moscow's devel-
oping airstrips in the area, which may be a primary reason
for the Kremlin's interest. (Prepared by ORR)

17 Jan 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 4

[PAGE 05]
3. BURMA MAY ACCEPT SOVIET HELP IN ESTABLISHING
INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES

U Kyaw Nyein, Burmese minister
of industries, told Ambassador
Satterthwaite on 12 January that
despite the risks involved, he was
now convinced Burma should accept Soviet assistance in
the establishment of industrial enterprises. Among the
projects for which Soviet aid is anticipated are a steel
mill and a fertilizer plant. Kyaw Nyein also indicated he
had been pleasantly surprised by Communist China's per-
formance in furnishing Burma a textile mill, and implied
that Burma may seek Peiping's assistance in establishing
a jute mill and a paper mill.

Kyaw Nyein, referring to negotiations
with the International Bank, stated that Burma was dis-
illusioned with the results achieved. He complained that
the bank had discriminated against Burma and had, in fact,
insisted on the denationalizing of a number of socialized
industries. In justifying his position he said that Burma's
present socialist government absolutely must go ahead with
some industrialization, otherwise its supporters will turn
to Communism.

Comment
A high Burmese planning official had
previously stated that Soviet assistance
would be concentrated on agricultural and irrigation projects.
A group of Chinese experts has been in Burma for some
months in connection with a textile mill project.

Kyaw Nyein has been known as Burma's
most strongly anti-Communist leader. His views expressed
to Satterthwaite indicate that an important deterrent to in-
creasing ties between Burma and the Sino-Soviet bloc has
been removed. Soviet leaders will probably make every

17 Jan 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 06]
effort to soften up Kyaw Nyein further when he and Defense
Minister Ba Swe--who is probably already inclined to favor
closer ties with the Orbit--visit Moscow after Burma's par-
liamentary elections in April. The visit will be in response
to an invitation from Premier Bulganin when he latter was
in Rangoon last month. (Concurred in by ORR)

17 Jan 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
