[PAGE 01]
Copy No. 134
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS
1. ISRAELI SHIPPING AT EILAT INCREASES (page 3).
2. JORDAN'S ECONOMIC SITUATION SERIOUS (page 4).
3. FOREIGN COMMUNISTS REPORTEDLY SEEK TO RESTORE POLISH PARTY ORTHODOXY (page 5).
4. FIRST SIGHTING OF SOVIET AERIAL REFUELING OPERATION
5. SUKARNO REPORTEDLY ORDERS SEA-BORNE OPERATION AGAINST CELEBES (page 7).
6. MAO TSE-TUNG REPORTEDLY TO VISIT WARSAW THIS SUMMER (page 8).
7. KISHI REPORTS ON MEETING WITH NEHRU (page 9).

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. ISRAELI SHIPPING AT EILAT INCREASES

Comment on:

The Israeli-flag freighter Atlit was sighted entering the Red Sea on the night of 2-3 June. At its prevailing speed of eight knots, and if no further stops are made, the Atlit should arrive in the Gulf of Aqaba on the morning of 9 June.

Meanwhile, the small Danish-flag freighter Ulla Danielsen arrived at the Aqaba port of Eilat on 1 June with a cargo of construction materials after transiting the Suez Canal. The ship allegedly was not under Israeli charter until reaching Eilat, but will now operate under a one-year charter between Eilat and Djibouti. The Liberian-flag tanker Memory, en route to Eilat with a cargo of oil from Iran, probably entered the Strait of Tiran on the morning of 4 June.

With the increase in shipping activity, the Israeli navy is reported taking special precautions at Eilat against possible attacks by Arab underwater demolition specialists. Depth charges are set off periodically at night, and Israeli antifrogman teams are in action. Israeli naval forces at Eilat include two patrol escort vessels, three motor torpedo boats, and six landing craft.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. JORDAN'S ECONOMIC SITUATION SERIOUS

Comment on:

In recent discussions with US government officials, Jordan's deputy premier Samir Rifai and other cabinet ministers have stressed the seriousness of Jordan's economic plight. Even if an artificially balanced budget should ultimately be published by the government, a serious deficit appears inevitable.

Specific factors contributing to the deficit include reduced UN relief spending, a slump in tourism, and withdrawal of British forces, all with an accompanying increase in unemployment. The cost of maintaining adequate military and internal security forces under present circumstances has increased. Moreover, contributions of $16,800,000 promised for this year by Egypt and Syria "toward replacement of the former British subsidy to Jordan are not likely to be paid. These circumstances may cause a deficit of more than $24,000,000 in a total budget of about $80,000,000.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. FOREIGN COMMUNISTS REPORTEDLY SEEK TO RESTORE POLISH PARTY ORTHODOXY

Representatives of the East German, Czechoslovak, and French Communist parties met in East Berlin on 24 and 25 May to discuss ways to "bring the Polish Communist Party (PZPR) to reason,"

Two longtime German Communists allegedly are to go to Warsaw in mid-June to renew contacts with Deputy Premier Nowak and other former comrades in the Polish party who now belong to the Natolin faction. The Germans are to stress their former comradeship in the fight against Fascism and warn the Poles of the dangers involved in the current Titoist deviation of the PZPR.

Following the return of the German emissaries from Warsaw, leaders of the East German, Czech and French parties will hold another meeting in Prague to discuss the progress made in curbing the Polish deviation. One of the Germans will then go to Moscow to report his impressions of the situation in Poland.

Comment The use of old Communists in an attempt to establish close relations with Stalinist Polish party members would conform to the campaign by Moscow-oriented parties to bring the PZPR back into line. The East German Foreign Ministry's announcement on 3 June that a Polish party and government delegation will come to Berlin in mid-June suggests talks parallel to those held between the Poles and the Czechs, which concentrated on economic affairs and agreement on noncontroversial aspects of bloc solidarity. It is unlikely, however, that the Poles will effect a complete rapprochement with the orthodox parties on either the government or the party level.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. FIRST SIGHTING OF SOVIET AERIAL REFUELING OPERATION

sighted two BISON jet heavy bombers engaged in aerial refueling practice using a probe and drogue refueling system. The two BISONS as well as other aircraft in the vicinity flew at altitudes of 500 to 1,000 feet, indicating that they were practicing for Soviet Air Force Day, 24 June.

The tanker BISON trailed a flexible hose about 40 feet long on the end of which was a cone-shaped attachment. The other BISON, which had a probe mounted on its nose, attempted to make connection with the refueling hose but was unsuccessful during the period of observation.

Comment Previous unconfirmed reports have indicated the use of Soviet heavy bombers as tanker aircraft. This is the first reliable observation of a BISON in this role, but a probe-nosed BISON was sighted as early as July 1955 and others have since been observed in flight in the Moscow area and on the airfield at the Moscow/Fili factory where these aircraft are produced.

An article in the 26 May issue of Soviet Aviation stated that the forthcoming air show will feature a demonstration of aerial refueling as well as a flyby of "new combat and passenger aircraft."

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. SUKARNO REPORTEDLY ORDERS SEA-BORNE OPERATION AGAINST CELEBES

President Sukarno reportedly has overridden Prime Minister Djuanda on the issue of deposing the East Indonesian territorial commander, Lt. Col. Sumual, and has ordered the army to mount a sea-borne operation against Celebes.

Comment

the central government did actually plan to remove Sumual, by force if necessary, on 7 May, and a "relieving battalion" from East Java was detailed to Makassar "to stand by on ship and to be sent into action if necessary." Elements in Celebes whose help the government had enlisted refused to co-operate since they feared the result would be civil war.

The proposed operation was called off, and a cabinet minister has since told the American ambassador that the East Indonesian problem is so much more difficult than originally believed that in order to avoid "complete breakdown," the government must proceed "slowly and with discretion." The army chief of staff is currently in Makassar, and inaugurated a partial reorganization of area command on 1 June with Sumual in attendance.

It remains possible, however, that Sukarno, angered by the delay in solving the command problem in East Indonesia, has again ordered an attack on Sumual.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. MAO TSE-TUNG REPORTEDLY TO VISIT WARSAW THIS SUMMER

The US embassy in Warsaw has been informed

Mao Tse-tung will visit Poland at the end of June or the beginning of July. The Poles plan to give him an elaborate welcome.

Comment Mao Tse-tung has indicated that he will visit Moscow at some "convenient" time. He will probably include Warsaw and other East European capitals during such a trip.

Polish officials probably hope to use a visit by Mao to gain support from China for their course of greater independence from the Soviet Union. In his speech to the Polish central committee last month, Gomulka described Chinese doctrinal formulations as a unique contribution to Marxist thought.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. KISHI REPORTS ON MEETING WITH NEHRU

Comment on:

During his recent visit to India, Japanese prime minister Kishi differed with Nehru on broad international questions.

Kishi was cautious about the admission of Communist China to the United Nations and defended the stationing of US forces in Japan. Nehru, advocating immediate cessation of nuclear tests, found Kishi inclined to consider control measures first and the total prohibition of tests later.

Kishi offered Japanese support for India's Five-Year Plan, and Kishi and Nehru agreed in principle to an exchange of Indian iron ore for Japanese machinery. Kishi indicated to the Indian commerce and finance ministers, however, that India should make additional concessions. Kishi discouraged a suggestion that Japan transfer its purchases of iron ore from Portuguese Goa to western India.

5 June 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 9
[PAGE 11]
