[PAGE 01]
[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]TOP SECRET
1 January 1953
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]
[PAGE 02]
[[PRED_REDACTION_2]]TOP SECRET[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Indian Ambassador is being treated discourteously by Peiping
(page 3).
2. Peiping asks for representation in Ceylon to handle long-term
trade (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

3. Soviet press ignores possibility of Eisenhower-Stalin meeting
(page 4).

FAR EAST

4. Peiping promises North Koreans continued support in war
(page 5).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Magsaysay ready to accept Nacionalista nomination for Philippine
presidency (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. British influence in Jordan in jeopardy (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Gaullists seen ready to support any new French government
(page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Indian Ambassador is being treated discourteously by Peiping:
Chinese Communist officials in Peiping are treating the Indian Ambassador with
"remote" discourtesy, according to the
Secretary General of the Ministry of External Affairs in New Delhi.

The source also states that the Chinese
Communist press is conducting a "rabid" campaign, in which it
is denouncing New Delhi for having diminished Peiping's prestige
throughout the world by presenting the Indian truce plan for Korea.

Comment: Indian envoys in Peiping for
the past two years have had more cordial relations with Chinese
Communist officials than have any other non-Communist representatives.
Although frequently misinterpreting Peiping's position,
Indian diplomats have sometimes obtained accurate statements of
its intentions, notably prior to the Chinese intervention in Korea.

While Peiping emphatically rejected
the Indian truce plan, no Chinese Communist public statement [[PRED_REDACTION_3]]impugning[[/PRED_REDACTION_3]] the motives of its authors has been noted.

2. Peiping asks for representation in Ceylon to handle long-term trade:
The Ceylonese Food Minister on 29 December stated that in the rice-rubber long-term
trade negotiations just concluded in Peiping,
the Chinese insisted on representation in
Ceylon, but could be persuaded to accept representation through a
Ceylonese firm. He added that the Chinese demonstrated how important they considered the long-term trade pact by accepting all
Ceylonese stipulations.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: It is likely that Ceylon eventually
will allow Chinese trade representation at Colombo, despite the Ceylonese Prime Minister's assurance on 27 September to the contrary.
Such representation will mark another success in China's campaign to
promote Western disunity on East-West trade controls.

Following the Moscow Economic Conference,
Peiping set up a trade mission in Berlin to negotiate directly with
Western firms, and there is evidence that it plans to organize a network of such missions.

SOVIET UNION

3. Soviet press ignores possibility of Eisenhower-Stalin meeting:
As evidence of the propagandistic nature of
Stalin's replies to the Reston questionnaire,
the US Embassy in Moscow cites the fact that the Soviet press has emphasized the
answers dealing with Soviet peaceful intentions but omitted comment
on a possible Eisenhower-Stalin meeting. The original heavy play
given Stalin's answers has considerably tapered off, foreign reactions
to the exchange have received only passing reference, and there has
been no mention of Mr. Dulles' statement.

Comment: The Peiping and Satellite press
reactions have followed closely the Soviet line that the United States
is solely responsible for the cold war and that conditions for peace
are inherent in past Soviet proposals.
[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

4. Peiping promises North Koreans continued support in war:
The China Peace Committee in Peiping has sent a New Year's message to North Korean
Premier Kim Il-sung stating that the "central
task" of the Chinese people is "to strengthen
the struggle against American aggression and aid Korea." The statement promises that the Peiping regime will "use all its resources...to
support you until a final, just and reasonable settlement" of the Korean
war is achieved.

Comment: Peiping's New Year propaganda
to Chinese audiences also reaffirms the Chinese commitment to North Korea's support, listing it as one of the regime's principal efforts for
1953.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

5. Magsaysay ready to accept Nacionalista nomination for Philippine
presidency:
Defense Secretary Magsaysay told the American Embassy on 30 December that so far as
he was concerned "the die was cast with the
Nacionalistas." They now propose to nominate
him at a convention to be called for 1 March,
by which time he will have resigned from the
cabinet.

He explained that the Nacionalista leaders,
fearing Quirino's new tactic of labeling his enemies as Communists,
desire to nominate him at an early convention to obtain the
protection afforded by his record. Magsaysay added that the army
would support him on the Nacionalista ticket.
[PAGE 06]
Another report from Manila states that Quirino
is preparing to force Magsaysay out of the cabinet.

Comment: Philippine nominating conventions
are customarily held in the late spring or summer. Magsaysay plans to
propose that the Nacionalistas meet as early as 1 February instead of
1 March. This suggests that he hopes to be nominated before any shift
in his fortunes causes the Nacionalistas to reconsider their commitment.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. British influence in Jordan in jeopardy:
The American Ambassador in Amman reports
that strong Jordanian resentment over the recent British vote in the UN favoring direct
Arab-Israeli negotiations is likely to precipitate open parliamentary debate on all aspects of Anglo-Jordanian relations.
The Ambassador states that the debate scheduled for 23 December
was cancelled when 17 deputies withdrew in protest against holding
the discussions in secret.

Comment: Anti-British sentiment in Jordan,
where British influence is stronger than in any other Arab country, will
probably aggravate Britain's current problems in other parts of the area,
particularly in Iraq and Saudi Arabia.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Gaullists seen ready to support any new French government:
On the basis of a conversation with the secretary general and the foreign affairs spokesman
of the Rally of the French People, the American
Embassy in Paris concludes that the party, though not General de
Gaulle himself, will support the man chosen as the next premier.

[[PRED_REDACTION_4]]Although opposed to the EDC treaty in its
present form, these leaders consider that some of its "good" features,
such as standardization of equipment, a common uniform, and perhaps
even joint services, could be retained.

Comment: This is the first strong indication
that the Rally will support the next government regardless of its leadership, thus giving it a broader base than the Pinay coalition[[/PRED_REDACTION_4]].
[PAGE 07]
