25X1A

9. British propose settlement for Saar issue:
As a means of settling the Saar dispute, British Foreign Secretary Eden proposes that:
(1) the Saar be placed under the trusteeship of the Council of Europe with full political, cultural, and economic freedom, except that France would continue to have a 50-year lease, with option of renewal, on coal fields and railways, and would receive credit for iron and steel output under the Schuman Plan;
(2) the Saar become the seat of the projected European authorities;
(3) France and Germany agree to these arrangements without prejudice to the final determination of German frontiers in an eventual peace treaty; and
(4) the Council of Europe supervise the election of a new Landtag, which would then pass on these proposals.

Eden further suggests that, if all parties concerned agree to these steps, the Saarlanders themselves could within five years decide their future.

Comment: The British position regarding the Saar has been that the United States and Britain should discreetly press for settlement before greater French-German animosity developed over this issue.

10. MRP dissatisfaction with Pinay increasing:
The American Embassy in Paris reports that the recent Congress of the Popular Republican Party (MRP) was marked by "scathing denunciations" of the "reactionary policies" of the Pinay government. Even the newly elected party president expressed regret at MRP participation in the government.

Despite this opposition, however, the conservative majority of the party voted by a large majority to allow Pinay to continue his price-lowering experiment.

Comment: This new display of unrest in the Popular Republican Party, reflecting increased dissatisfaction with the party's exposure to attack from the left, gives added weight to its demands that Schuman remain in the cabinet as a condition of continued Popular Republican support of the coalition.

11. American Minister in Switzerland against further blocking of Swiss bank assets:
The American Minister in Switzerland opposes any further blocking of Banque Populaire funds in the United States in retaliation for the bank's handling of Chinese Communist accounts. He recommends that any further action be postponed until it is conclusively proved that the bank has other Chinese Communist accounts.

The Minister believes that the blocking of any more of the bank's assets would adversely affect Swiss consideration of further participation in the European Payments Union, the extension of Swiss controls over East-West trade, and the German assets problems now under discussion.

The blocking of additional funds now could make this incident the central issue in the June session of the Swiss Parliament, which plans to study the problem.
