II. ASIA-AFRICA

Further Bloc Aid to Ethiopia

Negotiations for Czechoslovakian economic assistance to Ethiopia will begin soon, according to a communiqué issued at the end of Emperor Haile Selassie's visit to Prague. Czechoslovakia has offered to deliver capital goods on a credit basis and to negotiate economic and technical-cooperation agreements between the two countries. According to an Ethiopian official, the credit will total $20,000,000 and will include the purchase of Czech military equipment. The only previous Czech aid to Ethiopia was a $2,000,000 line of credit extended last year for the purchase of hospital equipment and supplies.

The Soviet Union, under its recently granted $100,000,000 credit, is studying a plan for the construction of a pharmaceutical plant in Ethiopia, as well as plans for training 15,000 retired Ethiopian soldiers in agriculture and establishing the necessary farms to accommodate them. Moscow probably will provide both technical assistance and equipment for the agricultural program. Ethiopia estimates the total cost of that program at about $44,000,000.

Meanwhile, it is rumored in Addis Ababa that a number of high-level officials are alarmed by these agreements and are plotting a bloodless coup to overthrow Haile Selassie and set up a constitutional monarchy headed by the Crown Prince. According to the rumors, the alleged plotters claim support from among high army and church officials--as well as from the Crown Prince. They plan to abrogate the recent bloc agreements and seek additional economic aid from the US. Another unconfirmed report indicates opposition to instructions the Emperor allegedly sent from Moscow, that the Ethiopian Parliament should at its opening session in early November abrogate an agreement permitting US operation of a military communications installation in Asmara, Eritrea.

An attempt to depose Haile Selassie in the foreseeable future appears unlikely, in view of his widespread popularity and close

20 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
