Ceylon Encourages Relations With the Sino-
Soviet Bloc

The cordial relations established under the leadership of Mrs. Bandaranaike's husband, who was prime minister from 1956 until his assassination in 1959, have been revived during her six months in office. Work on development projects contracted for under the Soviet Union's $30,000,000 credit of 1958 is being stepped up. Six Soviet experts arrived on 25 January to resume work on plans for the construction of an iron and steel mill near Colombo. Soviet engineers have also presented the Ceylonese with preliminary plans for a flood-control scheme and an automobile tire and tube factory to be partially financed by Moscow.

The Ceylonese finance minister, who plans to accompany Prime Minister Bandaranaike on her London-Moscow-Cairo trip, probably will discuss other projects available under the credit agreement as well as recent Soviet offers of civil aircraft, pilot training, and refined petroleum products. Moscow has offered petroleum products at prices considerably below those of the Anglo-American consortium, which is the sole local importer and distributor of these products.

Colombo's attempt to equalize its economic relations with the Communist bloc and the free world has resulted in new trade negotiations with various Communist governments. Since last December, Ceylon has contracted for a total of 79,000 tons of sugar--chiefly of Cuban origin--from Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and the USSR; Ceylon in the past has relied on free-world sources for most of the 150,000 tons of sugar required annually. The government may also be considering the proposal made recently by a visiting East German trade union delegation for a trade agreement; Ceylon now has neither diplomatic nor formal trade relations with East Germany. A trade pact probably would be encouraged by the leftist minister of trade.

Negotiations between Ceylon and Communist China concerning this year's protocol to their second five-year rice-

4 Feb 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
