[PAGE 01]
22 June 1960
Copy No. C 68

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 JUNE 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Khrushchev's Bucharest speech reaffirms detente policy, criticizes Peking stand. 1

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Libyan prime minister says he will need further US concessions to satisfy critics of US base rights. 2
Terrorists apparently attempting to disrupt Cameroon's economy. 3

III. THE WEST
Finland--Formation of majority center government believed imminent. 4
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 June 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: In a hard-hitting criticism of Peiping's opposition to his policy of international detente, Khrushchev focused the foreign policy section of his Romanian party congress speech on a reaffirmation of the Soviet position. Pointedly claiming that only "madmen and maniacs" can speak of a new world war, Khrushchev warned that even a local war might grow into a major conflict, and that the way to prevent war is through "peaceful coexistence." He attacked the Chinese by implication for not sharing the USSR's confidence that the growing strength of the Communist bloc will turn the world Communist without resort to war. Reflecting continued Soviet sensitivity to the U-2 overflights, Khrushchev went to some lengths to assure his audience that these flights had in no way compromised the USSR's military posture. Khrushchev repeated his post-summit indictment of American policy and again in effect took the position that he has severed relations with the present administration.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Libya: The Libyan prime minister, in economic aid negotiations with the US ambassador, has referred to growing anti-base sentiment on the part of parliament and the press and has suggested that even if US aid is increased he will need additional concessions to satisfy his critics--such as assurances that no atomic bombs or "espionage" aircraft will be stationed at Wheelus.

Cameroon: The security situation in Douala, Cameroon's principal port and commercial center, has deteriorated as a result of stepped-up terrorist activities by extremist elements opposed to the moderate Ahidjo regime. A marked increase in attacks against members of the city's commercially important European community suggests that the terrorists, apparently well organized, are trying
[PAGE 05]
to disrupt the country's economy and perhaps also to foment racial strife.

III. THE WEST

Finland: President Kekkonen told Ambassador Sessions on 20 June that the formation of a majority government in Finland is "virtually assured." Prime Minister Sukselainen apparently has reached a tentative agreement with various party leaders to form a center government which will exclude both the Communist-front SKDL and the regular Social Democrats. The new government's most immediate task reportedly will be to seek to associate Finland with the European Free Trade Association and to negotiate with the Soviet Union on the most-favored-nation question. (Page 3)

22 June 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
New Libyan Press Attack on Wheelus Air Base

Prime Minister Kubar, in economic aid negotiations with the US ambassador, has referred to growing sentiment against Wheelus Air Base on the part of the Libyan parliament and press. He has suggested that even if US aid is increased, he will need additional concessions to satisfy his critics. Although he initially requested a joint review of the entire base agreement, Kubar has been fairly receptive to the idea of issuing a joint Libyan-American communique stating that such a review has been undertaken and that some procedural adjustments have been agreed to. He has made it clear, however, that he would like such a communique to contain American assurances that no atomic bombs or "espionage" aircraft will be stationed at Wheelus, as well as to provide for a joint Libyan-American commission to consider problems and complaints relating to base operations.

The weekly Tripoli newspaper Al Ra'id has attacked the American base agreement with Libya as a "deed of slavery" and rhetorically proclaimed, "Go out of our country, you enemies of liberty and peace." This, the second such attack in the Libyan press in the past three weeks, quoted press service accounts of a recent Moscow propaganda broadcast, including Soviet threats of retaliation against American bases in the event of war and Soviet allegations that the US is using Middle East bases to obtain espionage data on the Arab states which is then turned over to Israel.

While the Libyan Government does exercise considerable control over the press, it does not typically monitor newspaper issues in advance of publication. On occasion, it has suspended a paper and jailed or fined its editor; usually, however, this has followed an attack on the government itself or on some key government policy.

22 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 07]
Cameroon Terrorists Step Up Attacks in Douala

Extremist elements opposed to the moderate regime of President Ahidjo--presumably adherents of Felix Moumie's far left wing of the Union of the Cameroun Populations--have recently increased the scope and boldness of their terrorist attacks in Douala, Cameroon's largest city and commercial center. Such attacks had been frequent for some time, but until recently they seldom involved members of the European community and were usually conducted under cover of darkness. Since 31 May, however, at least four incidents--three of which resulted in European fatalities--have occurred in daylight in the center of the city. About a third of the approximately 15,000 whites in Cameroun, most of whom are French nationals, live in Douala.

The terrorists, who seem to be well organized and may be receiving direction from local Communist elements, appear to be attempting to disrupt the country's economy by forcing the Europeans to close down their enterprises, on which Cameroun depends heavily. The extremists may also hope to foment racial strife by provoking a violent reaction among the less responsible whites. The Europeans are becoming increasingly apprehensive and angry; last week French authorities had difficulty restraining elements which were threatening to take the law into their own hands.

Cameroun officials, who have been pressing the US, Britain, and West Germany for military assistance now provided exclusively by France, claim that the new wave of terrorism constitutes a major "penetration" effort by the Sino-Soviet bloc and that some of the terrorists now operating in Cameroun have been trained in bloc countries. So far, however, there is no evidence available to support these charges, although Moumie and his associates have frequently visited bloc countries and are believed to have obtained at least some financial support from such sources.

22 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 08]
Formation of Majority Government Expected in Finland Shortly

President Kekkonen told Ambassador Sessions on 20 June that the formation of a majority government in Finland is "virtually assured." Agrarian Prime Minister Sukselainen has apparently agreed with various party leaders to form a center government which will exclude both the Communist-front SKDL and the regular Social Democrats. The Agrarians reportedly intend to retain four cabinet posts and give four to the dissident faction (Skogists) of the Social Democrats, three to the Conservatives, and the remainder to the minor parties.

This termination of an 18-month impasse appears to have developed largely as a result of maneuvering by Kekkonen, who reportedly is anxious to lay the groundwork for his re-election in 1962. There has also been pressure by business and industrial groups that are convinced that Finland must be associated with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Kekkonen has exploited this factor to persuade the Conservatives to abandon their tactical alliance with the regular Social Democrats. The expected inclusion of the Skogist Social Democrats appears to be a maneuver designed to weaken the regular Social Democratic party organization and points to a prolonged period of dissension within Finnish labor.

As far as is known, Moscow has not expressly warned Finland against joining the EFTA, but the Finns have carefully considered probable Soviet reaction to such association. The new government's first move may be a bill requesting parliamentary authorization to make the necessary economic arrangements covering association with EFTA. After the passage of such legislation, negotiations will probably begin with Moscow regarding most-favored-nation treatment--i.e., equal tariff reductions for the Soviet Union. The Finns apparently believe that their primary problem is to convince Moscow that Finnish-Soviet relations will not be adversely affected by Finland's association with EFTA.

22 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 09]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 10]
