5. Syria willing to accept 500,000 more Arab refugees:
Syria is willing to resettle 500,000 Arab refugees in addition to those already there, according to the Chief of State, Colonel Selo. Colonel Shishakli had previously intimated that he would welcome this opportunity for economic development.

Colonel Selo urged an agreement integrating Syrian plans for a $200,000,000 development program with the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) projects. He also made it clear that in view of the political risks involved in accepting the refugees and in spite of the economic advantages, Syria would welcome any additional funds for general economic development which UNRWA could secure.

Comment: Acceptance of Arab refugees along with sizable economic assistance would enable the Shishakli-Selo regime to build a larger, more powerful Syria.

Successful resettlement of so many refugees would be a major step toward the solution of one of the Near East's most pressing problems. Other Arab states are likely to be uncooperative on the resettlement project and insist that the refugees be returned to their Palestinian homes.

LATIN AMERICA
6. Political disturbances in Ecuador:
The political situation in Ecuador is tense and rumors of a pending revolution are persistent. A minor incident occurred in Quito on 18 April when university students shot at and burned an effigy of presidential candidate Velasco Ibarra. This resulted in unfounded rumors that the revolution had started.

Comment: The February announcement of Velasco Ibarra's candidacy and his return on 1 March from exile in Argentina have upset earlier predictions that the presidential contest would be a "fairly normal one."

Velasco is scheduled to arrive in Quito on 22 April on his campaign tour, which has already resulted in violence. Communist leaders are reported to be organizing shock troops in Quito in preparation for Velasco's arrival, and Communist and Socialist students are actively engaged in propaganda campaigns against him. Should the expected disturbances in Quito reach serious proportions, it is possible that the ambitious Minister of Defense might stage a preventive coup "to protect" Ecuador from further bloodshed and from possible rule of the twice deposed ex-president Velasco.
