Situation in Laos

King Savang is now secretly in sympathy with
General Phoumi's plans to suppress the revolt led by Kong Le.
Khamphan also claimed that nine of the 14 members of the Somsanith
government, excluding the ex-prime minister, are members of
Phoumi's "counterrevolutionary group." Other reports indicate that
the King's acceptance of the Somsanith government's resignation on 14
August and his designation of Souvanna Phouma to form a new govern-
ment the next day were taken reluctantly and only to avoid bloodshed.
In the interim Khamphan and other followers of Phoumi may have
persuaded Savang of the necessity and the feasibility of Phoumi's
plans to retake Vientiane.

These plans are said to embrace a coordinated attack on Vientiane
utilizing air-dropped paratroopers and ground forces approaching the
city by road. Included in the ground forces are about 500 infantry
troops who are already being transported by river craft from Luang
Prabang. They will presumably debark above Vientiane, where they will
remain until the day of the attack. Armored elements within Vientiane,
ostensibly under Kong's control, are also reportedly ready to participate.
Preparations for an operation of this scope would take a considerable
length of time, and its execution would require outside logistic and
air support. A further complicating factor is the decision of the
French Government to deny Phoumi the use of Seno military base,
which they control. This may force Phoumi to transfer his headquarters
to Pakse farther south.

Meanwhile, Captain Kong Le shows signs of developing personal
political ambitions. He is reported to have told a group of Thai news-
men that the newly formed Souvanna Phouma government is merely
provisional and that the Youth party, organized by the rebels and to
be headed by Kong Le, will be the only legal political group once order
is restored. Souvanna Phouma's
new government was in fact provisional and would resign when "peace"
is restored throughout the country.
