[PAGE 01]
30 September 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

5. CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY LEADERSHIP

6. BRITAIN PUBLISHES CYPRIOT TERRORIST DOCUMENTS

* * * *

30 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
5. CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY LEADERSHIP

Elections to the central organs of the Chinese Communist Party's new central committee confirm that Mao Tse-tung continues to dominate the party. The elections, like the proceedings of the party's eighth congress as a whole, also provide strong evidence that Liu Shao-chi remains Mao's principal lieutenant, that Chou En-lai remains in third place, and that Teng Hsiao-ping has joined the top handful of party leaders.

Mao is to remain chairman of the central committee and its politburo. Liu is to be the senior vice-chairman, with Chou next in line. Mao has been replaced by Teng Hsiao-ping as head of the secretariat which directs the routine work of the central committee. These four persons, plus two lesser figures who have been formally ranked fourth and fifth in the party for years, will make up the politburo's new standing committee.

The politburo has been enlarged from 13 members to 17 members and six alternates. Eighteen of the 23 members occupy key posts in the party and regime. Four others are Mao's old comrades, and one of the ten new members owes his elevation to prestige gained as a military leader many years ago.

Almost all of the politburo members, and most of the members of the new central committee, have given evidence of strong bonds with the Soviet Union. Although Mao and his principal lieutenants are not Soviet puppets, they can be expected to view the maintenance of the Sino-Soviet alliance, in Liu Shao-chi's words, as the party's "supreme international duty."

30 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 7

[PAGE 06]
6. BRITAIN PUBLISHES CYPRIOT TERRORIST DOCUMENTS

Extracts from captured Cypriot terrorist documents published on 28 September by the British government do not appear to establish that the present Greek government has been implicated in supporting terrorism in the colony, according to the American embassy in London.

The embassy comments that the documents published, which are a relatively small portion of the captured papers in British possession, establish that Archbishop Makarios was fully apprised of terrorist activities, made the major decisions for the EOKA terrorist organization, and was the main source of its funds. The documents as published do not, however, implicate any Athens government leaders since the death of Prime Minister Papagos last October. The embassy doubts that the documents will be as helpful to the British case as the Foreign Office claims.

Comment
London has consistently displayed confidence that the captured documents will greatly strengthen the British case on the Cyprus issue, particularly in the forthcoming General Assembly.

Publication of an earlier selection of EOKA documents appears to have strengthened EOKA's position among the Greek-Cypriots and the public's impression of the organization's strength and efficiency.

30 Sept 56     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 8

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
