Dominican Dissidents Plot to Overthrow Trujillo Regime

The dissidents, should they succeed in overthrowing Trujillo, plan to approach President Joaquin Balaguer and demand that he sign a proclamation turning the government over to the junta. If Balaguer refuses, they intend to depose him and to install the junta.

One dissident army general believes he has the loyalty of 35 percent of the armed forces, while two other generals expect to sway more than half of the army in the important north-central part of the country. The revolutionaries also hope for support in the same region from peasants who recently have been demonstrating their loyalty to the local bishop in the face of great intimidation by the secret police. The dissidents, however, are not known to have any collaborators in the air force, but they believe at least half of the 80 pilots are anti-Trujillo. The loyalty of the air force's mobile ground division--a force roughly comparable in size and firepower to a US World War II regimental combat team--is unknown. This force and two army brigades commanded by members of Trujillo's family are stationed at Ciudad Trujillo.

Should the initial attempt to seize or kill Trujillo fail, these units probably would remain loyal to him, while officers deeply implicated in the plot and who are in control of units in outlying towns might decide to risk civil war rather than to face prospects of torture and execution following their arrest. If the dissidents are able to neutralize Trujillo, almost all Dominicans, except for those military men and members of the secret police, probably would offer no significant resistance to the revolutionaries. The dictator's sons and several other close relatives are reported abroad or planning to leave the country soon.

The group which is to capture or kill Trujillo may not have enough arms to ensure success. It believes quick action is necessary before Trujillo learns of their plot--if in fact he has not already done so.

Meanwhile, Trujillo is reported to believe that exiles in Venezuela are about to invade the Dominican Republic. On

3 May 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 8
