[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Rumania offers scarce grain for Austrian steel and machinery
(page 3).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]SOVIET UNION
2.

FAR EAST
3. Cargoes for Communist China accumulating in Antwerp[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. French Ambassador fears consequences of Egyptian outcry
against French imperialism (page 4).
5. British reject cotton stockpiling as means to assist Egypt (page 5).
6. Egypt protests delay in Sudan negotiations (page 5).
7. Egypt reportedly prepared to return to "national struggle"
(page 6).
8. Turkish-Yugoslav military talks stall at first meeting (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. French deputies see possibility of coalition based on Popular
Republicans and Gaullists (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Rumania offers scarce grain for Austrian steel and machinery:
Rumania has offered Austria $8,500,000
worth of grain, to be delivered during
1953, in exchange for semi-fabricated
and construction steel and large amounts
of machinery.

Comment: Despite this year's severe
drought and resultant poor crop, there is as yet no indication that
the Rumanians will reduce the grain exports which help pay for
goods needed in their industrialization program.
The Rumanian grain offer would include
approximately 30,000 tons of wheat, 25,000 tons of rye, and over
20,000 tons of corn.

SOVIET UNION
[PAGE 04]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]FAR EAST
3. Cargoes for Communist China accumulating in Antwerp:
Large quantities of cargo for Communist
China are available in Antwerp.

Whereas the Belgian firm was authorized to
load only 4,000 tons on the Polish merchant ship Pulaski,
it could easily fill the ship.

In view of the difficulties now encountered
by shippers in fulfilling their delivery commitments to Communist
China,

Comment: Increased shipments from
the free port of Antwerp are regarded as evidence of Communist
success in obtaining strategic materials despite Western export controls[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. French Ambassador fears consequences of Egyptian outcry against
French imperialism:
Ambassador Caffery in Cairo reports
that his French colleague has refused to
accept a "rudely worded" note expressing
Egyptian concern over developments in
Tunisia and Morocco.

The French Ambassador has informed
Paris of the danger of a "sort of holy war" against French imperialism. He also fears that fanatics in the Moslem Brotherhood may
organize commando groups to participate in a liberation movement
in Tunisia.
[PAGE 05]
Comment: A similar note expressing
Egyptian dissatisfaction with Great Britain's vote in the UN on the
Palestine resolution was recently handed to the British Ambassadors
in Cairo and other Arab capitals.
While the Moslem Brotherhood did organize
"commando groups" against the British in the Suez Canal zone last
year, it is doubtful that such untrained units could effectively undertake a military operation as far away as Tunisia.

5. British reject cotton stockpiling as means to assist Egypt:
The British Government has decided
that it cannot purchase Egyptian cotton
for stockpiling, and that it will not put
pressure on the British Raw Cotton
Commission to dispose of Egyptian stocks.

British Foreign Office and Treasury
officials are now studying the possibility of an additional sterling
release to Egypt beyond the 10,000,000 pounds already scheduled
for January under existing agreements, and hope to have concrete
suggestions ready for discussion in the forthcoming Anglo-American talks on Egypt in London.

6. Egypt protests delay in Sudan negotiations:
The Egyptian Government on 22 December
delivered a note to British Ambassador
Stevenson protesting the prolonged negotiations on the Sudan. Stevenson has
indicated that his latest meeting with General Nagib failed to achieve
any substantive progress on the remaining points of difference between
Britain and Egypt.

Nagib and Stevenson, however, have agreed
to issue an "optimistic" joint communique indicating that they are
close to agreement in order to allay public opinion in Egypt and the
Sudan.
[PAGE 06]
7. Egypt reportedly prepared to return to "national struggle":
General Nagib has told Ambassador Caffery
that British tactics on the Sudan negotiations are obstructive. He indicated that
if an agreement with Britain is not reached,
he will return to "unity of the Nile" and
the title of "King of the Sudan" as the basis
for future efforts.

A senior official of the Egyptian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs is quoted to the effect that Egypt is preparing to revert
to the "national struggle" if efforts to reach a settlement with the
British prove futile.

Comment: Other reports indicate that
the military regime is disappointed with the results of its moderate
policy on the Sudan.

A return to the popular theme of "national
struggle" might gain the support of extreme nationalist elements
within Egypt and distract attention from the increasing internal problems.
There is no firm indication, however, that a drastic change
in Egyptian policy is imminent.

8. Turkish-Yugoslav military talks stall at first meeting:
The Turkish Ambassador in Belgrade
told Ambassador Allen on 22 December
that the Turkish-Yugoslav defense-planning
talks had stalled at the first meeting.
Although both Turkey and Yugoslavia expressed a willingness to
"proceed far," neither side was ready to submit a plan for discussion.
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE
9. French deputies see possibility of coalition based on Popular
Republicans and Gaullists:
Some French National Assembly deputies
are predicting that secret negotiations
between the Popular Republicans (MRP)
and Gaullists will result in the selection
of a new premier within the next two weeks.

MRP President Teitgen believes that
the Gaullists' bargaining position is so weak that he would need to
offer them nothing in return for their support.

Comment: Anti-Pinay negotiations
between the Gaullists and MRP elements in Pinay's government were
reported as long ago as October. The former are under popular
pressure to participate in a new middle-of-the-road government.

While the two parties generally see eye
to eye on domestic social problems, there is little likelihood of
their reaching agreement on foreign policy unless the Gaullists
modify their opposition to EDC.
