Julius Nyerere, Tanganyika's moderate African leader who has cooperated closely with Britain, has apparently made a major bid for leadership of East African nationalist groups. In a recent speech in Addis Ababa, he demanded accelerated independence for all regional states--Kenya, Uganda, and Zanzibar as well as Nyasaland--and their emergence with Tanganyika as "one political unit" rather than as separate states with existing boundaries.

In Tanganyika there was initial confusion as to whether he advocated stepping up the pace of freedom for the other states or delaying local independence. Nyerere, however, later clarified his intention as meaning earlier independence for the group under Tanganyika's auspices. London has previously agreed to early independence for Tanganyika--desired by Nyerere for July 1962, but by most other nationalist party leaders for 1961.

Achievement of East African unity would appear to face almost insurmountable difficulties because of personal and tribal rivalries. However, Nyerere may have chosen an opportune time to present his bid for leadership. In Kenya, nationalist leaders are divided, and Tom Mboya faces a real challenge for power. In Uganda, African factions continue their infighting, which has complicated London's effort to ready the protectorate for early independence. In Zanzibar, Sheik Ali Muhsin, with the support of the Arab minority and growing African backing, is pressing London for early self-government for the island.

Nyerere's demands may lead to new difficulties for Britain as well as the settler-dominated Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Nationalist agitation led by Dr. Hastings Banda has been a serious challenge to the Federation's security, and disorders may break out again this summer if talks in July between Banda and British officials prove inconclusive. Banda and Nyerere have conferred recently, and Nyerere's statement suggests that he may cooperate to some extent with Banda to try to dismember the Federation.

23 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
