[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

6 August 1958

Copy No. C-57

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
6 AUGUST 1958

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev's latest communications reflect Moscow's desire for a forum to denounce Western policies in Middle East before sense of crisis fades; no indication that Khrushchev plans to attend UN session.

Chinese Communists further increase jet fighter strength in Taiwan Strait area.

USSR has resumed arms shipments to Syria.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Jordan - King Husayn orders more army units into Amman to prop up security.

Algerian rebels planning attack on Europeans on or about 20 August.

Pakistan - President Mirza and former Prime Minister Suhrawardy have hammered out a political truce.

III. THE WEST

British officials fear effect on their forces in Jordan if US troops withdraw from Lebanon.

Plotting continues in Paraguay; President Stroessner has ordered arrests, and he retains loyalty of the military.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
6 August 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*Latest Khrushchev letters: Having failed to force the United States and Britain to accept Soviet terms for five-power summit talks, Khrushchev now hopes to use a special session of the UN General Assembly to denounce American and British actions in the Middle East before events bring about a further easing in the crisis atmosphere which Moscow seeks to maintain. Khrushchev apparently had hoped to use a five-power heads-of-government meeting to gain Western recognition of the USSR's claim to a major voice in Middle Eastern affairs; this effort appears to have been temporarily suspended. His letters contain no indication that he plans to appear before the General Assembly to present the USSR's case personally.
(Page 1)

[PAGE 05]
Communist China - Taiwan: Twenty-nine Chinese Communist jet fighters were photographed on 4 August on Lungchi airfield, about 30 miles inland from Amoy, according to the Chinese Nationalist Air Force. This move places Communist fighters directly opposite Taiwan and in the immediate vicinity of the major Nationalist-held offshore islands for the first time. On 27 and 29 July, at least 36 MIG's moved into Swatow, another of the Chinese Communist coastal airfields opposite Taiwan.

The build-up in the Communist air defense posture is probably designed to gain control of the air in Fukien Province and over the offshore islands as well. In addition, the Communists have improved their capability to interdict support for the Nationalist-held offshore islands. The greatest danger at the moment is that the Nationalists may react vigorously to any further Communist air moves, particularly into the coastal airfields in Fukien Province. However, Chiang Kai-shek told the US ambassador in Taipei he would honor his commitments to consult with US authorities before ordering any attacks on the mainland. He requested additional military equipment and a US "show of force."
(Page 4) (Map)

USSR - UAR: Soviet arms including 25 tanks--possibly T-54's--are again being shipped to Syria. Three shiploads of military equipment were delivered to Latakia in July, the first such shipments since last May. Another vessel was unloading arms as of 2 August and a fifth is en route to the port.
(Page 6)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Jordan: The position of King Husayn's government continues to deteriorate. Should the present pro-Western government fall, action by Israel and the UAR to secure portions of Jordanian territory seems almost inevitable. The King has brought more army units into the capital to prop up local security.
(Page 7)

6 Aug 58    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
Algeria: The Algerian rebels are reported to be planning an attack on the European population on or about 20 August.
(Page 9)

Pakistan: Intensive political maneuvering apparently has culminated in an agreement between President Mirza and his chief rival, former Prime Minister Suhrawardy. This should improve political stability and make it more likely that the national elections actually will be held as expected in February. The present government of Prime Minister Noon is to continue until elections. Suhrawardy would then become prime minister and support Mirza's reelection.
(Page 10)

III. THE WEST

Britain - Jordan: British officials show increasing anxiety over the position of British troops in Jordan, and hope that the US will continue to retain forces in Lebanon, or else send some to Jordan. Establishment of a regular supply route through Aqaba lessens the impact of Israel's banning of overflights.
(Page 11)

Paraguay: The government claims it has evidence of several subversive plots, including an attempt on the life of President Stroessner. The President has ordered many arrests; and the military, which seems loyal to the regime, can probably assure the inauguration of the dictator for a second term on 15 August.
(Page 12)

6 Aug 58    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Area of major naval activity
Communist troop strength
Nationalist troop strength

Piston fighter
Jet fighter
Piston light bomber
Jet light bomber
Ground-attack

5 AUGUST 1958

CHINA
SOUTH CHINA SEA
SHANGHAI
Nanking
Wuhu
Hangchow
Chuhsien
Wenchow
Swatow
Amoy
Foochow
Canton
Hong Kong
Chow Shan I.
Pescadores Is.
Quemoy Is.
Matsu Is.
Taiwan Strait
Taiwan
EAST CHINA SEA
CHINA SEA

STATUTE MILES 300

[PAGE 08]
Taiwan Strait Situation

On 4 August, at least 29 Chinese Communist jet fighters were sighted on Lungchi Airfield, about 30 miles from the coast in the Amoy area. On 27 July, at least 36 jet fighters of the Canton-based 18th Air Division flew to Swatow's Chenghai Airfield. flight activity in the Liencheng area on 2 August which suggests that aircraft may also be operating from Liencheng Airfield, about 125 miles northwest of Amoy. Other air activity has included a flight of about a regiment of jet light bombers into Shanghai from the north, but this may be a training exercise.

There have been no significant reflections of unusual ground force activity in the Taiwan Strait area. The launching of a direct assault against the Quemoys, where Communist strength is about equal to the Nationalist forces, would require additional troops, but these could be brought in rapidly over the Yingtan-Amoy rail line. Communist troops in the Matsu area outnumber the Nationalists by two to one, but no activity indicative of military preparations has been detected in this area.

There have been no changes in naval strength in the Fukien area.

While the activities of other forces do not reflect an intention to initiate major, hostile moves against the Chinese Nationalists, Peiping has the capability to do so at any time. A recently renewed flurry of propaganda urging Taiwan's "liberation" appears to have subsided since Khrushchev's recent trip to Peiping, but the Chinese Communists have professed concern that the Nationalists are planning military action against the mainland.

In a conversation on 4 August with Ambassador Drumright and Admiral Smoot, Chiang Kai-shek said he will continue to honor his treaty commitments to the United States which require consultation with US authorities before ordering an attack

6 Aug 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
on the occupied airfields. However, Chiang regards the occupation of the airfields as a great threat, and he thinks that Communist military action should not be ruled out.

Some elements among the Chinese Nationalists are reported to be urging retaliation, and precipitous action is always possible. During the conversation Chiang asked for additional aid, including provision of Sidewinder air-to-air missiles for his air force and the permanent stationing of US F-100D aircraft on Taiwan. Admiral Smoot, on the basis of conversations with Chinese Nationalist military officials, says they regard strategic control of the Taiwan Straits as "lost" and the threat to the offshore islands "imminent."

On learning of the occupation of Lungchi airfield by the Communists, Minister of Defense Yu Ta-wei requested Admiral Smoot to transmit a message requesting the President of the United States to issue a public statement to the effect that he would consider an "attack on Quemoy or Matsu at this time to be a threat to Taiwan."

6 Aug 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
