III. THE WEST

Makarios Gets Support From Former Top EOKA Leaders

Former EOKA leader George Grivas has followed his recent
public announcement dissociating himself from responsibility for
the Cyprus accords with a private call to ministers of the transitional government of Cyprus to be ready to abandon Archbishop
Makarios. Several ministers of the transitional government were
formerly active in EOKA, including Minister of Communications
Georghiades and Minister of Labor Georkadjis, who were Grivas'
top lieutenants. Both informed the American consul general in
Nicosia on 30 July that they regretted Grivas' recent announcement and were attempting to convince him not to continue his
campaign; they stated that no minister would resign. Georghiades
flew to Athens on 31 July, reportedly to tell Grivas that 90 percent of the leadership of the right-wing Greek Cypriot nationalist
front, which succeeded EOKA last spring, was supporting
Makarios, and to warn him that only the Turks and Communists
stand to gain from the developing rift between himself and the
Archbishop.

If Makarios can retain the support of the former EOKA leaders, he will be in a strong position to rebuff attempts by Grivas
to upset the Cyprus settlements. He is also in a position to cite--
as the Greek Government has already done--speeches by Grivas
at the time the settlement was negotiated, calling on the Cypriots
to support Makarios and to ignore those who would disrupt Greek
Cypriot unity.

Turkish Cypriots fear that the rift between Makarios and
Grivas will allow the extremists to intimidate the moderate leadership into more intransigent positions on questions regarding
the settlement still to be resolved. The extremists have a potential leader on Cyprus in the person of Bishop Kyprianos of
Kyrenia, who has never accepted the settlement and still demands union of the island with Greece. A few fanatics, looking
to Kyprianos and Grivas for leadership, could cause a dangerous
revival of intercommunal tension by isolated acts of terrorism.

3 Aug 59  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
