[PAGE 01]
NOT RELEASABLE TO FOREIGN NATIONALS

CONTINUED CONTROL

Copy No. C 55
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Bloc reaction to US proclamation of ‘Captive Nations Week.’
Peiping asks Rabat for three consulates in Morocco.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Tunisian relations with Algerian rebels continue to deteriorate; Bourguiba publicly admonishes rebels in Tunisia.
Saudi Arabia may be considering curtailment of US military advisory activities; UAR training mission has resumed its functions.
Shah again showing dissatisfaction over extent of moral and material support for Iran.
Dalai Lama will press for UN consideration of Tibetan question.

III. THE WEST
Greece seeks association with European Common Market.

LATE ITEM
Valid countdown in process at Tyura Tam Missile Test Range; probably ICBM.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
25 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The strong bloc reaction to President Eisenhower's proclamation of "Captive Nations Week" reflects Moscow's extreme sensitivity to any official Western reference to the subjugation of the peoples of the Communist nations. The Soviet leaders are apparently particularly piqued at the timing of the proclamation to coincide with Vice President Nixon's visit to the Soviet Union, during which they probably planned to probe for flexibilities in the US position on the Geneva negotiations and on the possibility of an early summit conference. Khrushchev's 23 July speech on his return from Poland condemned the US proclamation as "infamous slander" aimed at the socialist camp, and invited the vice president to "have a look at these ‘enslaved peoples.’" A further reference to the US action sparked an exchange between the vice president and Khrushchev at a 24 July pre-opening tour of the American exhibition in Moscow. Reaction from other bloc countries was highlighted by an official Czech protest.

Communist China - Morocco: Communist China reportedly has asked Morocco for permission to open consulates in Fez, Marrakech, and Tangier, indicating a major effort to expand activities in that country. The Moroccan Government is considering the request. Since Rabat recognized Peiping last October, the Chinese have moved quickly to develop propaganda outlets in Morocco, where there is popular interest in the economic progress made by Communist China.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Tunisia-Algeria: Relations between President Bourguiba and the Algerian rebels appear to be deteriorating further in the wake of attacks on 19-20 and 22-23 July against Tunisian outposts and personnel in the Algerian-Tunisian border area. Rebel leaders, and especially their troops operating in the border region, have long been dissatisfied with the support they receive from Tunis, and Bourguiba's public admonition to them on 23 July to avoid further breaches of Tunisian sovereignty could provoke some rebel elements to attempt new anti-Tunisian activity.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Saudi Arabia - UAR: The recent appearance of a new UAR military mission in Saudi Arabia probably reflects an attempt by Faysal to implement a gradual improvement in Saudi-UAR relations. The chief of the United States military advisory group in Saudi Arabia is concerned that the UAR training mission may attempt to discredit American advisory assistance.
Saudi consideration of curtailment of at least some of the American military advisory activities is suggested in an early July message asking the maintenance branches at two major army posts to report on the number of American advisers, how much they were needed, and the possibility of getting along without them[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
(Page 2)

Iran: The Shah is again showing discouragement over the rate of Iranian military progress and over what he regards as the lack of moral and material support in this current trouble with the USSR. He feels that the Baghdad Pact does not offer Iran adequate protection and says he may have "to reconsider Iran's Baghdad Pact commitments."
(Page 3)

Dalai Lama: The Dalai Lama has decided to press for submission of the Tibet case to the UN General Assembly, although it is not clear how he expects the question will be raised. The Tibetan leader is ready to make a personal appearance at the UN if necessary, and is preparing documentary evidence to support

25 July 59
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
his case. He still hopes to travel abroad to publicize the Tibetan question, and intends soon to send out two high-level delegations, one to Southeast Asia and the other to Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, with the same aim.
The Dalai Lama reportedly is also preparing a message for circulation in Tibet encouraging resistance. Sporadic rebel activity continues in some Tibetan areas.
(Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Greece: The Greek Government is expressing fears of severe internal political and economic repercussions if its application for association with the European Common Market (EEC) is not approved at the EEC meeting scheduled for 25 July. While members of the Common Market generally favor Greek association, affirmative action on the application may be delayed for some time. There is concern that acceptance of the special Greek terms for membership would set an undesirable precedent, and a belief that acceptance of Greece at this time might hinder development of an eventual multilateral European economic association.
(Page 5)

LATE ITEM

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]USSR: A valid countdown began at the Tyura Tam Missile Test Range at 0200Z 25 July (2200 EDT 24 July). The countdown was proceeding on schedule as of 0200 EDT 25 July.
Barring delays in the countdown the launching should take place about 1000Z 25 July (0600 EDT). Present indications are that the launching will involve a test ICBM rather than a space vehicle. Twelve successful test ICBMs have been launched to date, six of them in 1959[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

25 July 59
DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Strong Bloc Reaction to "Captive Nations Week"

The Congressional resolution and the President's proclamation on "Captive Nations Week"--a week of prayer for the enslaved "peoples of Eastern Europe--was condemned throughout the Communist bloc as "foul slander" against Soviet policy and "blatant and arrogant interference" in the internal affairs of free and sovereign states. The bloc reaction reflects Moscow's extreme sensitivity to any official Western reference to the subjugation of the peoples of the Communist nations.

Khrushchev set the tone for this reaction in his speech on his return from Poland in which he termed the US action "direct interference" in Soviet internal affairs and an "infamous slander." Khrushchev then questioned why "the Americans are sending us US governors and vice presidents opening exhibitions and at the same time are talking about enslaved nations." His description of the US action--during a 24 June pre-opening tour of the US exhibit--as a "black cat that Congress let run across the road" sparked a sharp exchange between the vice president and the Soviet premier in which Khrushchev declared that the USSR would not "budge one inch" at Geneva. The Soviet leaders may view the US action at this time as an indication of a firm stand to be taken by the vice president during his visit--which they had hoped would reveal weaknesses in the US position at Geneva and open the way for an early summit conference.

The Czech Government has officially protested this "new American provocation" and expressed "amazement" that the US President had approved and announced this "hostile act." The Czech deputy foreign minister said he would not comment on the numerous historical, geographical, and ethnographical inaccuracies and misrepresentations in the resolution, but that Czechoslovakia found it strange to be listed with Cossakia and Idel-Ural, "whatever that was." He added he was at a loss to understand how the United States could hope to continue to recognize and maintain official relations with socialist governments while officially characterizing them as captive.

The Polish press expressed regret that circles attempting to sharpen the cold war have drawn the President into this affair.
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR Military Mission Reappears in Saudi Arabia

The recent appearance of a new UAR military mission in Saudi Arabia reflects the gradual improvement in Saudi-UAR relations which has accelerated since the development of the Communist threat in Iraq. Egyptian military personnel have been observed during July at the Saudi army training center at Taif and also at the al-Kharj military post; in late May a military mission was expected to arrive in mid-June to train tribal irregulars, the so-called "white army."

The American Embassy in Saudi Arabia reports that the chief of the United States military advisory group there is concerned that the UAR mission may attempt to discredit American advisory assistance. The possibility that the Saudis may be considering curtailment of at least some of the American group's activities is suggested from the Saudi Army's director of maintenance and transport, requesting the maintenance branches of the Taif and al-Kharj military posts to report the number of American advisers, how much they were needed, and the possibility of getting along without them. UAR inspiration of this Saudi request, however, is not certain.

A large UAR military mission was withdrawn from Saudi Arabia in March 1958 as a consequence of the diplomatic crisis caused by King Saud's efforts to incite an anti-Nasir conspiracy in Syria. Return of a UAR mission to Saudi Arabia, as part of an outward normalization of relations between the two countries, is reported to have been under consideration by Crown Prince Faysal for nearly a year.

Nasir has shown readiness to cooperate with Crown Prince Faysal, but he spurned a recent attempt by Saud to capitalize on the improved atmosphere. Despite the UAR ambassador's belief that Saud, in traveling to Europe via the Suez Canal, was eager to create an opportunity to meet Nasir, the latter sent Vice President Marshal Amir to greet the chief of state.
[PAGE 09]
Shah of Iran Renews Bid for Increased Western Support

The Shah of Iran, in a recent lengthy criticism of what he views as a lack of Western moral and military support, warned that he may have to reconsider Iran's Baghdad Pact commitments. Discouraged by what he regards as the slow rate of Iranian military progress, he charged that the pact does not offer Iran adequate protection against either direct attack or small local wars. He urged that military thinking concerning Iran should focus on the problems of possible conflict with Iraq or Afghanistan and the need for a delaying capability in the event of a Soviet ground attack. His demands, which far exceed Iran's ability to absorb, include the development of a limited bombing capability and the use of such modern weapons as antiaircraft guided missiles and Honest John rockets.

Despite the Shah's depression and criticism of the lack of Allied support in the Iranian-Soviet propaganda struggle, he firmly asserted that Iran should make no conciliatory gesture to the USSR. Contrary to his expressed opinion that Soviet propaganda attacks are unproductive, however, there are continuing indications of their effectiveness. The Shah is also overoptimistic in his evaluation of the internal situation in Iran, where the anticorruption program is showing little impact and where dissatisfaction with the regime is resulting in growing conspiracy.
[PAGE 10]
Dalai Lama to Expand International Campaign to Publicize Tibet

The Dalai Lama has decided to press for submission of the Tibet question to the UN General Assembly this fall. The Tibetan leader is prepared to deliver an appeal to the UN in person if necessary, and is compiling evidence of Chinese atrocities in Tibet to substantiate his case.

Any UN discussion of the Dalai Lama's claim would have the support of many Latin American and Western European members who view the question in terms of human rights. Any of those member countries might sponsor the introduction of the issue in the General Assembly. The Indian Government would be likely to take the position that a hearing would serve no useful purpose and would only heighten tensions. Prime Minister Nehru, in fact, has stated that UN consideration of Tibet would be difficult since Communist China is not represented. However, New Delhi probably would not go to extreme lengths to try to block consideration of Tibet or to prevent the Dalai Lama from traveling to New York, despite its refusal to recognize his claim to leadership of a Tibetan government-in-exile.

The Dalai Lama had received no official invitation as of 17 July to visit any other country, but he still wishes to travel abroad to promote the Tibetan cause. Thailand's King Phumiphon has privately expressed the view that a visit by the Tibetan Buddhist leader might prejudice the King's position in Thailand as "defender of the faith."

The Dalai Lama intends to send two high-level delegations on international tours, one to Southeast Asia, and the other to Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, to publicize the Tibetan plight and to sound out probable reaction to his own projected tour.

The Dalai Lama reportedly is also preparing a message for circulation in Tibet encouraging resistance. The Tibetans remain loyal to their religious leader, and his message will hearten them in their resistance to the Chinese. While most of the dissidence in Tibet has been suppressed, sporadic guerrilla activity is expected to continue for a long time.
[PAGE 11]
III. THE WEST

Greece Fears Rejection of Membership in Common Market

Greek Government leaders have expressed anxiety over reports that Greece's application for association in the European Economic Community (EEC)--the Common Market--is facing new obstacles. Following its confidential application in June for special association with EEC, the Greek Government leaked information to the press regarding the advantages that would accrue to Greece from this association. This has been followed by nationwide speculation regarding the issue, and the general assumption has emerged that the Greek application would be accepted. Failure of the EEC to take favorable action on the application, at a meeting tentatively scheduled for 25 July, would give opposition politicians another opportunity to discredit the government's political and economic policies.

In addition, important segments of the Greek business community are complaining that Greece, plagued with agricultural surpluses and hard hit by the world shipping slump, can ill afford its present "free trade" policy. Continued nonparticipation in the Common Market will place Greek exports at an even greater competitive disadvantage.

Despite a generally favorable reaction to Greek membership, the Common Market may delay taking definitive action for some time. Athens has requested extensive tariff concessions and access to the development funds of the European Investment Bank. Some Common Market officials fear that acceptance of these terms could not be justified under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and are reluctant to establish a precedent for other lesser developed countries.

Moreover, the Greek application comes at a time when the Common Market is divided over the future course of its relations with other countries of Western Europe. Leaders like West German Vice Chancellor Erhard, who advocates a broader multilateral European economic association, probably fear that bilateral Greek association with the Common Market would complicate its
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
