suggests that the US should consider its position in this eventuality, for if the US supports Seyyid Zia, it will be stigmatized as identified with British interests in Iran. On the other hand, if the US fails to support him, Seyyid Zia will be deprived of an element of strength that he will need if he is to bring about stability at this time. The Ambassador concludes that support of Seyyid Zia is to be preferred, despite the attendant risks.

the Shah is prepared to install Seyyid Zia as prime minister within the next few days and to have the Majlis dissolved as soon as it has confirmed this appointment. This move is to be followed by decree rule and widespread arrests, which should render impotent the National Front and the various subversive elements in the country. At this time, Iran will abandon its neutrality policy and come out openly on the side of the West.

Comment: While Prime Minister Ala has appreciably strengthened his position in the last weeks and while the London press states that Ala has received a vote of confidence from both houses of Parliament, Seyyid Zia and Qavam are continuing to maneuver politically to succeed Ala. The Shah's plan to install Seyyid Zia as a strong man, a plan consistently backed by the UK as the most feasible method of reversing Parliament's recent approval of the nationalization of Iran's oil, presents many difficulties. The oil issue is so controversial that the appointment of Seyyid Zia, with his reported UK connections, and dissolution of the Majlis without a firm commitment to hold new elections promptly would probably be followed by widespread popular disapproval and by increased internal disorder.

3. Comment on report of critical French-Moroccan relations:

According to a special dispatch to the New York Times, Resident General Juin has been engaged in emergency consultations with the government regarding the deteriorating relations between France and the Moroccan nationalists, including the Sultan. Juin is reported to have claimed that his presence is required in the Protectorate until at least 1 December to ensure order.

Juin had been slated to assume the command of the armed forces in the central sector of the European Army on 1 June.

- 4 -
