5. Soviet controls tightened in Albania:

According to the Albanian radio, pro-Soviet Minister of Interior Mehmet Shehu has been appointed interim Minister of State Control by decree of the Presidium of the Albanian People's Assembly. Former Minister of State Control Manush Myftiu has been appointed Vice Premier.

In addition to harsh control measures previously instituted by the Stalinist hierarchy under Shehu, all privately owned radio sets have been seized and persons guilty of violating the current regulations concerning radios will be severely punished. Since the bomb explosion at the Soviet Legation on 19 February, all persons are reportedly searched before being permitted to enter any government office. "Special Police" units have now returned to their various headquarters and have resumed "normal activity," an action that may be a forewarning of mass arrests of nationalist suspects.

Comment: The appointment of Moscow-favored Shehu as Minister of State Control is a further indication of additional Soviet controls over Albanian internal affairs. Reports in recent weeks have revealed intensified Soviet efforts to maintain its domination in Albania in the face of a marked growth in resistance activity.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Comment on political tension in Bolivia:

A situation potentially dangerous to the stability of the government has developed in Bolivia, where the administration has thus far refused to allow the presidential candidate of the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement, Paz Estenssoro, to return from exile. Political tension has been mounting and there have been large-scale demonstrations by Paz supporters.

The Bolivian Minister of Government has stated that the administration does not intend to impose a state of siege or postpone the 6 May presidential elections. However, it appears that Paz will be prevented from running in the elections -- either because he is not permitted to return to Bolivia or because his legal status as a candidate is not clarified -- the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement may resort to revolutionary activity. The government's ability to control a revolutionary situation will depend in large part upon the loyalty of the army.

- 6 -
