[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Department review completed

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

17 May 1952
Copy No. 53

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

1.

EASTERN EUROPE

3. French report Bulgarian overtures to Yugoslavia (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans praise latest Allied note on German unification (page 4).
5. France sees closer British association with Defense Community (page 5).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. French report Bulgarian overtures to Yugoslavia:

The French Ambassador in Sofia has reported that Bulgarians have been in clandestine contact with the Yugoslav mission in Sofia in regard to the formation of a "neutral south Slav bloc." The French Ambassador to Belgrade has been unable to shed additional light on the report.

Although considering it possible that the USSR is trying to draw Tito into some sort of trap, the French Foreign Office leans toward the view that the Bulgarian Government, or some element in it, is trying to "do a Tito."

Comment: The report is not confirmed by other sources. Although there have been rumors of a schism within the Bulgarian Communist Party, there has been no firm evidence of serious unrest within the higher echelons since June 1951.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. West Germans praise latest Allied note on German unification:

High Commissioner McCloy reports that the West German public is reacting very favorably to the Allied note of 13 May. Coalition and opposition leaders alike are hailing the note as "very satisfactory" and "constructive."

[PAGE 05]
The opposition Social Democratic Party was especially pleased that as Allied-sponsored UN investigation was not an unalterable prerequisite to all-German elections.

Comment: The West German press has been almost unanimous in stating that the Allies made precise proposals which Moscow will find difficult to dodge.

5. France sees closer British association with Defense Community:

The chief French delegate at the Paris conference states that the recent discussions between British Defense Minister Alexander and French Defense Minister Pleven provided real evidence of Britain's desire for specific arrangements to associate British forces with the European Defense Force.

It was agreed that there should be common instruction and training, and exchange of units and personnel, beginning with the air forces; and that a method must be found for the temporary incorporation of British divisions into European army corps and European divisions into British corps.

Comment: Although such arrangements would not entail closer political ties between Britain and the Defense Community they might make French ratification of the EDC treaty more likely by satisfying the French Socialists. The Socialists, whose support is essential for ratification, have insisted that they would reject the treaty unless the French Government made more forceful efforts to secure British participation.
