[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 February 1960
Copy No. C 67

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
11 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Czechoslovakia to establish regular civil air service to Guinea.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Stringent qualifications for candidates in 24 April elections evidently designed to limit participation of pro-Communists; this may provoke increase in armed dissidence.
Chinese Nationalists preparing to resupply Nationalist irregulars along Burmese-Thai border.
Tunisian-Soviet exchange of diplomatic representatives may be imminent.

III. THE WEST
Further expansion of Cuban economic relations with Sino-Soviet bloc expected.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
11 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Czechoslovakia-Guinea: Czechoslovakia is taking steps to establish weekly air service to Conakry, Guinea, via Zurich, Marseilles, Casablanca, and Dakar, according to the US Embassy in Prague. The Czechs have officially requested permission to overfly West Germany. Last fall, the Czech civil airline succeeded in establishing regular service to India via Cairo. The service to Guinea, which would be the bloc's first entry into air transport service in tropical Africa, would support bloc economic activity in the area. In addition, Conakry provides an ideal point for extension of service to South America.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The stringent qualifications for candidates contained in a recently promulgated electoral ordinance are tailored to limit the participation of pro-Communist candidates in the 24 April National Assembly elections. A provision for runoff elections in districts where no candidate wins a majority on the first ballot is also aimed at limiting Communist electoral success. Hanoi radio has already broadcast a protest by the Communist-front Neo Lao Hak Zat against the new ordinance, suggesting that the NLHZ may boycott the elections; conservative elements in Vientiane reportedly are apprehensive over the possibility of accelerated armed dissidence.

Nationalist China: The Chinese Nationalist ordnance command has recently ordered depots on Taiwan to prepare large quantities of ammunition and weapons, including rifles, pistols, machine guns, mortars, recoilless rifles, and 40-mm. antiaircraft guns, for another supply effort in February to Nationalist irregular

[PAGE 05]
forces in the Burmese-Thai border area. There are indications that one resupply flight to the border area was made in January. (Page 3)

Tunisia-USSR: The reported visit to Tunis of a Soviet deputy foreign minister, Vladimir Semenov, may presage an early exchange of diplomatic representatives between the USSR and Tunisia. President Bourguiba said publicly last November that he intended to establish relations with the USSR in 1960. In reply to a Tunisian request last month for Soviet technical and economic assistance, made during routine trade negotiations, a high Soviet trade official stated that consideration of the request would be delayed until the USSR had an embassy in Tunis.

Watch Committee Conclusions: The following developments are susceptible of direct exploitation by Soviet/Communist hostile action which could "jeopardize the security of the US in the immediate future":
Neither Israel nor the UAR appears to be preparing for large-scale hostilities as an aftermath of the recent border incidents in the Lake Tiberias area.
Iraqi political groups continue to maneuver for power, and an attempt to assassinate Qasim could occur at any time.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: The Castro government will probably expand its economic relations with other Sino-Soviet bloc countries in addition to the substantial trade contracts with the USSR which will evidently follow Mikoyan's visit.
three Cubans arrived in Prague on 7 February to buy munitions--one of several such missions reported in Prague during the past six months. An East German trade delegation is in Havana to negotiate a barter agreement with Cuba, and Poland and Communist China recently bought sizable quantities of sugar from the Castro government.

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

New Laotian Electoral Ordinance Aimed at Communists

The new electoral ordinance promulgated by King Savang on 5 February is intended to limit Communist participation in the National Assembly elections scheduled for 24 April. The provisions governing qualifications for candidates, including education and residence requirements, will disqualify a considerable number of those whom the Communist-front Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) might put up for election. Of the nine NLHZ deputies from the previous assembly, only five would be able to qualify. In addition to limiting pro-Communist candidates, these provisions will also reduce the number of non-Communist candidates. Many observers attribute the NLHZ success in the 1958 supplemental elections to the plethora of non-Communist candidates.

The Communists will also presumably be hurt by the provision for two-stage elections in districts where the winning candidate fails to win a majority in the first round of voting. This device will guard against the possibility that NLHZ candidates will squeak through to victory in districts where the conservative vote is divided among several candidates.

Hanoi radio has already broadcast an NLHZ protest against the new electoral ordinance and its demand that the less restrictive 1957 electoral law be used instead. The NLHZ may throw its support to its neutralist ally, the Santiphab party, particularly if the NLHZ finds it impossible to enter a substantial number of its own candidates. NLHZ and conservative sources in Vientiane reportedly feel that the NLHZ will not participate if Prince Souphannouvong and other leaders are not released from prison.

[PAGE 07]
Conservative elements are also reported apprehensive over the possibility that the new election restrictions will lead to accelerated armed dissidence by the Communist insurgents.

[PAGE 08]
Nationalist China Planning Additional Support for Irregulars
In Burma Border Area

The Chinese Nationalist ordnance command has recently ordered depots on Taiwan to prepare an estimated 250 tons of ammunition, small arms, heavy weapons, and 40-mm. antiaircraft guns, to supply Nationalist irregular forces in the Burma-Thailand border area.

the irregulars were being supplied to raise their morale and that they were not planning an offensive against the Burmese. repeated earlier charges that the Burmese Army was planning another offensive. There has been no engagement between the Burmese Army and the irregulars since June 1959, and reports from Burma do not indicate preparations for resuming anti-irregular activities. However, in order to ensure a speedy conclusion of the final Sino-Burmese border treaty, Burma will be more anxious than ever to eliminate the problem of KMT irregulars on its territory.

Chiang periodically discusses Nationalist plans for support of the irregulars in Burma, apparently to determine how the United States would react to efforts to strengthen contacts and influence with the irregulars. The Nationalists probably are supplying the irregulars in order to be prepared to take prompt action against the Chinese Communists if there is another crisis in the Taiwan Strait or if conditions favorable to Nationalist exploitation should develop in mainland China.

ten tons of weapons and ammunition packed for air drop were stored at Hsinchu airfield early in January. About mid-January substantial quantities of these supplies were removed, concurrently with a 24-hour flight by a Hsinchu-based P4Y--the type of aircraft believed to be used for resupply flights to the border area. Another probable resupply flight from Hsinchu was reported on 1 February.

[PAGE 09]
during a recent visit of Chinese Nationalist Chief of General Staff Peng Meng-chi to Thailand, he or a member of his party reportedly requested use of Thai airfields. Thai officials stated that the request would be taken under advisement. Nationalist use of the Thai air facilities to refuel aircraft supplying the irregulars would permit delivery of a larger payload each trip.

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
