[PAGE 01]
14 April 1959

Copy No. C 89
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 APRIL 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping Foreign Ministry maintaining fiction of Tibetan "autonomy" in talks with Indians.

Soviet ship, with largest arms cargo for Iraq thus far, due in Basra on 15 April.

Yugoslavia sides with Nasir in attacks on Arab Communists.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR continues harassment of Iraq by propaganda and political action.

Taiwan apparently resupplying Chinese Nationalist irregulars in Burma by air.

III. THE WEST

West Germany - Erhard may force showdown over Adenauer's preference for Etzel as next chancellor.

Cuban opposition to Castro's authori-
tarianism growing; Catholic Church leaders plan own party.

LATE ITEM

Yemen - Incapacitated Imam may leave country for medical treatment with Crown Prince Badr to act as ruler; unrest possible.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - Tibet - India:
the 1951 autonomy agreement between Chinese Communist and Tibetan authorities would continue to be respected "as the basis for the administration of Tibet." The Communists apparently are eager to maintain the fiction of Tibetan "autonomy," in their current effort to neutralize sentiment in Tibet for independence and undercut any representations Nehru might make to Peiping on behalf of Tibetans and the Dalai Lama.

USSR-Iraq: The Sukhona, the eighth Soviet ship to deliver arms to Iraq since late 1958, is about to enter the Persian Gulf and is due to arrive at Basra on 15 April. The ship is transporting the largest arms cargo thus far delivered to Iraq --more than 4,500 tons of military equipment. Sightings of the vessel reveal four large crates on deck. This, plus the fact that Baghdad has requested its embassy in Moscow to expedite the departure of the Soviet experts for the Iraqi Air Force, suggests that the crates may contain some of the jet aircraft ordered by Iraq under its $168.000.000 arms agreement with the Soviet Union.

*Yugoslavia - Middle East: Yugoslavia has extended its dispute with the bloc into the Middle Eastern sphere by taking Nasir's side in his dispute with Arab Communists. The Yugoslav party's official weekly, Komunist, on 9 April accused Arab Communist parties of splitting the Arab world and encouraging "third powers" to interfere in Arab internal affairs. Yugoslavia had previously refrained from attacking Communist parties not
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR-Iraq: Cairo is maintaining its campaign of harassment of the Qasim regime. The formation of "Free Iraq" committees by Iraqi refugees in the UAR is being considered. The Cairo-supported "Voice of Free Iraq" continues to attack Qasim. UAR technicians and teachers--employed by Iraq in large numbers--are being withdrawn, and attempts are being made to subvert Iraqi nationalists abroad. (Page 1)

Nationalist China: The Chinese Nationalists are reported to have flown three air resupply missions during the past month to the Nationalist irregulars in Burma, who have informed Taiwan that they are under Burmese attack. Chiang Ching-kuo, the Generalissimo's eldest son, has stated that Taiwan's policy is to maintain these guerrillas for future use against Communist China. (Page 2)

III. THE WEST

West Germany: Chancellor Adenauer's preference for Finance Minister Etzel as his successor in September has caused Economics Minister Erhard to threaten to resign if he fails to obtain the chancellorship. At the present time Erhard could probably carry the Christian Democratic party rank and file, and Adenauer therefore is unlikely to bring the issue to a showdown. Selection of Erhard would probably increase to a certain extent the influence of Bundestag President Gerstenmaier, who is his close political associate and has favored greater tactical flexibility than Adenauer in dealing with the East. (Page 3)

Cuba: Opposition to the Castro regime, still largely unor-
ganized, is increasing as Castro continues to reveal authoritar-
ian "tendencies. Catholic Church leaders are deeply disturbed

14 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
over the Communist gains and are said to be planning the establishment of a political party to influence political events. A number of disillusioned Castro followers have urged the US Embassy that Castro's US visit, which begins on 15 April, should not result in any offers of financial aid for Cuba. (See 4)

LATE ITEM

*Yemen-; At the urging of Crown Prince Badr, the ailing Imam's Italian doctors have declared him incapacitated because of drug addiction. Badr, who will act as ruler in the absence of his father, is attempting to hasten the Imam's departure for medical treatment in Italy--possibly as early as 14 April.

[According to an unconfirmed report, the crown prince has received assurances from the influential northern tribal leaders that they would. take no action against him while the Imam is abroad. These leaders, who traditionally elect each new Imam, have opposed the Imam's designation of Badr as crown prince and were reported. planning to assassinate Badr at the earliest opportunity, or to depose him in favor of the Imam's brother, Prince Hasan. Armed with a certificate of his father's incompetence, Badr is in a good position to attempt to seize the throne. Such action, however, would probably provoke armed resistance if the northern tribes continued to oppose him.

In order to strengthen his chances of succeeding his father, Badr has been the principal advocate of Yemen's tie with the UAR and of his country's military and economic aid. from the Soviet bloc. While he has promoted increased Soviet bloc activity in Yemen, he may now be restrained by Nasir's anti-Communist campaign. Badr's assumption of greater authority would otherwise offer the Soviet opportunity to increase its influence in Yemen.]

14 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
(No Back-up Material)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Cairo Continuing Harassment of Qasim Regime

The UAR has made several moves recently to expand its campaign of harassment against the Qasim regime. The more than 400 Egyptian teachers employed in Iraq, who have been concerned for some time over their safety, were ordered on 2 April to leave for home immediately, and on the same day Cairo directed its embassy in Baghdad to withdraw "all experts and employees who are UAR nationals."

there were more than 16,000 UAR nationals from Syria in Iraq, but there are no reliable figures available on the total of UAR "experts and employees."

The UAR is reported to be giving refuge and financial support to Faiq Samarrai, Iraq's former ambassador in Cairo, as well as to other Iraqi Embassy officials who are said to have asked for asylum. Samarrai has been asked to assist the UAR-supported "Voice of Free Iraq" in its clandestine broadcasts and to direct activities of other Iraqi refugees and exiles. The UAR Foreign Ministry is also reported contacting Iraqi students abroad, offering them school and living expenses if they will refuse to return home.

Cairo's propaganda continues to emphasize the anti-Qasim sentiments of the Iraqi Shammar tribesmen who have been given refuge in northern Syria. Iraqi efforts to lure the tribesmen back home with offers of amnesty, however, may have had some success. one of the Shammar sheiks advised an Iraqi border post of his willingness to return, along with his followers. Negotiations for the return are apparently still continuing. Baghdad radio declared on 12 April that Qasim had received renewed assurances of support from the Shammar in Iraq.
[PAGE 08]
Chinese Nationalists Resupply Forces in Burma

Chinese Nationalist security boss Chiang Ching-kuo said on 10 April that the Nationalists recently had used P4Y aircraft to airdrop supplies to Nationalist irregular troops in the Burma border area. Chiang said the supply missions were prompted by recent Burmese military action against the Kuomintang irregulars and refugee villages. Chiang emphasized that the drops, consisting mainly of rations and medicine, were not a departure from the recently formulated Nationalist policy of prohibiting attacks by the irregulars against either the Burmese or the Chinese Communists.

American officials on Taiwan have confirmed that single P4Y aircraft made 18- and 19-hour flights on 27 March and 2 April, and apparently a 27-hour flight on 3 April. Lt. Gen. Fu-en, the Nationalist Air Force intelligence chief, said on 10 April that these flights were missions to the Burma border area similar to missions flown last year, and that the 27-hour flight involved a stopover in southern Taiwan for fuel.

The flight time of these missions would be consistent with a flight to the Burma area and not long enough to permit a mission to Tibet. It therefore seems doubtful that they are related to alleged "Kuomintang" leaflet-dropping missions to Tibet.

Chiang Ching-kuo said recently that Nationalist policy is to maintain the Burma guerrillas as a force in being for use in a general counterattack against the mainland. Thus airdrop missions to the guerrillas would not only serve this purpose but also provide aircrew training for possible future airdrop missions into China proper.
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Party Struggle Over Adenauer's Successor Impending

Chancellor Adenauer's preference for Finance Minister Etzel as his successor has caused Vice Chancellor and Economics Minister Erhard to threaten to resign if he fails to obtain the chancellorship. Since Erhard is very popular in the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and can probably carry the party rank and file with him in a showdown, Adenauer will probably be forced to accept him. Erhard's election to the chancellorship after a bitter party fight would be a blow to Adenauer's prestige and could have an adverse effect on his future influence on the new government.

Erhard's popularity with the voters was an important factor in the CDU's victory in the 1957 national elections. At that time Adenauer was reported to favor Etzel as his eventual successor, but his attempt to create an important new cabinet post for Etzel was blocked by Erhard, who objected to any diminution of his economic powers. As finance minister, Etzel has enjoyed the support of the powerful Ruhr industrialists, who have been hostile to Erhard's free-economy policies. These industrialists also played an important role in Adenauer's attempt to force Erhard into the presidency in February, which would have opened the way for Etzel to become chancellor.

If Erhard heads a new government, his close associate and critic of Adenauer's foreign policy, Bundestag President Gerstenmaier, may be in line for the Foreign Ministry--a combination which would drastically reduce Adenauer's ability to influence foreign policy. In an effort to block Gerstenmaier, Adenauer will probably either insist on retaining Foreign Minister Brentano or propose Interior Minister Schroeder; both men are opponents of Erhard.

Bundestag leader Krone, Adenauer's close adviser, apparently is certain of the party chairmanship. Krone and other CDU officials will visit Adenauer at his Italian vacation resort at the end of April to begin talks on the composition of a new government.
[PAGE 10]
Former Castro Supporters Urge US Not to Support Him

A number of Cubans, most of them disillusioned former supporters of Fidel Castro, have urged through the US Embassy that Cuba not be offered financial assistance as a result of Castro's US visit, which is to begin on 15 April. They are alarmed at the regime's anti-US orientation and the influence of the Communists on the government, and are concerned over the critical economic situation resulting from the regime's recent unsound "reform" measures. They express the belief that US assistance would only postpone the economic breakdown, and that the longer this was delayed the more deeply consolidated the Communists would become.

Leaders of the Catholic Church are also disturbed and are planning to organize a political party in an attempt to influence political events. They feel the revolution is opening the way for the Communists.

After his return from his Cuban visit last month, former Costa Rican President Jose Figueres, who has always been slow to pin the Communist label on anyone without adequate proof, told US Ambassador Willauer that he was tending more and more to the belief that Castro may, in fact, be a Communist himself. While there is no proof that he is a member of the Communist party, it is clear that the Communists have made significant gains since Castro came to power last January and that Communists or pro-Communists are among his aides.

Meanwhile, Castro's speeches increasingly reveal his authoritarian temperament and his near-obsession with "enemies of the revolution." On 9 April he blasted those Cubans who have been suggesting that it is time to prepare for eventual national elections. He declared that elections would not be held "until the revolution is consolidated"--which he evidently defines as the completion of a program that would require many years.
[PAGE 11]
CORRECTION: In the Central Intelligence Bulletin for 10 April 1959, the first sentence of the second paragraph of Item 2, Page 2, should have read:

Of more immediate concern to the East German regime is the defection of some 204 doctors during the first three months of 1959?
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations
Coordination Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
