[PAGE 01]
3 May 1952
Copy No. 52

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Attack on French airliner may have been object lesson to corridor violators (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. General Li Mi reported in Bangkok (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Sentiment against British officials grows in Libya (page 4).

LATIN AMERICA

5. Bolivian Government threatened by labor leaders (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Attack on French airliner may have been object lesson to corridor violators:

American authorities in Berlin tend to believe that this attack on the Air France passenger plane was premeditated because of frequent Soviet complaints that airplanes have been flying out of the corridor. Therefore Soviet authorities may have decided to make an object lesson of the next violator by forcing it down or subjecting it to scare-gunfire.

According to the US High Commissioner's office in Berlin, the action appears to have been part of a previously conceived plan which went further than had been anticipated. This analysis is supported by the fact that no Soviet official was available to receive the Allied protest, an indication that the incident may have thrown the Russians off balance.

FAR EAST

2. General Li Mi reported in Bangkok:

Two subordinate Chinese Nationalist commanders from Kengtung State in Burma have informed the American Embassy in Bangkok that General Li Mi is now in that city. They were told by Li that no supplies were available in Bangkok for their troops.
[PAGE 04]
Comment: While there is no information to confirm this report, the two Chinese officers from Burma informed the American Embassy last week that they had been ordered by a wire from Taipei to meet Li Mi in Bangkok early in May.

The Burmese Government has made repeated strong representations to the American, French and Thai governments to prevent Li Mi from returning to Southeast Asia.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Sentiment against British officials grows in Libya:

The relations between Libyan and local British officials employed by the Libyan Government have so deteriorated that the American Minister in Tripoli detects a growing resentment of Western "interference" in Libyan affairs.

He reports that several British officials have been released by the government and that others, feeling mistreated by Libya and abandoned by Britain, have left their jobs. Their places have been filled by incompetent friends of influential Libyans. The American Minister fears that if this process continues, it will destroy the first line of defense against the rise of nationalism and nepotism.

Comment: Anti-British feeling has already been making it difficult for Britain to negotiate a long-term military agreement with Libya. This country has become more strategically important to Britain because of the uncertainty of the Suez Canal situation.

So far there has been no indication that the Libyan Government harbors any anti-American sentiment. Libya has, in fact, been seeking American military assistance.
[PAGE 05]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]4. French residents in Tunisia ask for membership on Mixed Commission:

French residents in Tunisia have asked of the Resident General that the French members of the Mixed Commission be selected from Tunisia rather than France.

Comment: The Mixed Commission, of at least 16 members, to be composed of equal numbers of French and Tunisians, is to discuss the formation of Tunisian legislative assemblies. It was originally scheduled to convene 24 April, but now may not meet before June. Previous indications had been that all the French members would be from France.

Substantial representation of the French residents in Tunisia, who are more adamant than the Paris government in opposing Tunisian autonomy, would make it impossible for the Commission to reach any decisions acceptable to the native Tunisians[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].

LATIN AMERICA

5. Bolivian Government threatened by labor leaders:

During May Day speeches in La Paz, Minister of Mines Lechin and other top union leaders warned that if the government wants to stay in office, it must keep its promises to labor and leave the unions alone. They stated that only the workers, who have the necessary arms, can stop the "counter-revolution."
[PAGE 06]
Lechin referred to the workers and himself as "we" and alluded to the government as "they." His speech, which was broadcast, was followed by vivas for unionism and for former MNR presidents, but none for President Paz Estenssoro. The President's speech from the balcony of his residence was not broadcast.

Comment: The union leaders' speeches had the tone of an ultimatum to Paz Estenssoro's moderate faction to comply with their extremist demands or be ousted. Lechin's identification of himself with the workers' threats against the government brings into the open the division within the governing party over nationalization and labor benefits.

Since the arms distributed during the recent revolt have not yet been called in, labor could make an armed attack against the government.
