Plebiscite in British Cameroons

London hopes that the vote this week end will lead to a speedy and orderly termination of its responsibilities in an area it has ruled under international supervision since the first World War. Involved is a 34,000-square-mile territory with a population of some 1,600,000, which has long been divided for administrative purposes into northern and southern sectors.

Northern Cameroons was governed as an integral part of Nigeria's Moslem-dominated Northern Region prior to Nigerian independence last October, and all major political parties active in the area favor a permanent return to that status. Such a solution is also strongly desired by northern Nigerian leaders as well as by Britain, which for some time has been working quietly toward this end. Within the past year a number of reforms have been introduced to redress local grievances believed to have been largely responsible for the area's failure to agree in a November 1959 plebiscite to retain ties with an independent Nigeria. At that time a majority of northern voters chose to postpone a decision on the area's future. Should the forthcoming vote unexpectedly also go against Nigeria, a severe crisis, possibly involving Nigerian intervention to nullify the plebiscite, could ensue.

The outcome appears to be much more uncertain--and the likely aftermath more unpromising--in Southern Cameroons, which enjoys considerable local self-government and has been treated since 1954 as a potential fourth region of Nigeria. The governing party--by a slim margin--favors federation with Cameroun, but public opinion is sharply divided with major tribal groups opposing each other on the issue. The fact that some of these tribes overlap the colonial frontiers with Cameroun and Nigeria enhances the possibility that, in the event disorders do develop, either or both of those states may feel compelled to step in to protect related tribesmen. Actually neither government has been anxious to acquire the southern territory, and Cameroun's conservative rulers are distinctly unhappy over the prospect of

11 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
