Situation in Laos

The Boun Oum government, since its formation in mid-December, has failed to generate enthusiasm in Laos or widespread international support. It is generally undistinguished in composition, and some members are known to be corrupt. Its principal weakness, however, lies in the fact that it is essentially a regional government rather than a national one; it is overloaded with individuals from southern Laos, associated with Boun Oum and Phoumi in their Savannakhet Revolutionary Committee. It is doubtful that Souvanna Phouma can be lured into any broadened government--mainly because of the animosity between him and Phoumi. However, the inclusion of representatives from the Vientiane area, from Luang Prabang, Nam Tha, and Phong Saly provinces in the north, and from Xieng Khouang Province in the east would make the government more truly national, putting it on more competitive terms with the Communist-supported shadow government in Xieng Khouang.

The government's ostensible bid to the Pathet Lao as well as to Souvanna's followers is probably merely a gesture designed to erase the impression, widely held abroad, of political inflexibility and a single-minded preoccupation with a purely military solution to the crisis in Laos.

The government advance along Route 7 toward the Plaine des Jarres area has been slowed considerably by the systematic delaying tactics of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces. The column has advanced only a few miles eastward from the junction with Route 13 near Phou Khoun.

three large craters in the road, making a combined break of about thirty feet. The enemy has also felled trees up to six feet in diameter, engineered landslides and rockslides in steep defiles, and made extensive use of landmines. In the Ban Ta Viang - Tha Thom area of southern Xieng Khouang Province, little action has been reported; however, there are reports that the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces are sending reinforcements of about battalion strength to Ban Ta Viang.

Stating that Communist China takes a "particularly serious" view of Chinese Nationalist irregulars in Laos, People's Daily on 10 February observes that this development "cannot but

11 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
