[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
15 October 1952
Copy No. 57
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Objections raised to Mexican proposal on Korean war prisoners (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Mullahs join Communists in promoting unrest in northern Iran (page 4).
4. Mossadeq to ask Majlis opinion on breaking relations with Great Britain (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. French Government reportedly plans to eliminate Communists from civil service (page 5).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL
1. Objections raised to Mexican proposal on Korean war prisoners:

although the Mexican proposal to end the Korean truce deadlock might serve as a basis for discussion, it would need serious modifications for adoption. the principal obstacle was that many countries would not receive "Communists."

Comment: Several Latin American countries have already objected to the proposal, under which Communist prisoners of war resisting repatriation would be resettled in neutral countries. Their objection is probably more racial than ideological.

SOVIET UNION
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Mullahs join Communists in promoting unrest in northern Iran:

The mullahs of Tabriz have joined the Tudeh in agitating for the cancellation of the Point IV program in Azerbaijan. They are preaching daily against the program, and a group of Tabriz merchants has reportedly cabled Mossadeq urging him to recall Point IV personnel.

The new military commander of Azerbaijan has refused to give Point IV personnel travel permits without the prior approval of the Governor General. The American Consul in Tabriz warns that the United States is rapidly replacing Great Britain as an object of attack.

Comment: The mullahs have also been stirring up the peasants against the landlords in the vicinity of Tabriz. Despite recent government efforts to restrict the influence of the clergy, the mullahs are becoming increasingly powerful and may become more effective than the Tudeh in promoting anti-American sentiment in Iran.

4. Mossadeq to ask Majlis opinion on breaking relations with Great Britain:

Mossadeq intends to submit the question of breaking relations with Britain to the Majlis if his latest proposal is rejected, Minister of Court Ala told Ambassador Henderson on 13 October. Ala speculated, however, that Mossadeq would probably wait two or three days before doing so in case the United States wished to put forward any suggestion for settling the dispute. Ala added that Mossadeq is convinced that the British instigated the current plots to replace him, and that the Court also was involved.
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. French Government reportedly plans to eliminate Communists from civil service:

The French Government has drafted legislation to eliminate Communists from all civil service positions including those in the defense establishment. The definition of "civil servant" and "Communist" is still not settled.

Comment: If "civil servant" is defined to include employees in the educational system and such nationalized industries as transportation and communications, in which infiltration is still serious, the legislation could be an effective weapon against Communist influence.

During the past year the French Government has consistently followed a policy of reducing Communist capabilities. Pinay's recent courting of stronger rightist support indicates an intensification of this trend.
