[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Neutrals in Korea increasingly concerned with Communist reactions to POW release (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. French official in Paris reviews Indochina situation (page 3).
3. Non-Communist Indonesian labor federation weakened by withdrawals (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]4. Turkey criticizes Council of Europe resolution on East-West relations[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).
5. Comment on dissolution of Moslem Brotherhood in Egypt (page 5).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]LATIN AMERICA

6. Czechoslovakia and Poland may seek to establish missions in Panama[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]] (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Neutrals in Korea increasingly concerned with Communist reactions to POW release:

Indian, Swiss, and Swedish members of the NNRC are reported by American representative Young to be increasingly concerned over the sharp Communist reactions to General Thimayya's proposed turnover of the Korean prisoners on 20 January. The Czech and Polish members on 13 January warned that such a release would have "grave consequences" in the United Nations.

Indian representatives told Young that New Delhi's relations with the Communists have reached a point of real strain. Young comments that the Communists will try to use "every possible scare" to prevent the Indians from turning back the prisoners.

Comment: The Communists will undoubtedly attempt such tactics of intimidation, but they will probably accept the situation and use the release as an excuse for their failure to induce most of the prisoners to return.

While additional North Korean and Chinese Communist units have been reported moving into the area northeast of Panmunjom, there is no evidence that this is related to the prisoner issue.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. French official in Paris reviews Indochina situation:

Secretary for the Associated States Jacquet told the American embassy in Paris that General Navarre last July estimated a period of two years before the French position would be such that negotiations with the Viet Minh could be undertaken. This was on the assumption that Chinese aid to the enemy remained at the same level and he received certain men and equipment. The latter condition has since been fulfilled.
[PAGE 04]
In December, according to the French official, Navarre stated that Chinese aid to the Viet Minh had increased considerably, particularly as regards trucks, heavy artillery and antiaircraft weapons, and that he must have additional men and equipment. In conjunction with Navarre's needs, Jacquet mentioned a forthcoming request for additional B-26's and air force mechanics from the United States.

Comment: General Navarre's plan of battle contemplated the decisive defeat of the enemy within two years. In discussions with American officials he has not referred to the possibility of negotiations.

The American army attaché in Saigon reported in late December that a check with all available sources failed to support French allegations of an increase in Chinese aid over the past several months.

3. Non-Communist Indonesian labor federation weakened by withdrawals:

The withdrawal of eight unions from Indonesia's non-Communist labor federation, the KBSI, is a severe blow to that organization. The KBSI, according to the American embassy, had just reached the stage at which it could combat SOBSI, the Communist-controlled federation and the largest labor organization in Indonesia.

Comment: The leader of the withdrawing unions is a prominent member of the National Party and the withdrawal was presumably in accordance with government policy, now susceptible to Communist influence.

The KBSI is now led by several capable anti-Communist labor leaders who are Socialist sympathizers. Although Indonesian labor is dominated by the Communists, some of these leaders have effectively maintained pockets of non-Communist labor, against which the National Party-Communist alliance is now moving.
[PAGE 05]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Turkey criticizes Council of Europe resolution on East-West relations:

The Turkish Foreign Ministry expressed concern that a recent resolution of the Council of Europe would be regarded by the Soviet Union as a sign of Western weakness and would have an unfavorable effect on Turkish public opinion. Concern was also expressed over the possible consequences of any East-West security pact. The ministry insisted that since present tensions are caused by the Soviet Union there is no longer any reason for compromise

Comment: The views of the Turkish Foreign Ministry are expressive of Turkey's rigid anti-Soviet policy and the contempt with which it views any move that suggests a softening up by the Western powers[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

5. Comment on dissolution of Moslem Brotherhood in Egypt:

The Egyptian government's dissolution on 13 January of the Moslem Brotherhood, a fanatical religio-nationalist organization, is the military regime's boldest move thus far to eliminate opposition, and one necessary if the regime is to achieve a settlement of the Suez issue.

The Moslem Brotherhood had some 2,000 branches throughout the country and, next to the banned nationalist Wafd Party, was the most extensive organization in Egypt. In outlawing the Brotherhood, which the Nagib government had not openly challenged before, the regime forces underground its only remaining opponent. The group was responsible for many of the terrorist raids against the British in the Suez Canal zone.
[PAGE 06]
a state of emergency has been declared and arrests of leaders of the group are continuing, with more than 300 already held. Effective suppression of the extremist organization would permit the Egyptian government greater freedom of action in its relations with the West.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]LATIN AMERICA

6. Czechoslovakia and Poland may seek to establish missions in Panama:

Comment: The Polish minister to Mexico presented his credentials in Panama in November. At that time the Panamanian foreign minister stated that his country was merely following the big nations in maintaining diplomatic relations with Poland. The Czechs reportedly made fruitless overtures on this subject to the previous Panamanian government in 1951 and 1952[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].
