IV. ANNEX

THE INDONESIAN MILITARY SITUATION
(As of 16.00 hours, 13 April 1958)

The civil war in Indonesia appears to be nearing a climax. Government forces are at the point of launching final air, sea, and land attacks on dissident strongholds in Central Sumatra and are increasing their pressure on North Celebes. Dissident capability to resist these attacks is questionable because of the lack of manpower, the absence of any air or naval support, and doubtful morale. Their assets are relatively good leadership and the rugged areas they are defending.

The Ground Warfare

Regular Indonesian Army troops comprise about 200,000 officers and men, the quasi-military National Police Mobile Brigade, 20,000, and "rebel" volunteers another 10,000. The battalion is the highest tactical unit in the Indonesian Army. Battalions are assigned to one of twelve military district commands (see map #1) which may be subdivided into two or more regimental areas. The military district commands are directly responsible to the army chief of staff. Army headquarters is organized on the United States model of a few years ago and was designed primarily by two of the six Indonesian graduates of the US Army Command and Staff College.

The Indonesian Army invaded Central Sumatra between 7-12 March by air and sea and since then has overcome dissident resistance in the marshy eastern approaches to the dissident centers in the mountainous west coast area. The government has committed about 3,500 men thus far to this operation against dissident troops estimated at 4,500. At present, government forces are pushing toward the insurgent strongpoints of Padang and Bukittinggi from two directions. The attack from the north has reached a point about 70 miles from Bukittinggi and the movement from the east is at a similar distance from Padang. (see map #4) These columns have been slowed by stiffened dissident resistance in rough terrain but the government apparently plans to overwhelm resistance by an early air-sea attack from the west coast of

14 Apr 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
