[PAGE 01]
8 July 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

Soviet Bloc - Cuba: Repeated Soviet assurances of both economic and political support to Cuba have strengthened Castro's hand in his anti-US policies. Moscow is accelerating its deliveries of oil and is capable of supplying all of Cuba's petroleum needs. Shipments of promised machinery and equipment to date have been minor, but are expected to increase. Raul Castro's mission, now in Prague, probably is discussing military matters, and it is likely that a military aid agreement will be concluded. No bloc military equipment is known to have arrived in Cuba thus far.

i

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

III. THE WEST

Italy: The strikes and rioting deriving from the neo-Fascist party's attempt to hold a party congress in Genoa reflect Communist exploitation of a widespread popular apprehension over the resurgence of Fascism as exemplified by the reliance of Premier Tambroni's caretaker government on neo-Fascist parliamentary support. The tensions which have been building up over the gradual moves to the right of recent Italian governments will probably continue, and even more extensive disorders are possible. Although the neo-Fascists would be reluctant at this time to withdraw their support of the government, they may do so if the government is forced to take an openly anti-Fascist stand in parliamentary debates this week. It is also possible that, if the government does not dissociate itself from the Fascists, it may lose sufficient numbers of Christian Democratic deputies in a vote of confidence to bring it down. The Communists may use this agitation to revive their hitherto unsuccessful campaign against US missile bases in Italy.

Austria: Top defense officials have informed the American Embassy that they now have dropped the plan to buy MIG-17 aircraft from Poland, and are considering the purchase of military jets from Sweden instead. Austrian officers plan to go to Sweden in August for final negotiations. Such a deal would further the Austrian policy of increasing trade with European Free Trade Area partners.

Finland: The Finnish Government expects to open negotiations next week on the question of most-favored-nation treatment for Soviet exports. The Finns consider solution of this problem a prerequisite to Finnish affiliation with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and a special session of parliament reportedly will be called following the negotiations. The Finnish export industry, which strongly advocates ties with EFTA, has anticipated such a link by reducing prices of certain exports to EFTA countries equal to the 20 percent tariff reduction they put into effect on 1 July.

8 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Cuba: Reacting to the reduction in Cuba's sugar quota, the Castro regime has called a mass rally of "a million and a half" on 10 July to protest "the aggressive and pro-Nazi" policy of the United States. Castro may use this opportunity, or his scheduled speech on 8 July, to announce the confiscation of further American-owned properties. Anti-US feeling has reached such a pitch that there is danger of violence against Americans.

8 July 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Disorders in Italy

Recent strikes and riots in Rome, Genoa, Ravenna, Reggio Emilia, and in several cities of Sicily exemplify the tension that has built up as the result of the gradual move to the right by post-war Italian governments in the face of an electoral shift to the left.

The uproar deriving from the neo-Fascist Italian Social Movement's scheduled congress in Genoa and its subsequent cancellation points up current popular opposition to Premier Tambroni's all - Christian Democratic caretaker government which maintains itself by virtue of neo-Fascist support against all six of the other parties in parliament.

This government is operating in a caretaker capacity to pass the budget and deal with routine problems until after the nationwide local elections scheduled for this fall. Although the party has officially resolved in favor of a center-left government, a rightist minority blocked two attempts at a center-left government this year, leaving a policy stalemate. The Christian Democrats have tried various short-lived government expedients, but have reached no clear decision as to the direction the government should take.

The neo-Fascists opposed the government earlier this week in the Senate, where their vote is not needed, but they are probably reluctant to withhold their votes in today's budget vote in the lower house, although they have threatened to do so. This would bring down Tambroni and cost the neo-Fascists their influence on the government, and could bring on a center-left government. It is also possible that if the government does not dissociate itself from the neo-Fascists, it may lose sufficient numbers of Christian Democratic deputies in a vote of confidence to bring it down.

The Communists, too, anxious to avert isolation from their former Nenni Socialist allies, wish to avoid bringing on a reformist government which the Nenni Socialists could support. Nevertheless the depth of popular feeling offers them a good chance to

8 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
promote further widespread disorders. They may also try to use the situation to revive their campaign against US missile bases, which they first tried in the spring of 1959.

8 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
Austria Plans to Buy Swedish Aircraft Instead of
Polish MIG-17s

Austrian defense officials, who in mid-June were strongly considering the purchase of MIG-17 aircraft from Poland, have informed the US Embassy in Vienna that they have dropped this plan in favor of purchasing Swedish Saab J-29F transonic interceptors. The Austrian Army will send three officers to Sweden in August to inspect the aircraft and discuss the price.

American officials in Vienna expect this deal to be concluded rapidly. They view the move as logical for Austria, considering Foreign Minister Kreisky's affinity for all things Swedish as well as his distaste for Khrushchev's current performance in Austria. Purchase of Swedish planes would serve to underline Austrian neutrality, somewhat called into question by Chancellor Raab's enthusiastic endorsement of his Soviet guests. It is also the policy of the Austrian Government to build up trade with its partners in the European Free Trade Area, including Sweden.

For its heavy arms Austria depends upon outside sources, mainly the United States. In the past Austria has purchased antiaircraft guns from Sweden, tanks from the USSR, and light training aircraft from Czechoslovakia. Since March the Austrians have been under pressure not only from the Poles to buy the MIG-17s but from the USSR to buy tanks and aircraft.

Austria's air force, now equipped with only 80 planes, seeks jets in order to gain a degree of combat effectiveness. The unit cost of the Swedish planes is relatively low, and Sweden plans to re-equip five or six of its J-29F squadrons with more advanced aircraft by the end of 1960.

8 July 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
