[PAGE 01]
14 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 SEPTEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR indicates embarrassment over events both in Laos and on the Sino-Indian border.

Chinese Communist propaganda now giving full publicity to Sino-Indian border dispute; New Delhi charged with exaggerating incidents.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Communist propaganda attempting to place onus on Phoui government for continued fighting in Laos.

Sudanese Army command declares alert.

Arab-Israeli tensions heightened by new incidents on eve of UN General Assembly meeting.

III. THE WEST
British-UAR relations continue to improve.

LATE ITEM
Comment on Soviet lunar shot
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: remarks by Soviet spokesmen provide further evidence of the USSR's embarrassment over events both in Laos and on the Sino-Indian border. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]A TASS correspondent in London[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] stressed the USSR's desire to prevent any aggravation of the Laos situation and said Moscow would "do everything possible" to avoid jeopardizing the chances for a detente with the United States.

Peiping's actions in the border dispute were "incomprehensible" and could gain nothing valuable enough to justify the bad impression being created.
(Page 1)

Communist China - India: In contrast to their silence up to last week on the Sino-Indian border dispute, Chinese Communist propaganda media now are giving full publicity to the issue. The resolution passed by the standing committee of the National People's Congress, press editorials, and statements at public rallies held throughout the country profess a sense of injury that New Delhi should "blow up" the matter and thereby give comfort to elements who want to drive a wedge between India and China. In this connection, strong exception is also being voiced to the "unfriendly" activities of the Dalai Lama countenanced by New Delhi. The Chinese are highlighting their firm opposition to the McMahon line. Their statements do not go so far, however, as to insist that the line presently shown on Chinese maps is beyond discussion.
(Page 3)
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Communist bloc propaganda continues to emphasize the "willingness" of the Laotian dissidents to negotiate a settlement with the Laotian Government on the basis of "respect for the 1954 Geneva and 1957 Vientiane agreements." By placing the onus for continued fighting on the Phoui government, the Communists probably hope not only to exploit existing differences within Laos, but also to divide free world attitudes on the situation. Laotian officials, while admitting the possibility of some unintentional exaggeration in communiqués on the fighting to date, express confidence that the four-nation UN fact-finding team about to arrive on the scene will bear out Laos' charges of North Vietnamese involvement in the rebel activity. Laotian Army sources report small-scale military action continues in the northern provinces.
(Page 4)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]Sudan: The Sudanese Army command declared a communications alert on 11 September. This is a precautionary measure by the Abboud military government, which is aware of coup plotting by a new group of dissident junior officers. The government anticipates a strong popular reaction to its announcement in the near future of courts-martial verdicts and sentences against the officers implicated in the abortive coup attempts of 22 May.
(Page 6)

Israel - Arab States: With Arab-Israeli differences likely to be aired early in the United Nations General Assembly session beginning 15 September, tensions between Israel and the Arab States have been heightened by new incidents. On 10 September the Jordanian defense minister protested to local UN officials against Israeli military patrolling activities in the Mount Scopus area and warned that if such patrols do not cease immediately, the Jordanian Army will take "direct action" beginning 18 September. He implied that by "direct action" he meant firing on the Israeli patrols. During the past few days, the Israeli Government has made a special point of publicizing recent violent border[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]

14 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
UNCLASSIFIED

NORMAL FLIGHT ROUTE, KUWAIT-CAIRO
[PAGE 07]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]incidents allegedly perpetrated by its Arab neighbors.

On 13 September Israeli military aircraft intercepted a UAR commercial aircraft in the vicinity of the Israeli port of Eilat. The intercepted aircraft, on a flight from Kuwait to Cairo, was pursued over the Sinai Peninsula[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]].

III. THE WEST

Britain-UAR: The present visit to the United Kingdom of UAR Economics Minister Qaysuni--the first such visit of any member of a Nasir government since the 1956 Suez intervention--points up the continuing improvement in relations between the two countries. London has responded favorably to a series of overtures from the UAR hoping they will lead to a resumption of diplomatic relations. Such a step still seems unlikely for several months, however, and any sharp clash with Nasir over special British positions or interests in the Arab world could reverse this trend.
(Page 7)

LATE ITEM

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]USSR: For the statement of the US Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee concerning the successful lunar shot, see[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]] Page 8.

14 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Embarrassment Over Events in Far East Indicated

remarks by Soviet spokesmen provide further evidence of the USSR's embarrassment over events in Laos and on the Sino-Indian border.

the Chinese Communists' actions in the border dispute were "incomprehensible" and could gain them nothing valuable enough to justify the bad impression being created.

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_5]]A TASS correspondent in London[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_5]] denied any Soviet responsibility for recent Chinese Communist actions in the Far East, saying it was "hardly logical" to assume that the USSR would "apply pressure" against non- Communist Asian countries on the eve of Khrushchev's visit. He asked why the Soviet Union should be blamed for "everything that happens" in bloc countries and stressed that the USSR wished to prevent any aggravation of the situation and would "do everything possible" to avoid jeopardizing the chances for a detente with the United States.

([[CLEAN_REDACTION_6]]The correspondent's[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_6]] remarks bore also on the relationship between the USSR and the Communist Chinese. "We can urge them to do things," he commented, "but we cannot push buttons and watch them jump to conform." He remarked that if the Chinese Communists are not happy at the prospect of Khrushchev exchanging visits with President Eisenhower--and he said he had no information that this is the case--the USSR would still go through with the visits. This would not mean that a break was imminent between the USSR and China which, he added, the Soviet Union would do everything possible to prevent.)

([[CLEAN_REDACTION_7]]The TASS representative[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_7]] expressed his conviction that something tangible must result from the Khrushchev-Eisenhower exchange of visits, and he mentioned the possibility of agreements on the cessation of nuclear testing and on trade. He stressed the importance of disarmament and urged that the United States sign a nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union. Touching also on

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
the Berlin issue, he said the USSR will try to work out "something like a series of status quos." He denied any Soviet intention of taking "dangerous" action on this question and remarked, "We can keep talking about Berlin for some time to come."

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Communist China's Propaganda Campaign on Sino-Indian Border Dispute

Chinese Communist measures to publicize Peiping's side of the Sino-Indian border issue are assuming the proportions of a major propaganda campaign, with all the trappings of long press editorials and public rallies. Speakers in the standing committee of the National People's Congress have echoed Premier Chou En-lai's condemnation of Indian activities along the border, reiterated his readiness to negotiate a solution, and urged his proposal to preserve the "status quo" pending a final settlement.

Embarrassed by their bad press in India and probably irritated as well by the failure of the USSR to voice unqualified support for the Chinese position on the border issue, the Chinese are voicing a sense of outrage that New Delhi by its charges should give encouragement to elements hostile to Sino-Indian friendship. Chinese stiffness toward New Delhi is based further on apparent confidence that Communist China's legal position in the border issue is every bit as strong as India's. Peiping cites British maps to support its position, and the American Consul General in Hong Kong points out that the Chinese could also draw on American maps for this purpose, including military maps that were widely available during World War II which give the Chinese version of the Tibet-Assam boundary.

The Chinese are adamant in their insistence that the McMahon line is "illegal" and unacceptable. They have not indicated, however, their minimum demands in the border area. None of their statements so far insists that the line presently shown on their maps is beyond discussion. New Delhi's position is that the McMahon line is not subject to negotiation except for minor modifications.

Some Indian Parliament members and newspapers in recent days have queried why Nehru hid from the Indian public the news of early Sino-Indian border clashes. They are now beginning to question the validity of the moderate stand Nehru is taking in Parliament on the border issue and are pressing him to take firm action against the Chinese Communists.

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Communist bloc propaganda is giving increased prominence to the declared readiness of the Laotian dissidents to negotiate a peaceful settlement with the government. Both Peiping and Hanoi have publicized the recent offer attributed to General Kayson, ranking Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) leader at large. Conditions set for a settlement include withdrawal of United States military personnel and weapons, cessation of Laotian Army operations against the rebels, release of imprisoned NLHZ leaders, and resumption of International Control Commission (ICC) activities in Laos. Kayson is quoted as warning that should the Phoui government "continue to use American weapons to further the civil war, . . ., the Laotian people will fight resolutely to the end."

The Communists probably feel that the degree of success achieved by the rebellion places them in an advantageous position from which to bargain. By dangling the bait of a peaceful solution, they apparently hope to bring domestic pressure on the government and international pressure on the United States to accept a negotiated settlement along the lines of the November 1957 agreement guaranteeing Communist participation in a coalition government.

The Laotian Government has spurned the NLHZ overtures, and American Ambassador Smith feels this position will not change so long as the Phoui regime stays in power. The military and young reformist group championed by influential Crown Prince Savang, recently named regent, are also strongly opposed to any concession.

Probably anxious to head off UN or other external intervention in Laos, the Communists are at some pains to deny "slanderous" charges of North Vietnamese participation in the conflict. Some fighting reportedly continues in northern Laos; a complete cessation of activity coincidental with the arrival of the UN mission would tend to refute the Communist portrayal of a "popular uprising."

Laotian officials admit the possibility of some unintentional exaggeration in communiqués on the fighting to date, but express

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
confidence that the investigation by the United Nations fact-finding team will bear out Laos' charges that North Vietnam is actively supporting the dissidents. The Laotian Government is amassing available evidence, including captured arms and equipment and eyewitnesses to enemy attacks. Arrangements are also being made to fly the investigators by light plane and helicopter to the remote fighting areas. The hit-and-run tactics of the enemy and the rugged terrain, however, virtually preclude effective observation.

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
Sudanese Army Alert

The Abboud military government, aware of plotting by a new group of dissident junior officers and concerned over the activities of a number of influential political leaders, took the precaution on 11 September of ordering a military communications alert. Since his assumption of power last November, Abboud, who is army commander in chief as well as prime minister, has faced one crisis after another as the result of widespread dissension within the army officer corps. Popular sentiment for a return to civilian government is growing and several important political and religious figures have urged Abboud to take steps in that direction. On 10 September a group of 40 students from Khartoum University petitioned for the return of the army to its barracks and the restoration of political freedoms.

A crisis may be precipitated by the government's announcement before the end of this month of courts-martial verdicts and sentences against the army officers implicated in the abortive coup attempt of 22 May. The prosecution's failure to present a really convincing case has caused many Sudanese to believe that the government had rigged these trials from their outset. The new conspiring group of junior officers is hoping to take advantage of a sharp popular reaction to the sentencing to make its move against the government.

Abboud and Army Deputy Commander in Chief Hasan Bashir Nasir have already delayed announcement of the sentences while they attempt to strengthen their control of the army by reassigning key officers. They are likely to issue orders soon that the Khartoum garrison be augmented with loyal troops from one of the regional commands.

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 14]
III. THE WEST

Anglo-Arab Relations Improving

Relations between London and Cairo continue to show gradual improvement. Political considerations bar any precipitate move by either government, and resumption of formal diplomatic ties does not seem to be in prospect for many months, certainly not until after the British elections on 8 October. The British response to the growing number of overtures from Cairo in the past two months has been designed to point up the desirability of full diplomatic relations.

(The UAR's mid-July invitation to participate in the Damascus trade fair from 21 August to 20 September, and then to send a member of the Macmillan government to take part in the "British day," was met by sending representatives of a semiofficial advisory committee on Middle East trade. Several members of the government-supported British Council are going to Cairo this week to discuss the UAR desire to place students in British universities. Greatest public evidence of the new cordiality is the present "private" visit to the United Kingdom of UAR Economics Minister Qaysuni--the first member of Nasir's government to visit there since the 1956 Suez intervention. His informal discussions with Foreign Secretary Lloyd may shed some light on Nasir's intentions to further the rapprochement.)

(Differences over the Suez Canal, while potentially troublesome, do not seem a present threat to this trend. Britain's efforts to delay an IBRD loan for Suez Canal improvements have not discouraged these overtures from Cairo. In any UN General Assembly discussions of the canal transit problem, London plans only to support the general principle of freedom of transit rather than specific Israeli claims. A reversal of the trend could nevertheless result from any clash with Nasir over Britain's remaining special positions elsewhere in the Arab world.)

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 15]
LATE ITEM

GMAIC Statement on Lunar Shot

The Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee on 13 September sent the following conclusions to USIB:

1. At about 0240 EDT, 12 September 1959 the Soviets launched a space probe which impacted on the moon at about 1700 EDT, Sunday, 13 September. The announced payload and empty last stage weights were slightly higher than those announced for Lunik I. Contrary to US press articles, the launching on an unfavorable day was not originally planned, since the launch had been attempted three times on more favorable days, 6, 8 and 9 September. This is the second generally successful Lunik in six launchings.

3. The announced sodium cloud was allegedly sighted visually by various unofficial observers, but there is no confirmation of this event.

4. Over-all we believe with a high degree of confidence that Lunik II made a hard impact on the moon, and that this was the primary intent of the Soviets.

5. Although generally successful, Lunik I is not considered to have performed as planned; Lunik II apparently did.

6. Analysis will probably provide information within the next several months that may confirm or deny announced experiments and their success.

14 Sept 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
[PAGE 16]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 17]
