Mass Political Trial in Turkey Could Spark Unrest

In the mass trial which started on 14 October, the prosecution has demanded the death penalty for 38 leaders of the ousted Bayar-Menderes government and lesser penalties for the remaining defendants. The trial now has been recessed until 19 October to allow the defendants more time to confer with their attorneys. Nearly 100 of the 500 prisoners reportedly have been released, but the remainder, including ex-President Bayar and ex-Premier Menderes, face sentences of death, prison terms, and exile.

The long-awaited trial, which may continue for more than two months, began on 14 October with Bayar being charged with selling for personal profit a dog which had been a state gift from the government of Afghanistan. This seemingly unimportant item apparently is aimed at reducing pro-Bayar sentiment among the peasants, who would consider the sale of such a gift particularly repugnant. This tactic could boomerang, however, by convincing the peasants that the military regime has failed to uncover conclusive evidence of serious criminal guilt.

Many military officers, recently forced to retire, are reported gathering in Istanbul. Some have informed the American army attache that they will launch a counter-revolt if former Chief of General Staff Erdelhun is sentenced to death. They believe they would have support within the First Army, which they could use to control the Istanbul area, and state that pro-Menderes civilians would revolt in the Izmir area. They claimed that winter conditions in northeastern Turkey would prevent the Third Army from moving to support the ruling Committee of National Union (CNU). The former commander of the disbanded Turkish Korean Brigade is reported to be one of the group threatening action against the interim government. The attache notes that the CNU is aware of the alleged threat and that, while bloodshed is possible, he does not believe a move to upset the CNU would be successful.

There is little indication that the CNU has been able to convince the people of Turkey that the leaders of the former

18 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
