The Situation in Laos

The Defense Ministry and army headquarters staffs in Vientiane are characterized by the American army attache as being demoralized, confused, and in some cases quite bitter as the result of splits in the military establishment and the pervasive influence of Captain Kong Le and his followers. Other factors are said to include General Ouane’s failure as armed forces commander to exercise effective command over even the forces present in Vientiane, the defection to Phoumi’s camp of Vientiane defense commander General Amkha, and the sudden departure of approximately ten senior officers on new assignments abroad as service attaches. Other reports indicate the chief criterion for their selection as attaches was their unwillingness to cooperate with Kong Le.

Many officers and noncommissioned officers in Kong Le’s 2nd Paratroop Battalion reportedly play dual military and civil roles. A close associate of Kong Le occupies the key position of chief of cabinet in the Ministry of Defense, from which post he has allegedly monitored all command functions and kept General Ouane "fully neutralized" in his dual capacity as armed forces commander and secretary of state for defense. Ouane’s decision to go to Luang Prabang on 16 October, where he intends to remain, undoubtedly is in part due to a sense of powerlessness in attempting to assert his authority in Vientiane. With the departure of Ouane, General Amkha, and the attache-designates, there are now very few senior officers in Vientiane, thus leaving the field even more than before to the Kong Le clique.

The only potential source of serious opposition to Kong Le in the capital is about 300 infantry troops, under Captain Southep, who came to Vientiane from Luang Prabang Province last month. Although Southep is reputed to be strongly anti-Kong Le and an able commander, he is undoubtedly under close surveillance and his ability to take action may already have been neutralized.

Soviet Ambassador-designate Abramov is still awaiting an audience from the King so that he can present his credentials. In the meantime, however, there are indications that he may have made informal offers of assistance to Premier Souvanna Phouma.

18 Oct 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
