[PAGE 01]
13 July 1959

Copy No. C 63
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet official further defines USSR's position on time period that West may remain in Berlin.
USSR makes economic loan to Ethiopia.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Iraq--Anti-Communist elements encouraged as 14 July celebrations approach.

III. THE WEST
Bolivia reported to have received $100,000,000 joint aid offer from Czechoslovakia and USSR; offer probably intended primarily for propaganda.
Attempted coup in Honduras fails.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
13 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Berlin: Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin told the West German ambassador in Moscow that the USSR would accept a compromise time limit of two years, during which the Allies could remain in West Berlin and an all-German committee would attempt to negotiate a permanent settlement.

Zorin stated that the USSR would not challenge Western rights in West Berlin at the end of this period if agreement had not been reached by the Germans. He observed that a separate peace treaty with East Germany would be a very serious step and that Moscow would resort to this alternative only after all attempts to reach a negotiated settlement had failed. Zorin's remarks make more explicit the hints contained in Foreign Minister Gromyko's public statement of 28 June that the USSR would continue to respect Western rights in Berlin during an indefinite period of East-West negotiations following the expiration of the time limit on all-German talks. (Page 1)

USSR-Ethiopia: According to a joint communique issued on 12 July at the conclusion of Emperor Haile Selassie's two-week visit to the USSR, Moscow has agreed to extend a long-term, low-interest loan of about $100,000,000 for the development of Ethiopian industry and agriculture. A trade and economic agreement has also been reached, the communique said. Such trade has, to date, been negligible. The Emperor's acceptance of Soviet assistance is probably intended to demonstrate his independence from the United States and thereby to associate Ethiopia more closely with pan-Africanism.

Speaking at a reception for the Emperor on 11 July, Khrushchev said that he and President Voroshilov had accepted an invitation to visit Ethiopia at some future date.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraq: Anti-Communist elements apparently have been further encouraged by the tenor of Prime Minister Qasim's speeches during the past several days and by the rigorous security measures which have been put into effect in Baghdad. A number of high army officers predict that Communist officials in the government will be purged soon after the 14 July celebrations and that conservative former officials and army officers will be recalled to service. The Communists, for their part, continue to heckle Qasim when he addresses meetings and snipe at his policies in their press.

Although no significant Communist demonstrations have occurred in Baghdad during the last few days, a serious riot involving Communists fighting security forces in a town in southern Iraq on 10 July.
(Page 2)

III. THE WEST

Bolivia-Czechoslovakia:
Czechoslovakia and the USSR had made a joint offer of $100,000,000 to the Bolivian Government, primarily for agricultural purposes and to be disbursed in goods rather than currency. This overture continues a series of reported bloc offers of economic aid to Bolivia, which is facing an acute economic crisis and was probably intended primarily for propaganda purposes. (Page 3)

13 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Honduras: The attempted coup initiated early on 12 July by a retired officer with the backing of dissident police and military elements in the capital was poorly organized and failed to gain the support of leading military units. The ringleaders of the coup effort have surrendered and have been given political asylum in a neutral embassy. The attempt, however, further intensifies the long-standing frictions between the armed forces, which in Honduras are virtually independent of the chief executive, and a strong and violently antimilitary faction of the governing Liberal party. The significant support given the government during the 12 July fighting by groups of armed civilians may embolden the antimilitary element to push for a showdown with the military. If a military coup were to succeed, it would probably encounter widespread and sustained civilian resistance. (Page 4)

13 July 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Seeks to Reassure West on Continuation of Allied Rights in Berlin

In a recent private conversation with the West German ambassador in Moscow, Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin made more explicit the hints contained in Gromyko's public statement on 28 June that Allied rights in West Berlin under an interim agreement would not be challenged at the end of a time limit on negotiations by the Soviet-proposed all-German committee. Zorin stated that the foreign ministers would again meet to review the West Berlin problem at the end of the time period and that Allied rights would be the same as they were at the beginning of the period. He also told the ambassador that the USSR would be prepared to accept a compromise time period of two years. According to press reports from London, Gromyko has also assured the British ambassador that Western rights would be maintained during a Big Four foreign ministers' review of the situation following the expiration of the time limit on all-German talks.

Zorin remarked to the West German ambassador that a separate peace treaty with East Germany would be a very serious step and that the USSR would resort to this alternative only after all attempts to reach a negotiated settlement had failed. He also indicated that Gromyko will attempt to reopen discussions in Geneva of the USSR's proposals on a peace treaty with both German states and European security measures.

These Soviet moves to reassure the Western powers that the USSR will continue to respect their rights in Berlin during an indefinite period of East-West negotiations following a failure of the all-German committee to reach agreement reflect the Soviet leaders' desire to obtain new arrangements on Berlin which, in their view, would supersede the postwar agreements on which existing Allied rights are based. Ambassador Thompson believes acceptance of the Soviet proposal would mean virtually the end to the occupation status. In his efforts to induce the West to agree to the creation of an all-German committee, Gromyko probably will offer to extend the time limit on its negotiations to two years or more. He may also make "concessions" on such issues as the level of Western "token" forces in West Berlin and on the inclusion of East Berlin in a city-wide prohibition on subversive activities and nuclear weapons and missiles.

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Iraqi Situation Prior to Revolution Celebrations

Tensions remain high between Communists and anti-Communist nationalists, and Prime Minister Qasim has ordered special security precautions prior to the beginning on 14 July of week-long celebrations of the first anniversary of the Iraqi revolution. Beginning on 9 July, the army and police were out in impressive and augmented strength in the Baghdad area, and special troops of armed mounted police were patrolling the suburbs where clashes took place a few days before. Police have carefully checked vehicular traffic on the bridges across the Tigris, and radio cars, motorcycle patrols, and street detachments of military and security police have been used to detect and disperse any suspicious groupings. The large army concentrations on the outskirts of the capital in connection with the 14 July parade should serve as a further deterrent to any planned Communist use of force.

Iraqi security officials show that sporadic violence has been continuing in several Iraqi towns. On 10 July in Al-Samawa, midway between Baghdad and Basra, armed Communist demonstrators were involved in a two-hour battle with army and police forces. Thirty-six members of the Communist mob were arrested.

Continuing their public opposition to Qasim's policies, the Communists have heckled the prime minister during his latest speeches, and the party has stated officially it would continue to press its demands for government approval of the Communist-rigged national front and for a share in the government.

the Communists have lost much of their power. They predict that Qasim will purge remaining key Communists in the army and government immediately after the revolution celebrations and that many former government officials and senior retired army officers will then be recalled to service.

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Soviet Bloc Reportedly Offers Sizable Economic Aid to Bolivia

Czechoslovakia and the USSR had made a joint offer of $100,000,000 to the Bolivian Government, primarily for agricultural aid and in the form of goods rather than currency. This reported overture, which may be for propaganda purposes only, appears to continue the series of reported bloc offers of economic aid to Bolivia in recent months, such as the alleged Soviet offer in late 1958 of large-scale assistance to the Bolivian national oil company. The Czech Legation, the only resident bloc mission in La Paz, has been the medium for presenting Czech offers of technical aid and scholarship grants to Bolivia since 1958.

Bloc economic overtures would have considerable propaganda value to local leftist and Communist groups in their opposition to President Siles' shaky regime. The regime's ability to carry out the conditions of the US-backed stabilization program is threatened by widespread political and labor opposition. The government reportedly has decided to delay its planned unfreezing of all mine commissary prices--set for 15 July to meet its commitment to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The miners still strongly oppose the unfreezing of prices.

According to the press, former President Paz, head of the ruling party who returned to Bolivia on 8 July, visited Czechoslovakia and other bloc countries in June. He was probably investigating reported bloc economic overtures and is likely to use any such offers in an attempt to extract concessions from the IMF or reduce Bolivia's dependence on US aid.

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 10]
Honduran Coup Attempt Further Intensifies Military-Civilian Frictions

The attempted coup initiated early on 12 July by retired Colonel Armando Velasquez against the moderate government of President Ramon Villeda Morales was suppressed after about 12 hours of fighting in the capital city. Velasquez apparently had the backing of some dissident military elements. Major military elements apparently remained loyal, however, and civilian groups were armed by the government for action against the rebels. By late in the day the rebel ringleaders had surrendered, with the condition they be granted asylum in the Costa Rican Embassy.

Velasquez, who returned recently to Honduras from exile after an abortive effort early this year to lead a revolution from neighboring Nicaragua, probably did not have Nicaraguan support in his latest effort. He apparently estimated that the long-standing and deep-seated frictions between the armed forces and the dominant faction of the governing Liberal party had reached such a peak that the military was on the point of revolt. The armed forces, under the constitution virtually independent of the chief executive, have been regarded with deep suspicion by the Liberals since they came to power in Honduras' first free election in 1957. The Liberals regard the military as the instrument of repression employed by past dictatorial governments, and the more extreme Liberals have even proposed that the army be abolished. Constant efforts to weaken the position of the military, despite generally ineffective efforts by the President to maintain a balance, have antagonized armed forces leaders. The prospect of almost certain widespread and sustained civilian resistance to any military coup, however, has restrained them.

Although most of the army apparently remained loyal during the 12 July coup attempt, the extreme antimilitary Liberal faction may now feel emboldened to force a showdown with the military. The large number of armed civilians in the capital late on 12 July suggests that further disturbances are likely.

A factor which may have brought the civilian-military feud to a head was the recent Honduran Army capture of two Cuban-supported rebel groups preparing to launch invasions of

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
Nicaragua. The army took this action in the face of widespread popular support in Honduras for the Nicaraguan rebels. Although he denies it, President Villeda is known to have offered at least his moral support to the Nicaraguan rebels.

13 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
