Possible Developments at OAS Meetings

Venezuela is demanding that a resolution calling for a com-
plete break in relations with the Dominican Republic be passed
at the first of the two Organization of American States (OAS) meetings
beginning 16 August in San Jose, Costa Rica. Peru will support
a break in diplomatic relations--a step already taken by Lima--
but not a break in commercial relations, according to the US
charge in Lima. At the subsequent meeting on the Cuban issue,
which Peru proposed, it will back a strong resolution condemning
Sino-Soviet interference in the hemisphere. Unless Cuba makes new
attacks on the OAS or Peru, the Peruvian Government would
not, however, want to support a resolution against Cuba.

The Trujillo regime now has no supporters among the Latin
American states. In its propaganda efforts and in the statements
of its officials, it is showing a bitterness against the United States
which, in many aspects, closely parallels that of the Castro regime
in Cuba. The two regimes, heretofore generally considered at op-
posite ideological poles, may well find themselves allies at the
foreign ministers' meetings. In a letter to air force officers prior
to his departure for Europe on 7 August, General "Ramfis" Tru-
jillo, the dictator's son, stated that the United States has turned
against both Trujillo and Castro because both attacked US business
interests--"When those people's dollars and cents are touched, no
one can shut them up." The American Embassy interprets the let-
ter, a bitter tirade against the United States, as clear indication
that dictator Trujillo intends to retain control and that he is "to some
extent at least sympathetic to Castro."

Communists and other pro-Castro groups in Costa Rica are
evidently planning disturbances during the conference, including
picketing the conference site and holding public meetings denounc-
ing the OAS. However, there is no large group of dissatisfied in-
dividuals in the Costa Rican capital that would be readily exploit-
able in mob action, and any disturbances are likely to be carried
out by individuals and small groups which could be controlled by
Costa Rica's 2,400-man civil security force.

minor disturbances are probable
and violence is possible, but either will probably be controlled.
