Moscow Expands Offer of Economic Aid to Ghana

Soviet Premier Khrushchev, in talks at Yalta on 5 August
with a Ghanaian delegation, expanded the USSR's earlier offer
of economic and technical aid to include assistance for a Ghanaian
naval base and school and for the Ghanaian merchant marine and
a civil airline. The delegation--which had come to the USSR to
negotiate the earlier Soviet offer, reportedly amounting to $280,-
000,000--agreed with Khrushchev's suggestion that discussions on
the new proposals begin as soon as possible. Soviet aid for the
merchant marine and the civil airline may include the supply of
ships and aircraft, as well as technical assistance for the opera-
tion of such services.

Khrushchev also offered to assist Ghana with its Volta River
hydroelectric and aluminum production project on terms more fa-
vorable than those available in the West. Ghana now is in the final
stages of negotiations with the International Bank of Reconstruction
and Development and a consortium of Western aluminum producers
regarding aid for this project.

Khrushchev's response to Accra's decision to accept Soviet
aid reflects an awareness of the key role Ghana plays in Western
African political affairs. The bloc's aid effort in this region has
so far concentrated largely on Guinea.

The USSR offered in June to carry out some 28 projects in
Ghana, including the construction of hotels and sewer systems,
car assembly and fertilizer plants, an atomic reactor, and a steel
mill. Inasmuch as Moscow and Accra are preparing a joint commu-
nique covering the results of negotiations over this offer, an agree-
ment has evidently been reached under which at least some of these
projects will be implemented.

As in similar arrangements with underdeveloped countries,
Moscow will probably accept local commodities in payment for its
aid. The Ghanaian delegation has made tentative arrangements for
the USSR to buy cocoa directly from Ghana instead of through the
international market in London.
