Senegalese-Soudanese Friction Shaking Mali Federation

Discord between Senegal and Soudan--the constituent states
of the newly independent Federation of Mali--has recently inten-
sified to such an extent that an early break-up of the federation
is possible. This latest and most serious in a series of such
crises between the federal partners--whose basic outlooks and
temperaments diverge widely--is the result of increasing resent-
ment on the part of the moderate Senegalese over Soudanese at-
tempts to dominate Mali. The Soudanese, whose top leader,
Modibo Keita, is foreign minister as well as head of the Mali
Government, have been placing a disproportionate number of
their people in federal positions. They have also been trying,
quite openly, on at least one recent occasion, to induce younger
elements in the Senegalese Government to work for the more vig-
orous domestic policies and the more aggressive, pan-African-
oriented foreign policy favored by Soudan.

This heightened friction, already reflected in a wrangle over
the naming of a chief of staff for the Mali Army, appears to be
building up toward a showdown in connection with the election,
now scheduled for 27 August, of a federal president by the com-
bined legislatures of Mali, Senegal, and Soudan. A top-level
decision reached last May supposedly cleared the way for the
election to this post of Leopold Senghor, Senegal's principal
spokesman and the chief architect of the Mali Federation. Now,
however, the Soudanese are insisting they agreed only that the
presidency should go to a representative of Senegal.

they have decided definitely to op-
pose Senghor, whom they regard as an obstacle to the "consolida-
tion" of the federation and to a possible future association with
other independent states of former French West Africa.

the Soudanese, who are in a position to pre-
vent any candidate from obtaining the necessary two-thirds major-
ity, plan to seek an indefinite postponement of the balloting or, if
that is not possible, to support Senghor's Senegalese rival, Lamine
Gueye. Senghor's supporters are reacting to these indications with
dire predictions implying a possible move by Senegal to secede
from the federation if Senghor is not chosen.
