[PAGE 01]
22 February 1953
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. India may not have a specific plan for solving the Korean issue
(page 3).

SOVIET UNION

3. State Security official appointed head of Kremlin's medical service
(page 4).
4. Fighter support initiated in Soviet Far East air-ground exercise
(page 4).

FAR EAST

6. Unusual paratroop activity noted at Canton (page 6).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

7. Replacement of Vietnamese premier rumored (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Serious civil disorders may occur in Trieste on 20 March (page 7).
9. French hint at more tractable approach to Saar settlement (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. India may not have a specific plan for solving the Korean issue:

A member of the Philippine UN delegation, who recently attended a meeting of Arab-Asian UN representatives in New York, states that the Indian representative had no instructions and did no talking regarding the Korean issue. Both the Filipino and a Pakistani who was also present say that the Arab-Asian group as a whole held only general conversations on Korea and came to no definite decision.

Comment: An earlier unconfirmed report stated that India intended to suggest at the meeting that a ceasefire in Korea be arranged before the prisoner of war issue was resolved. India's failure to raise the issue suggests that it still has no concrete proposal to present to the Assembly.
[PAGE 04]
SOVIET UNION

3. State Security official appointed head of Kremlin's medical service:

On 14 February, I. I. Kuperin was identified as the new chief of the Medical-Sanitation Directorate of the Kremlin.

Kuperin was chief of the Health Department, Ministry of State Security (MGB) in December 1947 and has been identified with that organization as recently as 20 August 1952.

4. Fighter support initiated in Soviet Far East air-ground exercise:

An air-ground exercise conducted by Soviet Ninth Air Army units in the Southern Maritime District of the Soviet Far East was the first occasion on which fighter planes of that command were noted providing air cover for ground attack aircraft. Jet fighters working in pairs provided continuous protection during the exercise.

Comment: Since the redeployment in October of over 90 ground attack aircraft from the Port Arthur-Dairen area to the Southern Maritime District, there has been an apparent intensification of tactical support training.
[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST
[PAGE 06]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

7. Replacement of Vietnamese premier rumored:

There is a "strong rumor" in Dalat, where Bao Dai's headquarters is located, that Nguyen Huu Tri, the present governor of Tonkin, will shortly replace Nguyen Van Tam as prime minister.

Comment: Since last fall, there have been indications of a growing disposition on the part of both Bao Dai and the French to take a more favorable view of Tri and a less favorable view of Tam. The latter's son, who is Vietnam's Chief of Staff, said in November that he thought his father would be prime minister for less than three months.

The replacement of Tam by the able and popular Tri would stimulate Vietnamese support of the war effort.
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

8. Serious civil disorders may occur in Trieste on 20 March:

The pro-Cominform Communist Party of Trieste asserts that the neo-fascist Italian Social Movement (MSI) is planning demonstrations on 20 March to commemorate last year's riots. The MSI will attack the police, and this may serve as an excuse for bringing Italian troops into Zone A to restore order. Allegedly, they would remain there with American consent. The Italians would then give tacit approval to Yugoslav annexation of Zone B.

The US Political Advisor also expects that the disorders may become serious. He believes that suppression of these demonstrations will be complicated by the unreliability of the police which are infiltrated by the MSI, and he feels that any use of Allied troops would bring about grave international repercussions.

Comment: Italy would accept a provisional settlement of the Trieste issue, which would include the entry of Italian troops into Zone A, but only if it were assured that Yugoslavia would not annex Zone B. While demonstrations will probably take place on 20 March, there is no evidence that the Italian Government intends to use them to occupy Zone A.

9. French hint at more tractable approach to Saar settlement:

A high French Foreign Ministry official, clarifying what Premier Mayer and Foreign Minister Bidault have in mind on a Saar settlement as a prerequisite for EDC ratification, stated that an agreement with West Germany "would have to be clearly in sight" which would recognize the territory as politically detached from Germany and economically linked to France. However, the links with France need not be as
[PAGE 08]
tight as at present, and special economic arrangements with Germany might be acceptable.

Comment: This is the first indication that the French might make some concessions on the Saar's economic ties.
