1. MOLOTOV SAYS DISARMAMENT PROGRESS DEPENDS
ON US AGREEMENT TO BAN NUCLEAR WEAPONS

In a conversation with the chairman of the Canadian UN delegation on 22 September, Molotov reiterated that progress on disarmament cannot be made if the Americans refuse to agree to the abandonment of nuclear weapons. When the Canadian representative referred to the difficulties of control over nuclear weapons, Molotov said indirect control is possible through control of the "instruments of delivery." He agreed that 100-percent control would not be possible but argued that "controls are never 100 percent. We must trust one another."

Molotov avoided a direct reply to a question whether the USSR would accept President Eisenhower's blueprint and aerial inspection proposals, saying that "we are studying many proposals and they all have good features."

Soviet deputy foreign minister Kuznetsov professed surprise at the Canadian attitude on controls, saying, "You want all the details. We would prefer to set up a general plan and then work out the details." The Canadian representative believes the Soviet delegates have no intention of answering detailed questions on control.

Comment

Molotov's remarks parallel Bulganin's letter to the President in seeking to focus the disarmament debate on the absence of an American commitment regarding the ultimate prohibition of nuclear weapons and the reduction of armaments. Soviet spokesmen are insisting that it is essential to establish a "legal basis" for the proscription of atomic weapons.

The Soviet representative on the UN Disarmament Subcommittee has so far refused to elaborate on the functions of the international control agency proposed in the 10 May plan. Molotov's reference to control of the instruments of delivery suggests that in any detailed discussion of the control question, the USSR will maintain that "control posts" in ports, railroad junctions, highways and airfields would provide adequate safeguards against a surprise attack. This would obviate any need for aerial photography and for according international inspectors access to industries and installations engaged in nuclear activities.
