[PAGE 01]
29 May 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

29 May 1959

DAILY BRIEF

Indonesia: The debate in the Constituent Assembly on President Sukarno's request for a return to the 1945 constitution, which

i

[PAGE 04]
would greatly increase the power of the executive, has concluded. A vote is expected within a few days. Although the outcome is still in question, pressures for acceptance have been increasing. Premier Djuanda has made a thinly veiled threat of an army takeover in the event of an unfavorable vote. Army leaders have just ended a national conference which was probably timed to bring pressure on the assembly for a favorable vote as well as to determine the support of regional commanders should extreme measures be required.

III. THE WEST

Haiti:

Under the constitution, executive power passes to the cabinet if the president is temporarily incapacitated. The senior member of the Supreme Court becomes provisional president if the president dies or resigns.

a sharp power struggle is likely to preclude any orderly transfer of power.

29 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
Argentina: Violence flared up again in several cities on 26 and 27 May. The continued defiance of various labor unions led by Communists and extreme Peronistas has increased the likelihood that the disturbances will become still more serious. The strike leaders reject any compromise in their economic demands and appear to be using these demands in the hope of undermining the government. Frondizi has the support of the military. He probably will have to resort to strong repressive measures to stop the agitation.

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)

Cambodia's International Orientation for the Next Year.
NIE 67-59. 26 May 1959.

Prospects for North and South Vietnam Over Next Two or Three Years. NIE 63-59. 26 May 1959.

29 May 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 07]
Indonesian Prime Minister Makes Thinly Veiled Threat of
Army Coup

Indonesia's Constituent Assembly, meeting in Bandung, was warned by Prime Minister Djuanda on 27 May that failure to readopt the 1945 constitution was likely to precipitate an army coup. The 1945 constitution strengthened the executive branch of government at the expense of the legislative, which is in line with Sukarno's concept of "guided democracy." Although the necessary two-thirds majority in the Constituent Assembly is still uncertain, indications are increasing that the substantial and hitherto uncommitted vote--chiefly composed of the Moslem Nahdlatul Ulama--may support the government. A final vote is expected on 29 or 30 May.

Army Chief

of Staff General Nasution held a national military conference during the final stages of debate, presumably to influence the assembly and possibly also to determine the support of regional commanders should extreme measures be required.

The American Embassy notes that most civilian leaders of the government are absent from Djakarta. President Sukarno, Acting President Sartono, the prime minister, all three deputy prime ministers, and more than half a dozen cabinet ministers, including some of the most important, are away on missions, either within Indonesia or abroad. General Nasution and the principal army leaders, however, are on hand.

29 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Haitian President's Illness Likely to Touch Off Power Struggle

The grave illness of Haitian President Francois Duvalier, who suffered a coronary occlusion on 24 May, will force him to withdraw at least temporarily from the political scene. The Constitution of 1957 provides that the cabinet assume executive authority if the president is temporarily unable to perform his duties. In the event of the president's death or resignation, the senior member of the Supreme Court automatically becomes provisional president and is charged with holding elections within three months.

The cabinet has been completely dominated by the President, and is not composed of strong political figures. Theodore Nicoleau, a former minister of justice in Duvalier's first cabinet, is president of the Supreme Court. Neither he nor the cabinet is believed to enjoy sufficient popular support to prevent determined and possibly violent bids for power by opposition groups, dissident elements of the armed forces, or even ambitious officials of Duvalier's administration.

The bitter political and racial tensions which have remained latent during the last several months could rise to the surface, causing a period of violence and political instability similar to that which followed the overthrow of former dictator Paul Magloire in December 1956.

29 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
Argentine Strikers Continue Defiant Attitude

The violence growing out of strikes in several Argentine cities on 26 and 27 May seems part of a pattern of labor defiance led by various Communists and extreme Peronistas in hopes of undermining President Frondizi's government. The strike leaders have rejected any compromise in their demands and threaten further trouble if not satisfied. As demonstrated by the bank strike, now in its eighth week, these leaders do not have the full support of the union rank and file, but they have enough to interrupt business operations, to gain some unwilling compliance by threats against both workers and employers, and to promote riots and unrest.

The recent strike tactics suggest that a major aim has been to provoke politically unpopular repressive measures that would intensify labor discontent with President Frondizi and possibly gain additional support for the Peronista and Communist unions. These unions nominally control slightly more than half of organized labor. Recognizing this motive, Frondizi has relied mainly on tear gas and water hoses to quell agitation. He has also emphasized Communist responsibility, which, in the 3 April riots, was clearly evident.

Nevertheless, Frondizi will probably have to resort to stronger measures. The military are supporting him and will probably continue to do so as long as he moves to quell the agitation.

29 May 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 12]
