[PAGE 01]
8 November 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. ANNIVERSARY SPEECHES IN MOSCOW (page 3).

2. USSR SEEKING INVITATION TO NEXT ASIAN-AFRICAN
CONFERENCE (page 4).

3. AFGHANISTAN REQUESTS AMERICAN TRUCKS BE
IMPORTED VIA THE USSR (page 5).

4. AFGHANISTAN TO CONVENE GRAND TRIBAL ASSEMBLY
(page 6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 7)
[PAGE 04]
1. ANNIVERSARY SPEECHES IN MOSCOW

The speeches of presidium member
L. M. Kaganovich and Defense Min-
ister Zhukov at the anniversary cele-
brations of the Bolshevik Revolution were, for the most
part, routine recapitulations of earlier pronouncements.
No particular significance can be attached to the choice
of Kaganovich, a first deputy premier and chairman of
the state committee for wages and labor, to deliver the
major address, since this honor has been rotated among
members of the presidium since 1947.

Kaganovich, however, probably indi-
cated the major goals for the forthcoming sixth Five-Year
Plan in stressing the need to increase labor productivity
and introduce advanced technology.

The portion of Kaganovich's speech
devoted to foreign affairs listed a series of recent Soviet
moves designed to ease international tension and empha-
sized the prime importance of European security. Kagano-
vich devoted particular attention to the USSR's good rela-
tions with the Bandung countries. The tone of the speech
suggests that the Soviet leaders are satisfied with their
current foreign policy line and contemplate no important
shifts in it.

Zhukov's ten-minute oration was con-
fined mainly to generalities on the Soviet Union's love of
peace, but also warned "reactionary elements" that the
USSR is continually becoming stronger.
[PAGE 05]
2. USSR SEEKING INVITATION TO NEXT ASIAN-AFRICAN
CONFERENCE

believes that the USSR will be invited to
participate in a second Asian-African
conference, which he understands will
be held in Cairo in the spring of 1956,
Khrushchev and Bulganin report-
edly will visit Cairo to discuss this matter with Egyptian
premier Nasr as well as to arrange a large-scale Soviet-
Egyptian trade agreement.

Comment

There is no doubt that the Soviet Union
would accept an invitation to attend an
Asian-African conference. Burmese premier Nu's hos-
pitable remark in Moscow that he hoped the USSR would
participate in the next conference may place the Colombo
powers (India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma and Indonesia),
who are responsible for issuing invitations, in an embarrass-
ing position. India and possibly Indonesia would probably
support Nu, while Pakistan and Ceylon would be strongly
opposed to inviting the Soviet Union. Moreover, several
other pro-Western countries that attended the Bandung
meeting are unlikely to attend another in company with the
USSR unless Australia and New Zealand, if not the United
States, are also asked to participate.
[PAGE 06]
3. AFGHANISTAN REQUESTS AMERICAN TRUCKS BE
IMPORTED VIA THE USSR

The Afghan government has re-
quested that future imports of
American trucks be shipped via
the USSR,
shipment costs and terms provided by the official Afghan
Transit Company "compare favorably" with those for
shipment through Pakistan.

The American embassy in Kabul
comments that if American trucks are barred from the
Afghan market as a result of refusal to ship through the
USSR, the Soviet Union will probably fill the gap.

Comment

The Afghan request indicates that
Kabul plans to reduce its dependence
on Pakistan by making maximum use of the transit rights
it obtained under the agreement of last June with the USSR.

Requests that other articles of Afghan-
American trade also be routed through the USSR are likely
to follow. (Concurred in by ORR)
[PAGE 07]
4. AFGHANISTAN TO CONVENE GRAND TRIBAL ASSEMBLY

The calling by Afghan king Zahir Shah
of a Grand Assembly of the Tribes
(Loe Jirgah) to discuss the Pushtooni-
stan issue on 14 November indicates a
major policy decision is pending in Kabul. The last two
such assemblies were called in 1930 to approve Zahir's father
as king and in 1941 to affirm Afghanistan's policy of neutral-
ity in World War II.

Unlike the "rubber-stamp" parliament,
the tribal assembly cannot be completely controlled by
Prime Minister Daud. Influential elements in Afghanistan
still oppose Daud's anti-Pakistani and pro-Soviet policy
and may attempt to act against him when the assembly of
tribesmen meets.

Daud will probably attempt to limit
discussion to the Pushtoonistan issue, which has recently
caused a worsening of Afghan-Pakistani relations. The
assembly is likely to support Daud on the Pushtoonistan
issue as such.

Discussion of Pushtoonistan in the tribal
assembly will probably include consideration of continued
tension with Pakistan, the risk of reimposition of the Paki-
stani blockade, and consequently the basic question of
Afghanistan's relations with the USSR. The assembly would
be wary of endorsing closer relations with the Soviet Union.
Unless Daud is rebuked by the tribal assembly for his Soviet
policy, the trend toward close relations with the USSR will
probably continue.
[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 7 November)

No significant military action has
occurred on the Israeli-Arab borders in the last 24 hours.
The parties appear to be concentrating on their usual post-
crisis activity--submitting detailed complaints to the UN
truce authorities.

A 5 November TASS dispatch from
Moscow lays the blame for the recent incidents on the
Israelis who, it is alleged, are carrying out the wishes
of "Western circles which are trying to stir up trouble be-
tween Israel and the Arab states."

The ratification by the Syrian parlia-
ment of a Syrian-Egyptian mutual defense agreement,
although of little immediate military significance, will
almost certainly be cited by the Israelis as an additional
threat to their position. A Syrian-Egyptian joint planning
group appears to be envisaged, and four Syrian officers
reportedly will go to Cairo on 10 November to participate
in it.

Even though Egyptian prime minister
Nasr reportedly has turned down a Soviet offer on the Nile
high dam, representatives of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development have concluded from their
talks with Egyptian officials that Egypt will not accept any
other offer until the Egyptian finance minister has visited
Washington and after further talks with the IBRD. It seems
[PAGE 09]
doubtful that Nasr's refusal of the Soviet offer will be
final until he actually signs with some Western group
such as the IBRD or the Anglo-French-German consor-
tium.
[PAGE 10]
