Comment: The Shah and other Iranian leaders have let it be known during the past two years that they have been disappointed and dissatisfied with the amount of aid given Iran in comparison with Turkey and Greece. In presenting their case, they have pointed out that Iran was most vulnerable to Soviet aggression. While the present government will hardly press its inclusion in Western defense arrangements, NATO's acceptance of Turkey and Greece will nevertheless add to general Iranian bitterness and irritation.

6. Shah continues to fear actions of Iranian Prime Minister:
In conversations with the US Ambassador in Tehran, the Shah expressed the fear that Prime Minister Mossadeq might "do harm" before his government falls. The Shah deplored his own position as a "looker-on" and stated that he was afraid that the new oil commission would be terrorized into action dictated by the extremists and spearheaded by Mossadeq. In conclusion, the Shah expressed himself very strongly on the futility of the Prime Minister's apparent program of neutrality.

Comment: The Shah reluctantly yielded to the popular demand for oil nationalization by appointing its foremost proponent Prime Minister. The Shah, however, has not changed his opinion of Mossadeq. The latter's policies of free speech and free assembly are being exploited by the pro-Communist Tudeh Party, and his anti-foreignism and mistrust of the army pose a real threat to Iran.

7. King Farouk opposes break in Anglo-Egyptian defense talks:
US Ambassador Caffery in Cairo has been informed by the Egyptian Royal Press Counselor that King Farouk opposes any break in the Anglo-Egyptian defense negotiations at the present time, assuming (a) that the forthcoming British reply leaves the door open for future talks and (b) that the Foreign Minister is invited to London soon for further discussions. According to the press counselor, the Egyptian Prime Minister and Foreign Minister indicated that they will not force a showdown on the defense negotiations at the present juncture.
