The Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma sent a letter to King Savang on 22 November to enlist the King's support for his proposed meeting with General Phoumi and Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphannouvong looking to the formation of a coalition government. Souvanna claimed during his recent trip to Sam Neua, he had secured Souphannouvong's agreement to participation in a coalition cabinet with representatives of the Phoumi group, excluding Phoumi himself. It is doubtful the King will offer Souvanna much encouragement in his latest venture, and in any event there seems little chance that Phoumi would agree at this stage to talks on coalition with the Pathet Lao.

the contemplated attack on Luang Prabang by joint Pathet Lao - government force will be deferred pending receipt of Phoumi's reaction to the proposal for negotiations. It had been previously reported that the Vientiane elements slated to participate in the attack, including some of Captain Kong Le's paratroopers, departed by truck from Vientiane on 20 November. They were allegedly to rendezvous with Pathet Lao elements at Muong Kassy, about 55 miles south of Luang Prabang on the road from Vientiane. A later report indicates the Vientiane force may have stopped only a short distance from Vientiane.

initiation of a previously planned offensive, the nature of which is not spelled out. "Mobile Group 1" may be Captain Siho's commando battalion of about 800 men which reportedly joined other Phoumi elements recently in the Pak Ca Dinh area, about 20 miles east of Pak Sane. The emphasis on infiltration tactics suggests the operation does not envisage a frontal assault on Vientiane forces disposed between Pak Sane and Pak Ca Dinh, but rather an attempt to bypass them. General Boun Leut, Phoumi's top military leader, recently divulged plans aimed at cutting off the Vientiane forces in the Pak Sane - Pak Ca Dinh area.

Soviet Ambassador Abramov, who is accredited to both Laos and Cambodia but resides in Phnom Penh,
