suggests that the US shoulq consider its position in this eventuality, for
if the US.supports Se.yyid Z.ia, it will be stigmatized as identified with
British interests in Iran. On the other hand, if the US fails to support
him, Seyyid Zia .wilLbe deprived of an element of strength that he will
need if he is to bring about stability at this time. The Ambassador concludes that support of Seyyid Zia is t.o be preferred, despite the atten3.5(c)
dant risks. ,--------~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 3.3(h)(2)
I [ the Shah
-is prepared to install Seyyid Zia as prime minister wittun the next few
days and to have the Majlis dissolved as soon as it has confirmed this
appointment. This move is to be followed by decree rule and widespread
arrests, which should render impotent the National Front and the various
subversive elements in the country~ At this time, Iran will abandon its
neutrality policy and come out openly on the side of the West.

Comment: While Prime Minister Ala has appreciably strengthened his position in the last weeks and while the London press states that Ala has n·ow received a vote of confidence from both houses of Parliament, ~eyfid Zia and Qavam are continuing to maneuver politically to succeed Ala.. : The Shah's p1an to install Seyyid Zia as a
strong man, a plan consistently bac):{ed by the UK as the most feasible
method of reversing Parliament's recent approval of the nationalization
of Irants oil, presents many difficultieso The oil issue is so controversial that the appointment of Seyyid Zia, . with his reported UK connections, and dissolution of the Majlis witp.out a firm commitment to
hold new elections promptly would probably be followed by widespread
popular disapproval and by increased internal disorder.

3. Comment on report of critical French-Moroccan relations;
According to a special dispatch to the: New York￾Times, Reside!}t General Juin has been engaged in emergency consultations with th~~ government regarding the deteriorating relations between
France and the Moroccan nationalists, including the Sultan. Juin is reported to have claimed that his presence is required in the Protectorate
until at least 1 December to ensure order.

Jutn had been slated to assume the command of
the armed forces in the central sector of the European Army on 1 June.
