I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Situation in Laos

A Hanoi broadcast of 21 August, attributed to a spokesman of
Laos' Communist front Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) party, called for
the creation of a coalition government with Communist participa-
tion, the realignment of Laos' pro-Western foreign policy, and a
return to the privileged position secured through the negotiations
between the Communists and the royal government which culmi-
nated in the unification settlement of November 1957. By tak-
ing this extreme position, the NLHZ is creating a climate in
which its proscription as a political party is almost inevitable.
Its line also suggests that the NLHZ is preparing to abandon le-
gal political activity in favor of guerrilla warfare.

Reports point to intensified Communist partisan operations
in northern Laos, especially in Sam Neua Province and areas of
eastern Luang Prabang Province adjacent to Sam Neua. The press
states that infiltration in Vientiane Province has forced the govern-
ment to abandon several posts. The scale of operations appears to
be smaller than is suggested by the reports, however.

North Vietnam has markedly increased its accusations that
South Vietnam is actively involved in the Laotian crisis, suggest-
ing concern over the possibility that Saigon has secretly agreed
to give military aid to Laos. Specifically Hanoi accuses Saigon of
training anti-Communist terrorists for the Laotian Government
and sending advisers to help the army, and claims that a decision
now has been reached to dispatch troops from South Vietnam. At
the very least Hanoi probably is worried that Saigon will utilize
the present crisis to increase its influence in Laos.

In another development, has reported ru-
mors circulating in Hanoi that Premier and Foreign Minister Pham
Van Dong left North Vietnam for Communist China around 17 Au-
gust to meet President Ho Chi Minh, who has been in China since
early August, and to confer with Peiping's leaders about the Lao-
tian situation. Such action would indicate the Communists' press-
ing need for close policy coordination at this time.

24 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
