In view of evident US-UK differences on this subject, the Political Adviser believes that Japan, in order not to offend either nation, has now decided that its most prudent course is to avoid any affirmative actions toward either Taipei or Peiping pending further developments. Consequently, he feels that the Japanese Government will no longer be responsive to any US pressure to reach a settlement with the Nationalists.

Comment: The Japanese have agreed in writing not to conclude a bilateral treaty with the Peiping regime and have implied that they would establish diplomatic relations with Nationalist China. Under heavy internal pressure to expand the present very limited trade with mainland China, Yoshida may well attempt to play off the US and Britain on an issue on which the two nations lack a coordinated policy.

3. ECA Chief in the Far East pessimistic over progress in Indochina:

The Chief of ECA operations for the Far East emphasizes that the greatest impediment to US aims in Indochina is the weakness and conservatism of the present Vietnamese Government. He believes the Viet Minh "revolution" will continue despite massive US military aid and a sizeable US economic program unless a socially-conscious government with "grass roots" instincts is formed.

The ECA Chief further believes that French officials in Indochina now realize they are fighting a war that cannot be won without a political solution and that the conservative Vietnamese "mandarins" they have been supporting as leaders will never attract the masses sufficiently to achieve such a solution. The US official recommends, therefore, that the United States now consider this problem jointly with the French to the end of developing a government with a broad popular base.

Comment: There is no convincing evidence available that the French authorities in Indochina have undergone such a change in attitude as described by the ECA Chief. Those Vietnamese politicians who have shown the clearest social purpose are the ones whose political life under the French-sponsored Vietnamese Government has been briefest.
