[PAGE 01]
22 January 1958
Copy No. 137
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 JANUARY 1958

New Soviet ambassador to US says Soviet leaders eager for better relations with US.

Opposition to Party Secretary Ulbricht growing in East German Communist party.

USSR suggests nuclear-free zone for Middle East.

Egyptian- Syrian union negotiations expected to begin soon.

Venezuela - General strike threatens President Perez’ position.

Guatemalan Congress to convene 24 January to select president.

OTHER ITEMS

South Vietnam - Personal guards fire on President Diem's plane.

Egypt to train Indonesian jet pilots.

Turkish defense minister replaced by confidant of prime minister.

Japanese irritated over US trade policies.

USSR and Colombia may conclude barter agreement.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Ambassador-designate to the United States Menshikov states he is personally convinced, as are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, and Bulganin, of the necessity for improvement in US-USSR relations. He has told Ambassador Thompson that this identity of views was apparently the reason for his appointment--a hint that one of Menshikov's primary assignments is to arrange high-level bilateral negotiations.
(Page 1)

Vigorous high-level opposition in the East German Communist party has forced party boss Ulbricht to postpone the central committee meeting originally scheduled for 15 January. Ulbricht's hard-line economic policies--raising work norms and stepping up collectivization of farmers and artisans--are being attacked as measures which will increase unrest rather than production. Although Ulbricht may be forced to make some concessions, he will probably continue to receive Soviet support to ensure his dominant position.

The USSR is now suggesting a nuclear-free zone throughout the Middle East to include specifically the Baghdad Pact area. The 21 January TASS statement is timed to influence any discussions on strengthening the northern-tier concept in the Baghdad conference starting Monday. (Page 2) (MAP)
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Arrangements are being made for the training in Egypt of Indonesian pilots and technicians in the use of the jet aircraft which the Indonesians are now seeking from the bloc[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
(Page 3)

Frustration in Japan over US trade policy and its application to Japanese imports has become acute as a result of recent recommendations by the US Tariff Commission. Ambassador MacArthur in Tokyo states that a series of restrictive actions can cause major damage to the US position in Japan and will aid those forces in Japan pressing for indiscriminate trade with Communist China and the USSR.
(Page 4)

The Egyptian and Syrian governments probably will announce formally in the near future plans to open negotiations for Syrian-Egyptian union under a federal constitution. The target date for completion of a draft constitution is said to be August 1958, prior to Syria's scheduled parliamentary elections. Should serious negotiations be undertaken, they would be arduous because of widely different economic and political conditions in the two countries. Nasir will presumably continue his efforts to remove Syrian Army Chief of Staff Bizri and neutralize Defense Minister Azm.

The resignation of Turkish Defense Minister Semi Ergin and his replacement by Etem Menderes, minister of public works and close confidant of Prime Minister Adnan Menderes, on 19 January is probably a repercussion of the alleged plans for an army-led coup d'etat which led to the recent arrest of at least nine army officers. This cabinet shift may foreshadow some further changes in the Turkish military command structure.

22 Jan 58 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]The continuing danger of assassination of South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem was highlighted again on 18 January when his plane leaving Saigon airport was fired on by four army paratroopers of his guard detail[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].
(Page 5)

III. THE WEST

The large plurality won in Guatemala's 19 January election by rightist presidential candidate Ydigoras has presented the congress and the army with a dilemma. Congress, which is constitutionally charged with choosing between the two top runners, contains a strong anti-Ydigoras majority. If it refuses to name Ydigoras president after it convenes on 24 January, serious public disorders are likely.
(Page 6)

The position of Venezuelan President Perez is threatened by a general strike which began in Caracas on 21 January. Street rioting has resulted in 33 deaths, many injured, and about 1,000 arrests. A state of siege has been declared and further violence may be expected. If the strike continues, the military now backing Perez may decide to oust him to check the mounting civilian opposition.
(Page 7)

Recent trade negotiations between the Soviet Union and several Latin American countries reflect increased Latin American interest in Soviet bloc trade.
(Page 8)

22 Jan 58 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Menshikov Stresses Importance of Bilateral Talks
To Improve Soviet-American Relations

Soviet Ambassador-designate to the United States Mikhail Menshikov told Ambassador Thompson on 20 January that he is personally convinced, as are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, and Bulganin, that it is essential to improve Soviet-American relations. He expressed the belief that this identity of views was apparently the reason for his appointment. He stressed the importance of contacts between top leaders and of taking some small steps toward improving relations.

Menshikov's remarks suggest that one of his major aims will be to arrange high-level bilateral negotiations. He suggested that even if no specific problem were taken up, contacts between leaders would be more useful than a large summit conference. Soviet officials during the past two months have privately urged direct talks, and Premier Bulganin's recent letters asserted that the USSR "always welcomes" bilateral consultations. Thompson considers that Menshikov's close relationship with Mikoyan over a period of years could give him more influence in Moscow than his predecessor.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 08]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]Middle East Members of the Baghdad Pact
22 JANUARY 1958[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_3]]
[PAGE 09]
Soviet Statement on Baghdad Pact Council Meeting

The TASS statement of 21 January on the forthcoming session of the Baghdad Pact council in Ankara is another step in Moscow's campaign to charge the United States with the responsibility for blocking an East-West detente. The statement is intended to forestall any moves to establish American missile bases in the Middle East and to underline the USSR's posture as the champion of Arab nationalism and neutralism.

Charging that the Ankara meeting will be a "continuation" of the recent NATO heads of government conference in Paris, TASS asserted that the United States will attempt to force Baghdad Pact members to accept American bases for nuclear and rocket weapons. It warned that alleged American plans to unite the Baghdad Pact and SEATO with NATO would expose the members of these alliances to the "flames of missiles and atomic war" should a conflict break out in another part of the world.

TASS attempted to create the impression of a cleavage between Turkey, Britain and the United States, on the one hand, and Iraq, Iran and Pakistan on the other. Turkey, along with the United States, was the main target. TASS warned that the stationing of nuclear weapons and rocket bases in Turkey "would be a great threat to the people of the Middle East."

In line with Moscow's recent proposals to extend the Rapacki Plan for a nuclear-free zone in Central Europe to cover the Scandinavian countries, Italy and Albania, TASS declared that the Middle East should also become a "zone of peace free of nuclear and rocket weapons." Neutralist elements in the Middle East probably will receive this proposal with enthusiasm, while pro-Western leaders will have difficulty in opposing it publicly.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian Jet Pilots and Technicians to Be
Trained in Egypt

Arrangements are being made for the training in Egypt of Indonesian pilots and technicians in the use of the jet aircraft, including bombers, which the Indonesians are now seeking from the bloc.

Indonesian technical personnel can be sent immediately for training, while pilots should arrive later. This arrangement is similar to the one under which Syrian pilots were trained in Egypt.

Agreement on this training apparently was reached by the Indonesian arms purchasing mission which visited Cairo in early January before going to Yugoslavia and bloc countries in Eastern Europe.

Indonesia hopes bloc planes could be delivered through Egypt to avoid a revolt of anti-Communist groups in Indonesia.

Indonesia believe that the announcement of a bloc arms deal, however disguised, would be regarded by Indonesian regional leaders as sufficient grounds for severing all ties with Djakarta.

From an air capabilities standpoint, the acquisition of Soviet-type bomber aircraft by the Indonesian Air Force would be of no immediate significance, since it is estimated that it would require a minimum of eight months for Indonesian bomber crews to acquire a basic combat-ready status. At present the Indonesian Air Force has no jet bomber aircraft, 10 pilots with minimum capabilities in jet trainer aircraft, and only 10 qualified piston bomber pilots and 10 navigators. Also, there are only three airfields in Indonesia--all on the island of Java--capable of supporting jet light bomber aircraft.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Japan Alarmed by US Trade Restrictions

Ambassador MacArthur reports that frustration in Japan over US trade policy and its application to Japanese imports has become acute as a result of recent recommendations by the US Tariff Commission for increased rates on certain Japanese commodities. He warns that more restrictions can cause major damage to the US position in Japan, prompt many pro-American Japanese to re-examine critically the economic benefits derived from continued close association with the US, and assist those forces pressing for indiscriminate trade with Communist China and the USSR.

Japanese producers in other industries which depend upon the American market will regard the US decision as an indication of the treatment Japanese products generally will receive in the future.

Japan's trade deficit with the US was approximately $500,000,000 in 1956 and about $900,000,000 for the first ten months of 1957. These deficits have been offset to a considerable extent by dollar earnings from US forces in Japan, but these receipts are being reduced as US forces withdraw.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
Personal Guards Fire on President Diem's
Plane

The continuing danger of assassination of South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem was highlighted again on 18 January when his plane leaving Saigon airport was fired on by four army paratroopers assigned to his guard detail.

There are indications that this incident was instigated by non-Communist opponents of Diem. The Vietnamese Government has clamped a tight news blackout on the affair, and Saigon officials deny any knowledge of it.

This is the second known attempt on Diem's life in less than a year. Last February, a cabinet member was seriously wounded in an unsuccessful pistol attack on Diem by an alleged religious sect fanatic.

Although these attacks were apparently carried out by non-Communist elements, Viet Minh Communist complicity cannot be discounted in either case. Communist cadres, as well as the remnants of other anti-Diem political elements, are still active in many areas of South Vietnam. These forces constitute a threat to the President's life, especially during his exposure in frequent inspection trips to outlying areas. Despite the steady growth of the government's administrative effectiveness, Diem's sudden removal from leadership would seriously jeopardize South Vietnam's political stability and continued progress as a strong anti-Communist state.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

The Post-Election Situation in Guatemala

The 19 January elections in Guatemala have produced a potentially explosive situation. Unofficial returns give rightist Ydigoras a clear plurality, while centrist Cruz Salazar appears second, and leftist Mendez Montenegro trails.

The Congress, which meets on 24 January, is constitutionally charged with choosing between the two leading candidates when there is no majority vote. The controlling moderates in Congress are strongly opposed to Ydigoras and may choose Cruz Salazar instead if he is clearly in second place. The Congress may, on the other hand, simply dissolve, thus inviting a military coup. Some influential army officers intensely dislike Ydigoras.

Ydigoras announced on 20 January that he expects Congress to select him and implied that, if it does not, his supporters will resort to mob action. Earlier, he threatened "civil war" if robbed of victory. The Communist-infiltrated Revolutionary party also declared on 20 January that Ydigoras should be named by Congress.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 14]
Venezuelan General Strike Threatens Position
Of President Perez

The position of Venezuelan President Perez is threatened by a general strike which began in Caracas on 21 January. The chief sponsor of the strike appears to be the Junta Patriotica which is composed of various civilian elements opposing Perez.

Street rioting has resulted in 33 deaths, many injured, an estimated 1,000 arrests, and considerable property damage. The government has declared a state of siege and called out troops to check the violence which police and national guard have apparently been unable to control.

The protest movement has widespread support from a large number of prominent Venezuelans, the press, students and some worker groups. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_4]]Moreover, the organizers of the strike have apparently made contact with dissident military groups to win their co-operation.

Elements of varying size in all armed forces components may defect if the strike appears to be successful[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_4]].

Perez has moved decisively to bolster his authority since the revolt of 1-2 January and the cabinet shake-up dictated to him by the armed forces on 10 January. His control over the realigned military, however, remains uncertain. Division within the military and the rapid changes in top command positions and in the government have apparently confused all ranks of officers, who are probably watching the trend of the power struggle before fully committing their support.

If the strike and violence continue, the military now backing Perez may oust him in order to conciliate the mounting civilian opposition.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 15]
Soviet Commercial Negotiations in Latin America

A semiofficial $30,000,000 barter agreement between Colombia and the USSR, involving coffee from Colombia in exchange for agricultural machinery and possibly wheat from the USSR, appears to have reached the final stages of negotiation. In a press interview in Bogota, the two Soviet commercial agents negotiating the coffee contract stated that the USSR could sell Colombia industrial and precision machinery, chemicals, and primary materials on long-term credit at a rate of 2 or 3 percent.

Deteriorating economic conditions in Argentina and the depressed prices of primary products such as Colombian coffee and Chilean copper have led to a growing interest by these countries in the recently intensified Soviet bloc economic offensive in Latin America. Chile is considering the sale of 15,000 metric tons of copper wire worth $10,000,000 to the USSR. Argentina has just sent a trade mission to the bloc seeking electronic and petroleum industry equipment to be purchased with the approximately $30,000,000 trade surplus with the bloc. The Brazilian cabinet is considering its policy toward recent Soviet bloc overtures for increased trade. In Uruguay, the Soviet Embassy is attempting to promote a barter agreement involving Uruguayan meat in exchange for Soviet trucks and agricultural machinery.

22 Jan 58 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
[PAGE 16]
DISTRIBUTION

THE PRESIDENT
The Vice-President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense Mobilization
Operations Coordinating Board
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under-Secretary of State
The Counselor
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under-Secretary for Administration
Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander-in-Chief, Pacific

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 17]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 January 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Ambassador-designate to the United States Menshikov states he is personally convinced, as are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, and Bulganin, of the necessity for improvement in US-USSR relations. He has told Ambassador Thompson that this identity of views was apparently the reason for his appointment--a hint that one of Menshikov's primary assignments is to arrange high-level bilateral negotiations. (Page 1)

The USSR is now suggesting a nuclear-free zone throughout the Middle East to include specifically the Baghdad Pact area. The 21 January TASS statement is timed to influence any discussions on strengthening the northern-tier concept in the Baghdad conference starting Monday. (Page 2) (MAP)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_5]]Arrangements are being made for the training in Egypt of Indonesian pilots and technicians in the use of the jet aircraft which the Indonesians are now seeking from the bloc[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_5]]. (Page 3)

The Egyptian and Syrian governments probably will announce formally in the near future plans to open negotiations for Syrian-Egyptian union under a federal constitution. The target date for completion of a draft constitution is said to be August 1958, prior to Syria's scheduled parliamentary elections. Should serious negotiations be undertaken, they would be arduous because of widely different economic and political conditions in the two countries.

The large plurality won in Guatemala's 19 January election by rightist presidential candidate Ydigoras has presented the congress and the army with a dilemma. Congress, which is constitutionally charged with choosing between the two top runners, contains a strong anti-Ydigoras majority. If it refuses to name Ydigoras president after it convenes on 24 January, serious public disorders are likely. (Page 6)

The position of Venezuelan President Perez is threatened by a general strike which began in Caracas on 21 January. Street rioting has resulted in 33 deaths, many injured, and about 1,000 arrests. A state of siege has been declared and further violence may be expected. If the strike continues, the military now backing Perez may decide to oust him to check the mounting civilian opposition. (Page 7)

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_6]]Recent trade negotiations between the Soviet Union and several Latin American countries reflect increased Latin American interest in Soviet bloc trade[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_6]]. (Page 8)
