[PAGE 01]
20 February 1960

Copy No. C 67

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
20 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: The pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) has appealed to the Soviet and British cochairmen of the 1954 Geneva truce conference to intervene with Laotian authorities to ensure free elections in April. "US henchmen" in the Lao Government are accused of conspiring to elect a national assembly "completely in their hands." The NLHZ demands the release of Prince

i
[PAGE 05]
Souphannouvong and other imprisoned leaders so they can participate in the elections. The appeal seems aimed at generating international pressure on Laos to forestall rigged elections, or failing that, to build a case for an NLHZ refusal to participate in the elections and possibly for Communist insurgent operations.

Algeria: The rebels are expected shortly to name a new delegation to discuss a cease-fire with French authorities. Rebel spokesmen have repeatedly indicated their desire to talk with emissaries of De Gaulle, but have yet to accept his stipulation that talks be limited to discussion of a military cease-fire. Recently, through a widely publicized call for Arab volunteers, the rebels have attempted to strengthen their hand by appearing willing to continue the war indefinitely. They probably feel that a conciliatory posture, as attempted in Ferhat Abbas' 17 February appeal to European Algerians, is now required in order to maintain their support among Algerian Moslems, whose respect for De Gaulle has increased in the wake of the Algiers insurrection.

20 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
Afghanistan-Pakistan: Relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan are growing worse as Rawalpindi follows through on its decision to take a harder line with Kabul. Pakistan's ambassador in Kabul says he was "really rough" on Afghan Foreign Minister Naim during a 16 February meeting, warning him that Afghanistan must change its unfriendly policy regarding Pushtoonistan. Radio Pakistan on the same day declared, "No Afghan can lead a decent life as long as these rulers of Kabul control his destiny." Pakistan Foreign Minister Qadir, until now a moderating influence, has apparently become convinced that this new line will induce Kabul to alter its policy. The Afghans, who may believe the United States supports Pakistan's hardened attitude, appear to be looking for ways to hit back at the Pakistanis.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Che Guevara, probably the most strongly anti-American and pro-Communist leader in the Castro regime, will be replaced as head of the National Bank. Guevara is believed to have caused resentment among Castro followers by his open exercise of power in numerous sectors of the government.

Dominican Republic: A large public "homage" to Generalissimo Trujillo being organized by the regime for 21 February as a show of strength could, in the present climate of unrest, provoke violence. Dissidents, who include representatives of some of the most prominent Dominican families, are so embittered that they are becoming reckless. Arrests and police excesses continue and the economic situation is growing worse.
(Page 6)

20 Feb 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
Next 4 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 12]
III. THE WEST

Trujillo Regime Faces Continued Unrest

A large public "homage" to Dominican dictator Trujillo being organized by the regime for 21 February as a show of strength could, in the present climate of political unrest, provoke violence. Dissidents, who include representatives of some of the most prominent Dominican families, are embittered to the point of recklessness. Arrests and police brutality continue. The economic situation, still deteriorating, has added to the political unrest. Foreign Minister Herrera's hurried trip to the Vatican early this month apparently failed in its purpose of securing a reversal of the Dominican bishops' pastoral letter of 2 February calling on Dominican authorities to respect human rights.

Dominican officials appear anxious to ease the unrest, which has reached an intensity unprecedented in Trujillo's 30-year dictatorship, by a "gesture of magnanimity" toward some of the more prominent prisoners recently sentenced to 30-year terms for anti-Trujillo activity. However, few if any of the prisoners appear disposed to issue the expected laudatory declaration of gratitude to the "Benefactor."

20 Feb 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
TOP SECRET
