2. SHEPILOV REAFFIRMS SOVIET POLICY OF COEXISTENCE

Comment on:

Foreign Minister Shepilov's 12 February foreign policy report to the Supreme Soviet reaffirmed the general lines of Soviet policy laid down at the 20th Party Congress a year ago. It provided further evidence that the Soviet leaders do not want to revert to a cold war situation in their relations with the West and that they hope eventually to overcome the setbacks to their prestige and coexistence line incurred by the suppression of the Hungarian uprising.

Shepilov stressed that the "policy of peaceful coexistence" remains the "cornerstone of Soviet foreign policy" and that this is not merely an expedient or a political maneuver "as our enemies are trying to depict it". He also reaffirmed the 20th Party Congress doctrine that in present conditions "war is not fatalistically inevitable," claiming that the events in Hungary and the Middle East confirmed the correctness of this thesis. The Soviet foreign minister promised that the USSR would continue to display "the greatest self-control, patience, and persistence" and that it "will not fall for any provocations".

Shepilov drew a picture of a strong and united Socialist bloc standing firm and calm against the disruptive assaults of the imperialists. He said the most important factor in the strength of the Socialist camp is the friendship between "the brother nations"--the USSR and Communist China. Against this array of power and solidarity, said Shepilov, the "ruling circles" of the capitalist world have only one sensible course--"to finally give up all intentions of 'rolling back Communism' and to embark on the road of peaceful coexistence".

The Soviet government, according to Shepilov, believes it is "vitally necessary" to continue to seek solutions to two major problems--disarmament and collective security in Europe and Asia. However, he indicated no changes in current Soviet positions on any of the main East-West issues.

13 Feb 57    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 4
