Situation in the Congo

Gustave Duran, the chief UN representative there, knew on 19 February that the 15 opponents of Lumumba--including ten legislators and five soldiers--had been killed but that this information had not been transmitted to New York. UN spokesmen in the Congo have so far failed to provide public confirmation for the reports. On 23 February Dayal sent a plea to Stanleyville, urging that the "truth be made known."

Dayal, a high-ranking and capable Indian official who has the confidence of Hammarskjold and has been given an almost completely free rein in running the UN Congo operation, has displayed considerable anti-American bias and often appears to have worked to further the cause of Lumumba's supporters. He has occasionally intervened personally with the UN military command, often to try to forestall military moves by Mobutu. At the same time he apparently has suppressed information concerning movements by pro-Lumumba forces. He also seems to be attempting to undermine Joseph Ileo's efforts to form a broadly based government. Recently he severely criticized the United States at a gathering of newsmen and foreign officers, charging that American policy was responsible for the chaotic situation in the Congo.

Hammarskjold has repeatedly refused to remove Dayal, although Dayal is on extremely poor terms with the Congolese authorities in Leopoldville. However, his contract expires in three weeks, and Hammarskjold has indicated that it will not be renewed. Dayal himself reportedly has twice asked Nehru to recall him, but Nehru refused on the ground that the Indian "commitment" to the UN must be honored.

In Katanga, a standoff apparently exists between UN officials and members of Tshombe's government. Although Tshombe announced on 22 February that he had agreed with the UN not to undertake any troop movements, his associates seem to be reiterating their demands that UN recognition of Katanga's sovereignty is a prerequisite for the complete cooperation of the

24 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
