[PAGE 01]
24 January 1953
DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Purported text of Sino-Soviet agreement appears spurious
(page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tension increases sharply between Jordan and Israel (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Purported text of Sino-Soviet agreement appears spurious:

the purported text of a Sino-Soviet agreement
reached at the Moscow talks last autumn.

Some provisions of the alleged agreement
relate to matters publicly known. Others call for the disposition of
"all resources" of the Soviet Union and Communist China by an un-
specified "supreme organ," the formation of a "world peace revolu-
tionary volunteer army" of 3,000,000 men, the stationing of 5,000
Soviet aircraft in the China area, and the establishment of a Soviet
submarine patrol along the China coast.

Comment: Both the style and content of
this document indicate that it is spurious. It resembles many other
purported Sino-Soviet agreements received from intelligence fabri-
cators. Most of the provisions relating to unpublished agreements
are implausible.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tension increases sharply between Jordan and Israel:

The senior Israeli delegate to the
Mixed Armistice Commission has
charged that the deteriorating re-
lations between Jordan and Israel
are the result of deliberate Jordan-
ian policy. He warned that if Jordan
prevents Israeli convoys from going
to Mount Scopus in the Jerusalem area,

Israel might use force to ensure its access to this region, as
granted under the armistice agreement.

Meanwhile, the Jordanian member of
the Commission has informed the American Consul General in
Jerusalem that he will not sign another agreement with Israel
because Tel Aviv has broken all previous ones. He stated that
after 22 January, the termination date for the special May 1952
agreement, any Israeli soldier found crossing the demarcation
line would be shot.

Comment: A top UN official on the
Commission previously informed the Consul General that he
believed Israel was fomenting border incidents in order to lend
credence to its accusation that the stability of the Middle East
was threatened by the sale of Western arms, including jet planes,
to the Arab countries.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
