[PAGE 01]
24 January 1953
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. Purported text of Sino-Soviet agreement appears spurious
2. Communist China contracting for Burmese rubber (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Iran offers 50,000 tons of oil to Argentina (page 4).
4. Tension increases sharply between Jordan and Israel (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST
1. Purported text of Sino-Soviet agreement appears spurious:

the purported text of a Sino-Soviet agreement reached at the Moscow talks last autumn.

Some provisions of the alleged agreement relate to matters publicly known. Others call for the disposition of "all resources" of the Soviet Union and Communist China by an unspecified "supreme organ," the formation of a "world peace revolutionary volunteer army" of 3,000,000 men, the stationing of 5,000 Soviet aircraft in the China area, and the establishment of a Soviet submarine patrol along the China coast.

Comment: Both the style and content of this document indicate that it is spurious. It resembles many other purported Sino-Soviet agreements received from intelligence fabricators. Most of the provisions relating to unpublished agreements are implausible.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Communist China contracting for Burmese rubber:

Comment:
[PAGE 04]
There have been no recorded rubber shipments to Communist China from Burma or any other UN member since the UN embargo resolution was passed in May 1951, but the Indonesian Government is seriously considering approval of such trade. Sales by either country at this time would encourage abandonment of the embargo by other rubber producing areas.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Iran offers 50,000 tons of oil to Argentina:

Comment: Iran may be attempting to sell a token amount of oil as a bargaining factor in the current effort to settle the Anglo-Iranian dispute. Fulfillment of any agreement would depend on Argentina's ability to find transportation. A large portion of Argentina's tanker fleet is already occupied.

4. Tension increases sharply between Jordan and Israel:

The senior Israeli delegate to the Mixed Armistice Commission has charged that the deteriorating relations between Jordan and Israel are the result of deliberate Jordanian policy. He warned that if Jordan prevents Israeli convoys from going to Mount Scopus in the Jerusalem area,
[PAGE 05]
Israel might use force to ensure its access to this region, as granted under the armistice agreement.

Meanwhile, the Jordanian member of the Commission has informed the American Consul General in Jerusalem that he will not sign another agreement with Israel because Tel Aviv has broken all previous ones. He stated that after 22 January, the termination date for the special May 1952 agreement, any Israeli soldier found crossing the demarcation line would be shot.

Comment: A top UN official on the Commission previously informed the Consul General that he believed Israel was fomenting border incidents in order to lend credence to its accusation that the stability of the Middle East was threatened by the sale of Western arms, including jet planes, to the Arab countries.

5.
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
CORRECTION
