Nkrumah Exploiting South African Situation

Ghana's Prime Minister Nkrumah appears to be preparing new initiatives to increase pressure on the government of South Africa and to project himself as the foremost champion of black Africans in that country. On his return to Ghana last week from the recent Commonwealth prime ministers' conference, Nkrumah publicly berated the present South African Government for its "fascist" apartheid policy and its refusal to place the mandated territory of South-West Africa under UN trusteeship. He said he regarded that government as an "alien" one "temporarily" functioning on African soil and urged discussion by the growing bloc of independent African states of a total boycott of South Africa.

Nkrumah's blast almost certainly foreshadows a militant approach to South African issues on the part of his representatives to the second conference of independent African states scheduled for 14 to 25 June in Addis Ababa.

expected the conference to devote most of its time to the South-West African question, apartheid, and two other issues, these four as matters which now have reached "critical stages requiring decisions."

Meanwhile,

Nkrumah has recently been "working to form in Accra a government-in-exile" composed of political refugees and exiles from South Africa.

the idea was being opposed by spokesmen for the militant Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), one of the African political organizations suppressed as a result of the recent racial disorders in South Africa. The PAC's attitude was said to be based largely on its opposition to the multiracial character of the free government Nkrumah apparently has had in mind and to the movement's inevitable domination by Ghana. Despite this rebuff, Nkrumah may continue to explore the idea with other exiled South African elements. In April it was estimated that over 100 exiles were already in Ghana, and Nkrumah has subsequently made a major effort to bring others to Accra.

5 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
