[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

17 February 1956

Copy No. 103

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. STATE OF SIEGE IN PERU

3. BULGARIA PLANS TO REQUEST RESUMPTION OF
RELATIONS WITH US

4. COMMUNIST CHINA TO CELEBRATE PRODUCTION OF
FIRST MOTOR VEHICLE

5. VIET MINH PROPAGANDA THREATENS VIOLENCE ON
ELECTION DAY IN SOUTH VIETNAM

6. DEATH OF ITALIAN BUDGET MINISTER VANONI

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
[PAGE 04]
1. STATE OF SIEGE IN PERU

President Odria's declaration of a
nationwide 30-day state of siege re-
flects what is apparently serious
concern by the Peruvian regime over
the sudden uprising of the army garri-
son at Iquitos. Although a government spokesman has
stated that with the exception of Iquitos the country was
completely quiet, with the government in control, uncon-
firmed reports suggest that the movement may be spread-
ing.

The rebels' manifesto, demanding the
end of Odria's authoritarian regime and full guarantees for
the 3 June presidential elections, in effect reiterates the
demands made by the political opposition in recent months.
Antiregime sentiment among the Peruvian military as well
as the general populace has been developing as a result of
Odria's refusal to accede to these demands. Developments
in the past several months have all pointed to a well-directed
plan by Odria to ensure the continuation of his regime in power
by installing a hand-picked successor through rigged elections.

General Marcial Merino Pereira, who re-
portedly initiated the revolt, was a member of the military
junta which emerged from the 1948 Arequipa revolution, fol-
lowing which General Odria was elected head of state.
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 07]
3. BULGARIA PLANS TO REQUEST RESUMPTION OF
RELATIONS WITH US

The Bulgarian minister in Paris is
seeking an appointment with Ambas-
sador Dillon in order to make a
formal request for the reopening of
relations with the United States. He told the American
counselor that his government was interested in some
prior indication of how the demarche would be received.

When reminded that the mistreatment
of US legation personnel was an important reason for the
rupture of American-Bulgarian relations, the Bulgarian
minister said that "those days were past" and that he saw
no reason why American diplomats in Sofia would not now
be treated as well as any others, including representatives
of the USSR.

Comment
The Bulgarian request is the latest move
by a Soviet bloc country in support of
Moscow's efforts to improve relations of the bloc with the
United States.

The United States broke relations with
Bulgaria in February 1950 following Bulgarian charges
that the American minister in Sofia was involved in a plot
to overthrow the Bulgarian Communist regime. A few
months after Stalin's death, Premier Chervenkov publicly
expressed a wish to re-establish full normal relations be-
tween his country and the United States, Yugoslavia, and
Greece. Subsequently, Sofia took the initiative in restor-
ing normal relations with Yugoslavia and in undertaking
negotiations with Greece, but no direct approach was made
to the US until this month.

The French minister to Tirana recently
told American representatives in Paris that Albania, the
only other Satellite not represented in Washington, was ex-
ceedingly interested in resuming normal diplomatic relations
with the United States. Restrictions on the movement of
Western diplomatic personnel in Albania are considerably
greater than in Bulgaria.
[PAGE 08]
4. COMMUNIST CHINA TO CELEBRATE PRODUCTION
OF FIRST MOTOR VEHICLE

The Chinese Communists will have
produced their first motor vehicle
by August 1956 and intend to make
a "great show" of the event.
Peiping will send invitations to
persons in most countries of Southeast Asia.

Comment
Peiping radio has stated that China's
first motor vehicle factory, at Chang-
chun in Manchuria, will be producing vehicles by 1 October
1956, six months ahead of schedule. The plant is sched-
uled eventually to produce 30,000 Soviet-model four-ton
trucks per year.

Peiping could be expected to make a
major celebration of the plant's official opening, because
it will be one of the first large new machine building plants
built under the Communist regime. The construction site
at Changchun has been a showplace on official tours given
to impress foreign visitors with industrial progress in
Communist China.

Such displays may impress many Asians
with Peiping's propaganda line that China's rapid develop-
ment is possible because it is a Communist state that has
Soviet support. (Prepared jointly with ORR)
[PAGE 09]
5. VIET MINH PROPAGANDA THREATENS VIOLENCE
ON ELECTION DAY IN SOUTH VIETNAM

Hanoi radio on 10 February broad-
cast the strongest statement to date
in the Viet Minh's propaganda cam-
paign against the national assembly
elections scheduled for 4 March in
South Vietnam. The broadcast stated that "the Vietnam-
ese people who know how to act will not recognize the
faked elections" and will "transform them into a bloody
reply to the Americans and their lackeys." The broadcast
added that President Diem will undoubtedly win the elec-
tions as he did in the "referendum farce."

These are the first Viet Minh statements
strongly implying violence in connection with the 4 March
elections. The Viet Minh had previously condemned the
elections in more general terms and called for an election
boycott.

It now appears likely that the Viet Minh
will attempt to foment extensive disorders to embarrass
the Diem government by creating the impression of insta-
bility and widespread repression. Since the Viet Minh lacks
the capability to prevent the holding of the elections or to
force Diem out in the immediate future, such an effort would
probably be part of a long-term campaign to get a govern-
ment in the south that would deal with the Viet Minh.
[PAGE 10]
6. DEATH OF ITALIAN BUDGET MINISTER VANONI

The sudden death of Italian budget
minister Vanoni may revive the con-
flict on financial policies which nearly
caused the government's fall and re-
sulted in the resignation of Treasury Minister Gava late
in January. Gava resigned in protest against rising gov-
ernment expenditures and was replaced on an acting basis
by Vanoni, who favored an expansionist policy focusing on
the ten-year economic development plan which bears his
name.

The Vanoni plan, which seeks a heavy
reduction in unemployment, Italy's chief economic ill, has
been approved by the OEEC in principle and has captured
the imagination of the Italian public. It is widely considered
the Christian Democratic government's most effective polit-
ical weapon against the Communists, but the government has
been slow in working out its final formulation. Vanoni's death
will probably further impede government action on it, particu-
larly if he is succeeded by Gava, as may be the case.
[PAGE 11]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 16 February)

The small selective Israeli call-up of personnel
and vehicles reported on 15 February is continuing, but the
American army attaché in Tel Aviv believes that it does not
indicate an impending large-scale action. This call-up may
be connected with a late December statement by a high Israeli
officer that divisional maneuvers would be held in the Negev
in January or February.

The Egyptian military attaché in Damascus has
stated that Egypt believes the period from 1 March to 1 June
will be the most critical in Arab-Israeli relations, since up to
June Israel could mount an attack with some hope of early suc-
cess. From June on, however, Egypt will be too strong for
any attack. The attaché believes Prime Minister Nasr is rely-
ing to a large extent on the UN Security Council to force Israel
to make some concessions. If this can be done, he believes
there is a chance Nasr would openly advocate peace. The at-
taché also said Egypt's "new weapons" were now all in use.
Egyptian pilots are adapting well to the MIG's but are having
some trouble with the IL-28's. The attaché was not very en-
thusiastic about the Soviet T-34 medium tanks, but said the
JS-3 heavy tanks were able to knock out any Israeli tank.

The Syrian UN representative told American of-
ficials in New York on 15 February that his government was
unlikely to press for a Security Council meeting, since Israeli
prime minister Ben-Gurion had stated that plans to resume work
at Banat Yacov were "shelved."
