Laos

The apparently growing number of North Vietnamese involved on the enemy side is particularly discouraging to General Phoumi, according to American officials in Vientiane. American military personnel formerly stationed at Tha Thom describe the actions taken by the enemy forces during the six weeks preceding the town's capture on 31 March as "professional" and not of a type that could be executed by the average Pathet Lao. Three Soviet IL-14s on apparent air-drop missions in the Tha Thom area were seen by reliable observers on 31 March, and additional drops in the same general vicinity reportedly occurred on 30 March. So sudden and furious was the enemy action at Tha Thom that it appears that all the government's crew-served weapons, including two 105-mm. howitzers, were captured intact.

General Phoumi, whose moods alternate between extremes of confidence and depression, was especially pessimistic over the Kam Keut situation. When he discovered that this situation was not as critical as first imagined, he regained his cheerfulness for a few hours until news of the fall of Tha Thom plunged him again into despondency. He has since recovered some of his confidence and is speaking of an offensive in the Muong Kassy area.

Senior American officials in Vientiane believe that the leadership of both the Laotian Army and government is "terribly uncertain" and vulnerable to factors and forces over which the leaders feel they have little control. One such factor is the enemy's military potential, which General Phoumi feels is greater than his own at this time. A second crucial factor is US political, economic, and military support; if this appears to weaken or waver, a further loss of confidence can be expected, and with rapidity.

In his recent discussions with Admiral Felt, Phoumi revealed that he has a standing agreement with South Vietnam for a Vietnamese division to enter southern Laos as an intervention force in case he asks for assistance. He stated that he has not yet called for entry of this division since the situation does not warrant intervention.

4 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
