as a result of the current situation, a Southern Operational Zone was being formed.

Soviet propaganda has underscored Moscow's contention that the way is now open for a peaceful solution in Laos. President Kennedy's remarks on the 1 April Soviet reply to the British proposals on Laos have been widely circulated. Moscow radio carried the text of the President's statement and reported that it is carried in full in the 3 April issue of Pravda. Soviet broadcasts have also reported an article in the Peiping People's Daily of 1 April which called for an enlarged Geneva conference as the "only way" to solve the Laotian problem. Moscow, in broadcasting the remarks made by Chen Yi in Djakarta, omitted any reference to his threat to send Chinese troops to Laos. The Soviet broadcast quoted Chen Yi as saying that Peiping "will not remain indifferent in the event SEATO launches direct military intervention in Laos."

Terming the Soviet reply to the British note "practical and correct," Hanoi's official newspaper Nhan Dan on 3 April called for prompt convocation of an international conference. The conference also was endorsed by Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphannouvong and by the Xieng Khouang "government." Souphannouvong, in a 1 April statement, and Souvanna Phouma's Xieng Khouang "representative" Quinim Pholsena, in a statement of 2 April, both demanded withdrawal of "US, Thai, South Vietnamese, and Kuomintang military personnel." The emphasis on this withdrawal suggests it is a point which may be used to prolong any cease-fire negotiations such as the USSR said should be held between the "interested parties of Laos."

Soviet airlift operations into Laos continue to be scheduled. Apparently only one of the seven IL-14s scheduled for flights to Phong Saly on 2 April actually made the trip. The others returned to Hanoi shortly after take-off because of heavy fog. However, seven IL-14s were again scheduled for Phong Saly on 3 April. Also scheduled for 3 April were [redacted] from Hanoi to Xieng Khouang and [redacted].

4 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
