III. THE WEST

Situation in the Caribbean Area

Although Cuban leaders now appear to recognize the failure of the initial insurgent effort launched against the Dominican Republic from Cuba last month, they remain determined to overthrow the Trujillo dictatorship. There are persistent reports of preparations in Cuba for further rebel incursions into the Dominican Republic.

Fidel Castro is pressing Haitian exiles in Cuba to speed up their preparations to invade Haiti. Action in Haiti would be primarily a means of opening another front against Trujillo.

Cuba's two eastern provinces--those closest to the Dominican Republic--have been designated a zone of military operations. On 29 June the Cuban cabinet discussed a possible declaration of war against the Dominican Republic. Doubt as to Cuba's military preparedness, however, reportedly has led some cabinet ministers to oppose such action. Others probably question the wisdom of precipitate measures that would almost certainly lead to immediate OAS action and the subsequent revelation of Cuban direction of the Dominican insurrection and Cuban support for Nicaraguan rebels.

The Council of the OAS met in Washington in urgent session on 2 July, at Dominican request, and set a further meeting for 6 July. Venezuela, which is also supporting the anti-Trujillo effort, has informed a number of hemisphere governments that it would consider withdrawing from the OAS if that organization votes to investigate any Dominican charge of foreign intervention. Official sources in Havana told the press on 2 July that the Cuban Government would probably refuse to let a committee of OAS investigating officials visit Cuba.

Cuban leaders fear Dominican counteraction against Cuba, possibly by means of the force of Cuban exiles now in the Dominican Republic. The exiles are regularly using Dominican radio facilities to suggest that before long they will open a fighting front inside Cuba. However, the outbreak of guerrilla activity in Cuba's Pinar del Rio Province, which led Castro to send troops there on 1 July, is probably not Dominican inspired. This is an area where small farmers have bitterly protested Castro's agrarian reform law.
