Morocco Likely to Increase Pressure for Evacuation Of US Bases

Recent public statements attributed to Moroccan Premier Ibrahim just before or during his 15-27 June visit to the UAR appear to have committed his government more explicitly than heretofore to achieving early demonstrable progress toward the evacuation of the five American air bases in Morocco. An early acceleration of official pressure by the Moroccans--who seem to regard the US position as the key to securing also the complete evacuation of the 22,000 French and 10,500 Spanish forces still in Morocco--may be imminent.

According to the Egyptian press, Ibrahim said that all three countries with troops in Morocco have already agreed in principle to evacuate and that negotiations are under way to end all forms of "occupation." Actually, only the United States has given private assurances of eventual evacuation or engaged in recent negotiations on the subject. Subsequently, Ibrahim was quoted as telling a press conference held in Damascus on 25 June that he would appeal to "international bodies" if direct negotiations failed to achieve evacuation.

This step was also advocated publicly in Rabat on 23 June by Allal el-Fassi, leader of the antigovernment and more conservative faction of the divided Istiqlal party. In addition, El-Fassi called for active steps within Morocco to "evict" the bases if a UN appeal failed. Meanwhile, the small Communist element in Morocco has begun, through a new weekly publication, to contribute its bit toward stimulating popular demands for "direct-action" tactics.

In an audience with Ambassador Yost on 29 June, King Mohamed V again urged as "most important" an early public declaration by the United States recognizing the principle of evacuation. Such a statement, however, is vigorously opposed by France, which fears its possible effects on French hopes of retaining "indefinitely" certain air and naval installations in Morocco as well as the important Bizerte base in Tunisia.

4 July 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 3
