[PAGE 01]
19 August 1953
Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
INFORMATION

SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. ICFTU program to contact workers in Orbit countries seen as a major development (page 3).

SOVIET UNION
2.

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Iranian Tudeh reportedly alerts members for action (page 4).
5. Arab Legion preparing for Israeli attack in Jerusalem area (page 5).
6. Sultan of Morocco's forced abdication believed imminent (page 5).

****

[PAGE 03]
SECURITY INFO

GENERAL

1. ICFTU program to contact workers in Orbit countries seen as a major development:

American officials in West Berlin believe that the announced plan of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions to set up a permanent office in West Berlin and to establish contact with Satellite workers is "potentially of great significance." This program may result in coordinated planning such as the West Berlin unions were unable to provide during the 17 June riots in East Germany.

Furthermore, it may meet the need for an international approach to Orbit workers which is not too closely identified with American initiative. If factionalism can be avoided, the new ICFTU move could result in an underground free labor movement similar to that which developed during World War II.

Comment: Following the visit of a 10-man delegation to West Berlin last week, plans were announced for an ICFTU office in Berlin to administer funds intended to "assist" Orbit workers. Although initial plans called for attempts to organize only East German workers, West German initiative persuaded the delegates to expand the program to cover the Soviet Orbit in general. The new program is a follow-up to a resolution to aid East German workers adopted by the ICFTU congress in Stockholm last month.

SOVIET UNION
2.

[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA
3.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Tudeh reportedly alerts members for action:

the party told its members on 16 August:
"The time for talking has ended. The party must be prepared to act."

[PAGE 05]
Members were ordered to report all firearms available, and those with military experience were to inform the party of that fact. In addition, members were asked whether their houses faced on the streets.

Comment: These instructions probably indicate that the party was preparing for street fighting and acts of violence in support of Mossadeq if such proved necessary. It appears that the Tudeh has not yet made detailed plans for large-scale armed action of any kind, although more militancy may be expected.

5. Arab Legion preparing for Israeli attack in Jerusalem area:

The Arab Legion is reinforcing its troops on Mt. Scopus outside Jerusalem in anticipation of an early Israeli attack, according to the US embassy in Amman. The American charge suggests that the Jordanian "digging in" in plain view of the Israelis may be calculated to discourage an attack.

Comment: Jordanian defense preparations might be used by Israeli army authorities as an excuse for harassing and retaliatory actions. However, the Israeli government's awareness of inevitable Western opposition to any military action makes it unlikely that it would authorize an extensive attack against the Arabs.

6. Sultan of Morocco's forced abdication believed imminent:

The American consul in Rabat reports that the French government will probably attempt to force the sultan of Morocco to abdicate in the near future since he has reversed his previous approval of measures which would cede his power to the French.

[PAGE 06]
The consul states that the French Residency General prepared for such action by supporting El Glaoui in his moves of 13 and 15 August to strip the sultan of all temporal and religious powers.

Comment: It appears that the French government must now either disavow El Glaoui completely or risk upheaval in Morocco and the international censure that would follow the sultan's ouster.
