Delay in Formation of Government in Kenya Invites Violence

As a result of the legislative elections held in February and the later supplementary balloting by the Legislative Council for 12 "national" members—four from each of the African, European, and Asian groups—the two leading African nationalist parties have 35 seats in the 65-member legislature. The Kenya African National Union (KANU), with 20 seats the larger group, is led by its general secretary Mboya and its president Gichuru. The chief opposition group to KANU is the Kenya African Democratic Union (KADU), led by Ronald Ngala. It has 15 seats and represents minority tribal groups.

In neither party can the leaders control their legislative representatives; KANU is particularly faction-ridden. Mboya is challenged by American-educated Julius Kiano as well as by pro-leftist Oginga Odinga. Several KANU members are reported dissatisfied with their party's rigid stand on the Kenyatta issue and would probably break away and cooperate with KADU if the latter were successful in forming a government or if the governor made some face-saving compromise on Kenyatta.

KADU leaders appear more willing to cooperate with the governor in forming a government, provided the party does not lose its popular backing thereby and provided some KANU members participate. Ronald Ngala is visiting London in an effort to obtain some $60,000,000 in grant aid for the resettlement of Africans in the former White Highlands. At the recent All African People's Conference in Cairo he sought nationalist support by attacking the United States for colonialist policies.

KANU's attitude threatens to cause increasing difficulties for London. Mboya recently told American officials that he saw "no way out" unless Kenyatta were released. Even then, however, KANU would form a government only with the intention of demanding a new constitutional conference in the near future with Kenyatta in attendance. Mboya now demands Kenya's independence in 1961; neighboring Tanganyika is scheduled to become independent on 26 December 1961.

Britain remains opposed to releasing Kenyatta, although it has expressed its willingness to do so as soon as a Kenya

10 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
