SOVIET UNION

1. American Embassy comments on new Soviet Government:

The American Embassy in Moscow believes that the ministerial reorganizations under which Malenkov and Beria are the sources of real power probably were used to displace men who were not their close supporters. It points out that the key to stability doubtless lies in the ability of Malenkov and Beria to work together.

The Embassy notes that these leaders now speak in their own right and that Malenkov's latest speeches differ from the one he gave at the 19th Congress. However, his professions of friendly intentions toward the West do not go beyond recent Peace Congress protestations.

The Embassy sees no concrete evidence of a departure from Stalin's world plans.

Comment: There are indications of collaboration at present between Malenkov and Beria, but the former appears to be the dominant figure. Malenkov built his power, as did Stalin, on the control and placement of party personnel, while Beria's influence stems from the police apparatus, which, like other government organizations, is closely controlled by the party.

Malenkov's two speeches since Stalin's death set forth the same attitude toward "peace" and coexistence as his earlier addresses, from 1947 through the 19th Congress speech.

FAR EAST

2. New anti-Yoshida party in Japan reportedly off to poor start:

Ambassador Murphy reports that the initial efforts of the anti-Yoshida forces to form a new conservative political party under Hatoyama are less promising than the leaders had anticipated. Of the Liberal Party dissidents, only 37 have joined the new party, while 34 have chosen to remain in the Yoshida camp.

The new party's intention to sponsor only 70 candidates in the April election apparently indicates that the leaders hope to obtain sufficient Progressive and Liberal support for Hatoyama to form a coalition government.

Comment: Ambassador Murphy believes that the Yoshida Liberals and the Socialists may each win approximately 150 of the 466 seats in the House of Representatives. Should this occur, no workable coalition could be formed without the support of Shigemitsu's Progressive Party.
