[PAGE 01]
13 December 1951
Copy No. 47
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. British still uncertain about supporting Greece for Security Council seat (page 3).

USSR
2. Italian envoy believes Kremlin does not expect US attack (page 3).

FAR EAST
3. Report of "swept-wing aircraft" on Haeju airfield believed erroneous (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Churchill allays Adenauer's suspicions of Western "deal" with USSR (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. British still uncertain about supporting Greece for Security Council seat:

The British delegate to the UN General Assembly has been instructed to talk with the French and Commonwealth representatives with a view to voting for Greek representation on the UN Security Council if enough other votes can be won over to ensure Greece's election. Eden made it clear that the UK could not make any definite promises until after these talks.

The US delegation comments that it is clear that the French position is entirely dependent upon that of the British. It also advises that the election of Greece may be difficult even with British support.

Comment: Although Eden has been pressed repeatedly by US representatives within the past few days to support Greece, the British are holding to their traditional policy that the Western countries should avoid provoking Soviet charges that the UN is Western-dominated.

USSR

2. Italian envoy believes Kremlin does not expect US attack:

In the opinion of the Italian Ambassador to Moscow, Soviet officials do not actually expect an attack from the United States despite their charges of aggressive American intentions.

The Italian Ambassador concludes that the Kremlin's primary fear is that when Western "positions of strength" are established and German re-militarization completed the West will make demands upon the Soviet Union which it could not tolerate.

[PAGE 04]
The US Charge comments that the Italian Ambassador has had long experience in the USSR and that he had unusual opportunities to see high Soviet and Satellite officials recently preparatory to departure from his post.

FAR EAST

3. Report of "swept-wing aircraft" on Haeju airfield believed erroneous:

The US Fifth Air Force in Korea reports that the 7 December sighting by a US reconnaissance bomber crew of nine "swept-wing aircraft" on an airfield near Haeju, 75 miles from Seoul, has now been discredited. It is believed that formations of ice and snow on the ground may have given the air crew members a false impression. In addition, it is doubtful that jet aircraft could operate from this field.

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Churchill allays Adenauer's suspicions of Western "deal" with USSR:

Chancellor Adenauer, concerned at a possible Western "deal" with the USSR at German expense, was assured by Prime Minister Churchill during their recent meeting in London that, "even to avoid war," the UK would not make an agreement involving Germany without close consultation with the West German Government.

The Prime Minister said that he still wanted to establish "tolerable relations" with the USSR, but had come to the conclusion that the present Soviet Government "feared our friendship more than our enmity." Churchill agreed with Adenauer that West German integration into the European community must precede German unification.

Comment: This statement to Adenauer appreciably qualifies the remark made by Churchill to the French Ambassador in London shortly before the general election to the effect that German rearmament should be used as a lever in negotiations with the Russians.

[PAGE 07]
