[PAGE 01]
22 February 1952

Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Possible transshipment of Chilean copper to Orbit (page 3).
2.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Syria seeks closer military ties with the West (page 4).
4. Syrian Chief of Staff bargains on settlement of Arab refugees (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Possible transshipment of Chilean copper to Orbit:

Over 1,500 metric tons of Chilean copper scheduled for shipment or already en route to Europe are believed to be destined for Czechoslovakia, according to the American Embassy in Vienna. Another 180 metric tons are en route to a Belgian firm which was involved in the diversion of copper to the Soviet Orbit last fall.

Comment: Despite the US-Chilean copper agreement signed last May, in the last six months of 1951 almost 8,000 metric tons of copper manufactures, or 35 percent of the total exported, were shipped from Chile to questionable European consignees or to consignees not listed on export records for delivery to Europe.

A considerable amount of this copper probably has become available to the Soviet Orbit which has been offering twice the price set in the US-Chilean copper agreement. at least four of the firms listed as consignees dealt directly with Orbit countries last year.
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Syria seeks closer military ties with the West:

Syrian Chief of Staff Shishakli has suggested to the American Ambassador in Damascus that a visit by Syrian officers to the US zone in Germany, similar to one last autumn to the US zone in Germany, would help Syria in moving toward a "parallel policy" with Turkey. At the same time this would provide access to American equipment, methods and personnel. The American Ambassador believes that US cooperation in this matter would be instrumental in edging Syria toward a real contribution to Middle East security.

General Arnold, chief of the US military mission to Turkey, states that there are adequate facilities for training Syrian army personnel in Turkey. The American Ambassador in Ankara considers that such training would strengthen Turkish-Syrian ties as well as provide advantageous contact between the Syrians and American instructors. He also believes that expected French opposition should not deter the United States from attempting to stabilize the Syrian military establishment.

Comment: While Shishakli has been seeking arms from various countries in order to strengthen his own position, these reports add weight to previous indications that the powerful Army Chief of Staff is sympathetic to the West.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Syrian Chief of Staff bargains on settlement of Arab refugees:

Syrian Chief of Staff Shishakli, in an interview with the American Director of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, stated that he was prepared to resettle in Syria not only the Arab refugees who are there at present but also those whom the other Arab countries will not be able to absorb. He asserted, however, that he could only do this through the "execution of a general plan by virtue of which Syria would be integrated into the Western system." Shishakli warned that Syria's acceptance of the plan depended on "what you can offer us."

Comment: Some 850,000 Arabs who fled Palestine during the Arab-Israeli conflict are a major irritant and a serious relief problem in the Near East. Despite the opportunistic attitude of the Syrian Chief of Staff, his willingness to consider the matter injects a note of hope into the desperate refugee situation. While Shishakli probably does desire an overall settlement including Syrian alignment with the West, he probably will attempt to drive a hard bargain.

WESTERN EUROPE

5.
[PAGE 06]
