Peronistas May Attempt New Coup in Argentina

Peronista elements will probably make another attempt to oust Argentine President Frondizi. The effort to be better coordinated than the abortive Peronista attacks on 30 November. Peronista exiles in Uruguay are reported urging action soon. The Argentine armed forces are maintaining strong security measures, probably as a precaution against renewed plotting as well as to investigate the recent attacks. The armed forces are united in the opposition to any resurgence of Peronista power, although the army was reportedly embarrassed by the number of lower ranking officers implicated.

The pattern of the 30 November attacks--by small bands mainly of civilians led by retired officers--seemed to confirm strong suspicion that a widespread Peronista uprising had been planned. Attacks were made at three separate points in Salta and Santa Fe provinces and were accompanied by several bomb explosions in Buenos Aires on rail lines connecting important centers. At Tartagal, Salta--35 miles from the Bolivian border--attackers occupied the air field, the army command post, and other government offices.

The objective of the attacks on the infantry post in Rosario, Santa Fe, was to seize the armory and arm Peronista labor elements to coordinate with uprisings in Santa Fe, Mondoza, and Mar del Plata. The attacks at Rosario were led by retired General Miguel Iniguez, who led the abortive Peronista revolution in June 1956. His whereabouts at present is unknown.

The armed forces are making a thorough investigation to determine whether plans for a broader Peronista uprising may exist. This caution has been encouraged not only by the statements of Peronista leaders that their only path to freedom is through rebellion--though they formally deny connection with the recent action--but also by the continued discovery of caches of explosives in various parts of the country.

The military are also concerned about Castroism, which they consider a new form of Peronism, as well as the residence in Cuba of important Peronista leaders.
