Turkish Situation Tense

The new regime in Turkey is beginning to show indecision and anxiety as it tackles some of the more complex aspects of assuming civil authority. The National Unity Committee is finding it necessary to modify some of its earlier concepts of government operation. Col. Alatli, as official spokesman for the National Unity Committee, described it as being the replacement for the Grand National Assembly, with authority to change cabinet ministers and pass laws.

The atmosphere in Ankara is described by American military representatives as "quite tense," with troops armed with automatic weapons still posted at major buildings and patrolling the streets. There is apparently considerable dissatisfaction both within and outside the government. Some top military officers are becoming restive under the relatively junior group composing the National Unity Committee. The provisional government is also apparently under increasing pressure from vengeful elements of the populace, including young military and some Turkish intelligentsia. The pressure of public opinion may force judicial action against members of the former government before elections. It is also becoming more likely that the provisional government will find it difficult to relinquish the reins of government as early as it had planned. The military may be unwilling to return power to civilian authority.

The foreign minister informed Ambassador Warren on 3 June that the entire Turkish Army is needed to take the place of the National Police and Gendarmerie, which are being reorganized and screened, and to protect the country. He said the provisional government proposed for this reason that the Turkish brigade in Korea be returned this summer at the end of its tour and replaced with a token force of about 30 soldiers. Warren views this proposal as a symptom of the regime's insecurity and uneasiness.

The ambassador believes the general air of uneasiness indicates that the revolution has not developed as expected and that
