[PAGE 01]
27 March 1952

Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

State Department
review completed

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Comment on Asian attendance at Moscow Economic Conference:
(page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Egyptian Cabinet will not contest elections unless agreement with
Britain is reached (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Thirty percent of Yugoslav combat officers reported pro-Cominform
(page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Italian Foreign Office fears effects of the Trieste situation on the
government's stability (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Comment on Asian attendance at Moscow Economic Conference:

The interest which the Moscow Economic
Conference holds for underdeveloped countries is revealed

An influential Iranian delegation, which
includes the son-in-law of Mossadeq and an Iranian of avowedly pro-
American sympathies, reportedly will attend the conference with the
government's "blessing."

A Burmese delegation composed of both
extreme rightists and fellow-travelers is on its way to Moscow. Burma's
chief rice trader is a member. During a stop-over in Rangoon a spokes-
man referred to the "foreign trade" mission of the delegation.

The Indonesian Government rejected a sugges-
tion to subsidize seven delegates to the conference, and the Indonesian
participants will proceed to Moscow on an individual basis but with
governmental encouragement.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
[PAGES 05]
5. Egyptian Cabinet will not contest elections unless agreement with Britain is
reached:

Prime Minister Hilali's cabinet has decided
that, in the absence of an agreement with Britain,
it will not contest the 18 May Egyptian elections
and will resign immediately thereafter. The
Egyptian Foreign Minister has stated, however, that in the event of an
agreement, Hilali will stay in the election and attempt to secure popular
approval.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
Comment: There have been conflicting reports
on the intentions of the Hilali cabinet in the event the Anglo-Egyptian nego-
tiations should fail. The weight of evidence suggests that the government
will resign in this eventuality and let the Wafd return to power, although
British officials believe that this apparent readiness to resign may be a
form of blackmail.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Thirty percent of Yugoslav combat officers reported pro-Cominform:

Superiors that thirty percent of the officers
in combat units are pro-Cominform. The general reportedly recom-
mended that increased attention be given to political and ideological
orientation lectures for officers.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
Comment: Ten or twelve army colonels were
arrested in Macedonia last November for allegedly holding anti-Western
views. Moreover, a generally reliable source reported in February that
all Yugoslav army officers known to have Cominform sympathies were
being arrested and tried in complete secrecy.

Although pro-Soviet sentiment or opportunism
in the army may be greater than generally estimated, informed Western
observers believe that the Yugoslav Army on the whole is loyal to the
Tito regime.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Italian Foreign Office fears effects of the Trieste situation on the govern-
ment's stability:

A high official of the Italian Foreign Office
believes that the Trieste situation could have
"most grave consequences" for the West as
a whole and the Italian Government in particular.
He states that unless the British make "some gesture" in Trieste, the
De Gasperi government may have to make further anti-British moves in
order to avoid collapse.

Both the American and British Embassies in
Rome are convinced that Premier de Gasperi is facing a real parliamentary
crisis which will force him to take a strong stand in order to save his
government.

Comment: The Italians are undoubtedly using
the threat of a cabinet crisis to wring concessions from the Western powers
on Trieste. There is little likelihood of the government falling on the
Trieste issue, although its foreign policy may be subjected to a heated
parliamentary debate.

On the other hand, the rising tide of national-
ism throughout the country may threaten Italy's close collaboration with
the West in NATO, as well as in the Schuman Plan, which has not yet been
approved by the lower house.

- 7 -
