[PAGE 01]
8 August 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia-Netherlands: The recent arrival of Dutch naval units, including the aircraft carrier Karel Doorman, in West New Guinea--an area claimed by Indonesia--poses the possibility of an armed clash between Indonesian and Dutch forces. Indonesian public concern over the Dutch naval movements has been deliberately revived by the Djakarta government, and the likelihood of a highly emotional speech on the subject by President Sukarno on 17 August, Indonesian independence day, will further increase tension. The most critical period will be from 24 to 26 August when the Dutch ships are scheduled to be exercising north of New Guinea. Danger would appear to stem, not from deliberate provocation by either side, but from chance encounters between Indonesian air patrols and the Dutch ships, which could lead to an unpremeditated incident.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel and Raul Castro's week-end harangues expressed confidence and determination that neither the US, which Fidel called "militarily second best," nor the "lackey foreign ministers of the OAS," can stop the Cuban revolution and Latin America's "liberation from the Yankee colonial yoke." The Castros' uncompromising vehemence and the decree in effect ordering confiscation of most remaining American properties in Cuba came ten days before the opening of the OAS foreign ministers' meetings. They suggest that the Cuban leaders are convinced that US military intervention in Cuba, which they might even be trying to provoke, would enhance the prospects for Latin America's "revolution of liberation."

8 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*Republic of the Congo: President Kasavubu's Abako party, which is strong in the lower Congo region, has revived its pre-independence demands for "independence" within a loose confederation. This may be followed by similar declarations by other opponents of Congolese Premier Lumumba's concept of a highly centralized state. Encouraged by the success of Katanga Province's Premier Tshombe in inducing the UN to hold up its scheduled move of troops into Katanga, the anti-Lumumba elements appear to be attempting to join forces in an effort to undermine and possibly oust Lumumba. Tshombe's regime, meanwhile, is pushing the buildup of its new security force and still appears determined to resist any external force attempting to move into the province.

The UN Security Council session on the Congo crisis, which was scheduled for 7 August, was postponed until 8 August. Tunisia, Ceylon, Argentina, and Ecuador are reportedly working on a resolution designed both to meet Hammarskjold's request for new assurances to Tshombe of the UN's neutrality in the Congo's constitutional controversy and to gain the acceptance of African countries backing Lumumba. Ghana and Guinea have already offered military assistance to Lumumba independent of the UN effort.

8 Aug 60    DAILY BRIEF    iii
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
The Situation in the Congo

As the UN Security Council prepares to consider the Congo crisis again on 8 August, tension has once more risen sharply in the Congo amidst signs pointing toward an early showdown between Premier Lumumba--who is due back in Leopoldville on 8 August--and Congolese political elements opposed to him and his concept of a highly centralized Congo state. President Kasavubu's Abako party, which is dominant in the lower Congo region, revived publicly on 7 August its earlier demands for "independence" within a loosely-joined Congo confederation and adopted a formal expression of no confidence in Lumumba.

Kasavubu's failure to dissociate himself from his party's action suggests he may be behind it and perhaps also working with leaders of other parties to undermine and possibly oust Lumumba. Earlier Kasavubu and Lumumba were bitter rivals for the premiership of the first Congolese government. Premier Tshombe of separatist Katanga Province indicated on 7 August that he was engaged in "negotiations" with other confederation-minded Congolese leaders, including "some" from the lower Congo and also Equator Province.

Time appears to be working against Lumumba's opponents. There is increasing evidence that Lumumba is proceeding rapidly to reorganize the disintegrated Force Publique as part of his personal political organization. This presumably accounts in part for the lack of interest and evasiveness of Lumumba-appointed Congolese officers toward UN suggestions for the organization of a national army.

In Katanga, Tshombe is endeavouring to strengthen his bargaining position in any future negotiations with the central government and to counteract charges that he is merely a Belgian puppet. Tshombe declared on 6 August that his government did not intend to preserve an exclusive role for Belgians in the exploitation of Katanga's great mineral wealth and that Belgian troops would leave the province as soon as the new Katanga forces are strong enough to maintain security. Belgium, apparently encouraged by indications that wide Katanga support for Tshombe is facilitating a rapid buildup of the new force toward a 3,000- man goal, has offered to make

8 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 11]
an early announcement of its intention to withdraw Belgian troops from Katanga within a few weeks, according to a Belgian official in Elisabethville.

Tshombe's regime still appears determined to resist with all its resources any external force, whether or not under UN auspices, which might attempt to move into Katanga Province. Plans for resistance apparently include the harassment of "invaders" by tribesmen employing guerrilla tactics. A Belgian official who visited the province last week returned to Leopoldville with reports that tribes loyal to Tshombe were "preparing for war." Such reports are contributing to the great concern being displayed among the approximately 15,000 Belgian civilians remaining in the Katanga.

Moscow, which has become increasingly critical of the UN intervention, has denounced Hammarskjold for "capitulation to the colonialists." Izvestia on 6 August said the Security Council must call for an immediate withdrawal of Belgian troops from Katanga and an end to "attempts to tear this province from the Congo Republic."

In a statement of 5 August terming the Congo situation as "absolutely intolerable," the Soviet Government charged Belgium, supported by its NATO allies, with defying the United Nations. While the statement carefully avoided committing the USSR to any unilateral action, it attempted to sustain the impression that Communist bloc countries stand ready to send forces if the present UN contingents are unable to enforce the Security Council's resolutions. Soviet leaders apparently hope that their implied threats of unilateral action will increase pressure for an early withdrawal of Belgian forces, thus enabling the USSR subsequently to claim credit for having protected Congolese independence and unity.

8 Aug 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
