[PAGE 01]
8 August 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]
The Daily Brief of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN is
produced by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation
with representatives of departments and agencies of the United
States Intelligence Board. Back-up material is produced by CIA
with as much consultation with other departments and agencies as
is practicable. When, because of the time factor, consultation with
the department or agency of primary concern is not practicable,
the brief will be produced by CIA and marked with an asterisk.
Intelligence in this publication is based on all sources, including

Interpretations of intelligence information in this publication rep-
resent immediate and preliminary views which are subject to modi-
fication in the light of further information and more complete
analysis.

Certain intelligence items in this publication may be designated
specifically for no further dissemination. Other intelligence items
may be disseminated further, but only on a need-to-know basis.

WARNING

This document contains classified information affecting the national
security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage
laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794, and 798. The law prohibits
its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to
an unauthorized persons, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial
to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any
foreign government to the detriment of the United States.
[PAGE 03]
8 AUGUST 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR to supply Finland with additional military materiel under new agreement reached last month.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Indonesia seeking more military equipment from USSR.
Arrival of Dutch naval ships in West New Guinea poses possibility of clashes with Indonesians.

III. THE WEST
Comment on Fidel and Raul Castro's anti-US harangues.
Adenauer fearful of Moscow-instigated Berlin crisis in coming months; urges frequent contact and firm front among German, French, and British leaders.

LATE ITEM
The Congo Situation.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
8 August 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Finland: Under a new agreement reached in Mos-
cow late last month, the Soviet Union will deliver to Finland
a second IL-28 jet bomber, seven helicopters, 31 additional
T-54 tanks, and more than 20,000 rifles and machine guns,
presumably early next year. During the negotiations, the
USSR also offered to supply jet fighters. The Finns were more
interested in acquiring antiaircraft missiles, but the Russians
refused to discuss the subject. The Finns, in recent years,
have been reluctant to accept arms from the USSR. A shortage
of foreign exchange and Finland's concern that it must retain
Soviet good will have limited arms purchases from the West
and have made the Finnish Government more willing to take
Soviet equipment. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

USSR-Indonesia: Khrushchev assured Indonesian First
Minister Djuanda, during his visit to Moscow last month, that
additional military equipment which is "essential and urgent"
could be supplied by the USSR. During Djuanda's visit, a new
request for aid to the Indonesian Air Force was presented to
Soviet defense officials. About 225 million dollars' worth of
Communist bloc military equipment has been delivered since 1958.
Indonesia is also exploring Moscow's offer of substantial aid to the
Indonesian Navy which was made during Khrushchev's visit to
Indonesia in February. (Page 2)
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia-Netherlands: The recent arrival of Dutch naval
units, including the aircraft carrier Karel Doorman, in West
New Guinea--an area claimed by Indonesia--poses the possibil-
ity of an armed clash between Indonesian and Dutch forces. In-
donesian public concern over the Dutch naval movements has
been deliberately revived by the Djakarta government, and the
likelihood of a highly emotional speech on the subject by Pres-
ident Sukarno on 17 August, Indonesian independence day, will
further increase tension. The most critical period will be from
24 to 26 August when the Dutch ships are scheduled to be exercis-
ing north of New Guinea. Danger would appear to stem, not from
deliberate provocation by either side, but from chance encounters
between Indonesian air patrols and the Dutch ships, which could
lead to an unpremeditated incident.

III. THE WEST

Cuba: Fidel and Raul Castro's week-end harangues expressed
confidence and determination that neither the US, which Fidel
called "militarily second best," nor the "lackey foreign ministers
of the OAS," can stop the Cuban revolution and Latin America's
"liberation from the Yankee colonial yoke." The Castros' uncom-
promising vehemence and the decree in effect ordering confisca-
tion of most remaining American properties in Cuba came ten days
before the opening of the OAS foreign ministers' meetings. They
suggest that the Cuban leaders are convinced that US military inter-
vention in Cuba, which they might even be trying to provoke, would
enhance the prospects for Latin America's "revolution of [[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]libera-
tion."

Germany-UK-France: Adenauer, increasingly fearful that
Khrushchev may take advantage of the US election campaign to pre-
cipitate a crisis over Berlin and Germany, wants the top European
leaders to maintain frequent contact and a firm front during this
period. He apparently stressed these views to De Gaulle in Paris
on 29 July, and will probably do the same in his talks in Bonn with
Macmillan on 10 August. Direct consultations among the three
leaders are expected frequently in coming months[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]. (Page 3)
[PAGE 06]
LATE ITEM

*Republic of the Congo: President Kasavubu's Abako party,
which is strong in the lower Congo region, has revived its pre-
independence demands for "independence" within a loose con-
federation. This may be followed by similar declarations by
other opponents of Congolese Premier Lumumba's concept of a
highly centralized state. Encouraged by the success of Katanga
Province's Premier Tshombé in inducing the UN to hold up its
scheduled move of troops into Katanga, the anti-Lumumba ele-
ments appear to be attempting to join forces in an effort to under-
mine and possibly oust Lumumba. Tshombé's regime, mean-
while, is pushing the buildup of its new security force and still
appears determined to resist any external force attempting to
move into the province.

The UN Security Council session on the Congo crisis, which was
scheduled for 7 August, was postponed until 8 August.
Tunisia, Ceylon, Argentina, and Ecuador are reportedly work-
ing on a resolution designed both to meet Hammarskjold's re-
quest for new assurances to Tshombé of the UN's neutrality in
the Congo's constitutional controversy and to gain the acceptance
of African countries backing Lumumba. Ghana and Guinea have
already offered military assistance to Lumumba independent of
the UN effort. (Page 4)
[PAGE 07]
New Soviet-Finnish Arms Agreement

Moscow's persistence in offering military aid, which is
intended to tighten Finnish ties with the USSR, has again re-
sulted in a decision by Helsinki to accept Soviet arms. Under
a new agreement, concluded in Moscow in late July, the Soviet
Union will deliver to Finland a second IL-28 twin-jet bomber,
seven helicopters, 31 additional T-54 medium tanks, 21,000
automatic rifles, and 1,000 machine guns.

Soviet officials reportedly also offered to provide MIG-17
or MIG-19 jet fighters, but the Finns apparently expressed a
preference for antiaircraft guided missiles. Moscow, however,
refused to discuss missiles during the negotiations. Neverthe-
less, Finnish defense officials intend to renew their request at
a later date.

The new arms purchases, which may eventually amount to
$25,000,000, are to be considered part of the Soviet $125,000,000
long-term credit extended to Finland last year. Lack of funds to
meet the requirements of the armed forces may have prompted
Helsinki to draw on its credit to make the additional purchases
from the Soviet Union.

In 1959, Finland bought one IL-28 bomber--an obsolete aircraft
for target-towing purposes--12 T-54 tanks, and various other mil-
itary equipment in a token purchase from the USSR.
[PAGE 08]
Possible New Soviet Arms Aid to Indonesia

Soviet Premier Khrushchev has assured Indonesian First
Minister Djuanda that additional Soviet arms and equipment
considered "essential and urgent" for Djakarta's defense needs
could be supplied. Although the Indonesians were told that Khru-
shchev was too busy to discuss military requirements in detail
during Djuanda's July visit to Moscow, the Indonesian Air Force
presented a new request for materiel to senior Soviet defense of-
ficials. Apparently the Soviet officials indicated that the request
would be granted, but final approval would have to be given by
Khrushchev. There is, however, no precise information as to
the nature of the Indonesian request.

Indonesia is also exploring Khrushchev's offer of last Febru-
ary to provide substantial new aid to the Indonesian Navy. The
USSR has indicated a willingness to supply a wide variety of naval
vessels--including a cruiser and four submarines--as well as
arms and equipment suitable for amphibious operations. In 1958,
the Indonesian Navy purchased submarines, destroyers, and other
vessels from the Communist bloc.

The Indonesian Air Force, which made large purchases of bloc
aircraft--including MIG-17 jet fighters and IL-28 jet bombers--
in 1958 and 1959 as a part of the 225 million dollars of military
hardware supplied by the bloc, has in recent months been arrang-
ing for additional bloc training for its personnel. Contracts prob-
ably were concluded recently with Poland providing for radar train-
ing both in Poland and in Indonesia. In addition, new flight training
may have been arranged for with Czechoslovakia now that the orig-
inal air-training courses have been completed.
[PAGE 09]
Adenauer Seeks Common European Front Against Khrushchev

Talks in Bonn on 10 August between Prime Minister Mac-
millan and Chancellor Adenauer are likely to center around
Adenauer's fear that Khrushchev may precipitate a crisis over
Berlin or Germany prior to the inauguration of the new US Pres-
ident. Adenauer apparently discussed this fear with President
de Gaulle on 29 July at Rambouillet outside Paris. Adenauer may
urge more frequent meetings in the coming months among the three
leaders in an effort to present a position of Western firmness and
thereby prevent any miscalculation by Khrushchev.

Adenauer and De Gaulle also agreed on the general need for a
strengthening and "updating" of NATO. Adenauer nevertheless
found De Gaulle "more adamant than ever" on his refusal to inte-
grate French forces in NATO or permit the storage of US atomic
weapons on French soil. De Gaulle renewed his suggestion to create
a NATO political stand-
ing group in which the French member would be the spokesman for
the six Common Market countries.

Reports
are conflicting, particularly respecting the proposed reorganiza-
tion of European institutions. Adenauer has minimized the extent
to which this was discussed, and Ambassador Dowling in Bonn has
gained the impression that the Chancellor now wishes to proceed
more slowly with concrete steps toward European integration, pos-
sibly out of concern over the strong British reaction against pro-
posals to accelerate integration.
stress this aspect of the talks, and claim that De Gaulle and
Adenauer are agreed on further steps to strengthen political coopera-
tion among the Common Market countries.
[PAGE 10]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]LATE ITEM[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]

The Situation in the Congo

As the UN Security Council prepares to consider the Congo
crisis again on 8 August, tension has once more risen sharply
in the Congo amidst signs pointing toward an early showdown
between Premier Lumumba--who is due back in Leopoldville
on 8 August--and Congolese political elements opposed to him
and his concept of a highly centralized Congo state. President
Kasavubu's Abako party, which is dominant in the lower Congo
region, revived publicly on 7 August its earlier demands for
"independence" within a loosely-joined Congo confederation
and adopted a formal expression of no confidence in Lumumba.

Kasavubu's failure to dissociate himself from his party's
action suggests he may be behind it and perhaps also working
with leaders of other parties to undermine and possibly oust
Lumumba. Earlier Kasavubu and Lumumba were bitter rivals
for the premiership of the first Congolese government. Premier
Tshombé of separatist Katanga Province indicated on 7 August
that he was engaged in "negotiations" with other confederation-
minded Congolese leaders, including "some" from the lower Congo
and also Equator Province.

Time appears to be working against Lumumba's opponents.
There is increasing evidence that Lumumba is proceeding rapid-
ly to reorganize the disintegrated Force Publique as part of his
personal political organization. This presumably accounts in part
for the lack of interest and evasiveness of Lumumba-
appointed Congolese officers toward UN suggestions for the
organization of a national army.

In Katanga, Tshombé is endeavoring to strengthen his bargain-
ing position in any future negotiations with the central government
and to counteract charges that he is merely a Belgian puppet.
Tshombé declared on 6 August that his government did not intend
to preserve an exclusive role for Belgians in the exploitation of
Katanga's great mineral wealth and that Belgian troops would leave
the province as soon as the new Katanga forces are strong enough
to maintain security. Belgium, apparently encouraged by indications
that wide Katangan support for Tshombé is facilitating a rapid build-
up of the new force toward a 3,000-man goal, has offered to make
[PAGE 11]
an early announcement of its intention to withdraw Belgian troops
from Katanga within a few weeks, according to a Belgian official
in Elisabethville.

Tshombé's regime still appears determined to resist with
all its resources any external force, whether or not under UN
auspices, which might attempt to move into Katanga Province.
Plans for resistance apparently include the harassment of
"invaders" by tribesmen employing guerrilla tactics. A Belgian
official who visited the province last week returned to Leopoldville
with reports that tribes loyal to Tshombé were "preparing for
war." Such reports are contributing to the great concern being
displayed among the approximately 15,000 Belgian civilians re-
maining in the Katanga.

Moscow, which has become increasingly critical of the UN
intervention, has denounced Hammarskjold for "capitulation to
the colonialists." Izvestia on 6 August said the Security Council
must call for an immediate withdrawal of Belgian troops from
Katanga and an end to "attempts to tear this province from the
Congo Republic."

In a statement of 5 August terming the Congo situation as
"absolutely intolerable," the Soviet Government charged
Belgium, supported by its NATO allies, with defying the United
Nations. While the statement carefully avoided committing the
USSR to any unilateral action, it attempted to sustain the im-
pression that Communist bloc countries stand ready to send
forces if the present UN contingents are unable to enforce the
Security Council's resolutions. Soviet leaders apparently hope
that their implied threats of unilateral action will increase
pressure for an early withdrawal of Belgian forces, thus en-
abling the USSR subsequently to claim credit for having protected
Congolese independence and unity.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
