10. Saar issue threatens Adenauer Government:

The French appointment of an ambassador to the Saar has seriously undermined Chancellor Adenauer's political position. Top German Foreign Office spokesman state that pressure on Adenauer from all parliamentary factions compelled him to schedule for 7 February the Bundestag debate on rearmament which he had previously postponed.

Unless Adenauer can obtain some prior French action to calm the "bittered" parliamentary atmosphere, the government will be defeated on the European Defense Community. This would force either abandonment of German integration into Western defense or resignation of the government.

German diplomats feel that a crisis might be averted if France were to announce "free" elections in the Saar and were also to declare that the status quo in the Saar had not been altered by recent French action.

The US High Commissioner comments that "I am for the first time really worried."

Comment: The statements of the German spokesmen probably represent a move by Adenauer to force the Allies to intervene in the French-German controversy. Under the present circumstances it is doubtful that Adenauer will go through with the debate as scheduled since he risks sure defeat if he does so, whereas he would meet only continued pressure if he delayed the discussion.

11. French Communists propagandize for east-west trade:

The American Embassy in Paris believes that a Communist motion in the National Assembly for the establishment of normal east-west commercial relations "necessary for the prosperity of France" is obviously designed to whip up enthusiasm for the Moscow Economic Conference in April, as well as to build up sentiment favorable to the current French-Soviet trade negotiations.

This "cleverly keyed" campaign is having some effect, as indicated by the passage of east-west trade resolutions in several non-Communist municipal councils.

Comment: This phase of the Communist propaganda campaign is well timed to exploit the growing opposition in Western Europe to American demands for tighter east-west trade controls. The Italian Communists have also opened a press campaign supporting the Economic Conference, seeking to show that US pressure against trade with the Satellites hurts the economies of Western European countries.

French manufacturers are particularly vulnerable to the temptations of trade with the Soviet Orbit at this time when certain French exports are declining and the spectre of currency devaluation looms large.
