GENERAL

1. Schuman analyzes Soviet strategy regarding Germany:

On 26 February French Foreign Minister Schuman expressed the view that the purpose of present Soviet strategy with regard to Germany is to restore the quadripartite arrangements which the USSR abandoned in 1948. If this could be accomplished, the USSR could retain control of its zone and also prevent the integration of Western Germany into Western Europe. Schuman believes that the USSR cannot agree to a peace treaty and the withdrawal of occupation forces (which would free East Germany from Soviet control), and that it is turning, therefore, to the formula of a provisional government for a reunited Germany, presented as the first step toward a peace treaty. Once a provisional government is established and plans for German participation in NATO abandoned, the peace treaty could be indefinitely delayed. Since this would put the Soviet Government in a position to assert quadripartite control over the German government, it could then accept even the Western requirement for free elections. Schuman concludes, therefore, that the German question cannot be considered separately from other European problems and that French policy must not abandon its emphasis on the continued participation in a suitable European framework of any German government resulting from free elections. Schuman noted that "we cannot go back to formulas of quadripartite control at a time when we are progressively giving up tripartite control."

Comment: The first point of a Council of Foreign Ministers agenda proposed by Soviet Deputy Gromyko called for discussion of "fulfillment by the four powers of the Potsdam Agreement regarding the demilitarization of Germany and prohibition of the remilitarization of Germany." If the Potsdam Agreement were utilized as a basis for regulating German military affairs, it would imply in itself at least a partial restoration of quadripartite controls, a situation of greater advantage to the Soviet Union than to the Western powers.
