Lumumba Named to Form Congo Government

Brussels' action in asking National Congo movement leader Patrice Lumumba to attempt to form a government appears unlikely to halt political instability in the period prior to the colony's independence on 30 June. Although Lumumba claims to have the support of a majority of the 137-seat legislature, groups opposing him are numerous and vocal.

The choice of Lumumba appears to have been dictated by reasons of expediency. Resident Congo Minister Van Der Meersch indicated to American officials in early June that he believed it safer to give Lumumba the premiership than to turn to a weakly joined coalition of moderates open to the charge of being Belgian puppets. Although Lumumba's remarks since being invited to form a government have been conciliatory in tone, Belgian officials probably hope that his government, if actually formed, will ultimately give way to a coalition of moderates.

In any case, the investiture of Lumumba--in combination with partisan maneuvering for control of various provincial assemblies--could increase secessionist sentiment in the Congo. In contrast to Lumumba's espousal of a strong central government, the influential Abako party in Leopoldville Province has petitioned King Baudouin to permit it to form a new semiautonomous province in the Leopoldville area. The Abako move appears to have been prompted in part by chagrin that a rival party gained a slim majority in the present provincial assembly.

In Katanga Province, there is increasing sentiment for a dissolution of all ties with the Congo. A boycott of the Katanga assembly by the minority Balubakat party has kept attendance below the two-thirds quorum necessary before the majority Conakat party can organize the assembly. Subsequently, Conakat spokesmen have threatened action ranging from an appeal to the UN to the formation of a separate government if the requirement for a two-thirds quorum is not amended by the Belgians. Belgian authorities, taking cognizance of rumors of separatist moves, declared a state of emergency in Katanga on 14 June.

16 June 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
