[PAGE 01]
4 July 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
4 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet fighter aircraft scrambled against
US RB-47 reconnaissance aircraft in
Barents Sea, but no evidence aircraft
was downed by hostile action.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Laos--Recent escape of Prince Souphan-
nouvong and other NLHS party leaders
from prison prompted by fear of impend-
ing "liquidation" by government. (TOP
SECRET DAUNT ISHTAR)
Cambodia--Reports persist of pending
arms deal with Czechoslovakia.

III. THE WEST
Venezuela wants OAS to convene foreign
ministers’ meeting not later than 15 July
to take action against Dominican Repub-
lic.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
4 July 1960
DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: The US RB-47 which failed to return from a
routine reconnaissance flight over the Barents Sea on
1 July is believed down in an area approximately midway
between the Kola Peninsula and Novaya Zemlya.

that the US aircraft did not approach closer than 30 nau-
tical miles to Soviet territory. At least six fighter air-
craft were scrambled against the RB-47 mission in the
general area during the last hour of the flight, but there is
no conclusive evidence that an intercept was accomplished.
Two fighters from a Kola Peninsula base were vectored in
what appeared to be an identification pass against the US air-
craft.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos:
the escape of Prince Souphannouvong and 15 other lead-
ers of the pro-Communist Neo Lao Hak Sat (NLHS) party
from a Vientiane prison last May was prompted by the pris-
oners’ fear of impending "liquidation" by the government, and
was coordinated with the Pathet Lao central headquarters.
The prisoners were convinced that the triumph of the mili-
tantly anti-Communist Committee for Defense of National
Interests (CDNI) in the late April national elections fore-
shadowed their early prosecution and the suppression of all
pro-Communist elements in Laos. Communist propaganda
continues to place heavy emphasis on the "dangerous anti-
popular" nature of the Somsanith government in Vientiane.
[PAGE 05]
Cambodia: Recent statements by Chief of State Sihanouk
indicate he does not contemplate requesting arms and air-
craft from the Chinese Communist in the immediate future
unless he is provoked by sudden inimical acts by South Viet-
nam or Thailand. Reports persist, however, of a pending
arms deal with Czechoslovakia, where a Cambodian mission
headed by Deputy Premier Tioulong now is visiting. Sihanouk
may have in mind a stand-by arrangement with Czechoslovakia
or may be planning to use such arms to outfit Cambodian irregu-
lar forces, pending American reaction to Cambodia's request
for stepped-up aid to the Cambodian regular forces.

III. THE WEST

Caribbean: Venezuelan Foreign Minister Arcaya hopes
that the meeting of the Council of the Organization of Amer-
ican States, which Venezuela has requested for 6 July, will
convene a meeting of foreign ministers not later than 15 July
to take action against the Dominican Republic. Venezuela holds
the Trujillo regime responsible for the 24 June attempt to as-
sassinate President Betancourt, and Arcaya has told the Amer-
ican ambassador that if the OAS does not act firmly his govern-
ment will be unable to restrain its people from direct action
against the Trujillo regime. Colombian President Lleras Camargo
is also intent on OAS action against Trujillo and has
told the American ambassador in Bogota that, if action is taken
first against Trujillo, he will then help persuade other Latin
American governments to take quick action against Fidel Castro.
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]Betancourt plans to
take military action to overthrow the Trujillo regime shortly
after the Venezuelan case has been presented to the OAS for-
eign ministers. Betancourt has reportedly designated ex-Pres-
ident Figueres of Costa Rica to organize an anti-Communist and
anti-Castro junta for the Dominican Republic following Trujillo's
ouster[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]].
[PAGE 06]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 07]
