[PAGE 01]
10 September 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
10 September 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev visit:
at the Eisenhower-Khrushchev discussions "agree- ment" probably could be reached on cultural and economic ex- changes, and "progress" could be made on disarmament and the control of nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev wants to be remembered as the man who was able to raise the USSR's standard of living and bring about peace and prosperity. He stated that an agreement on economic ex- changes and credit in an early stage of Khrushchev's visit would facilitate "political concessions" later. In referring to Peiping as "definitely unhappy" about the Eisenhower-Khrushchev meet- ings, provided a further indication that the Chinese are concerned over the effect which the visits might have on Communist China's international objectives.)
(Page 1)

USSR: (In his interview on 4 September with British Labor party leaders Hugh Gaitskell and Aneurin Bevan, Khrushchev maintained his tough line on Berlin and repeated his threat to conclude a separate peace treaty with East Germany at some un- defined future date. Bevan gained the impression that, despite this firm stand, there is some possibility of an acceptable ar- rangement on these issues. In an apparent effort to encourage the Labor party leaders to press their proposals for disengage- ment in Europe, Khrushchev said that in exchange for a total American withdrawal from Europe, the USSR would withdraw from Central and Eastern Europe. He ruled out a mutual with- drawal from Germany alone, however, as unacceptable on grounds of prestige.)

[PAGE 04]
Communist China - India: In an 8 September letter to Nehru, Communist China's Premier Chou En-lai made a dis- play of willingness to discuss Sino-Indian border questions but stanchly reasserted Chinese claims to disputed territory. Stating Peiping "has consistently held" that both sides should seek a permanent settlement, Chou suggested, as a "provi- sional measure," that the "status quo" existing before the Tibetan revolt be maintained. He denied, however, the valid- ity of Indian territorial claims and charged that Indian troops were guilty of "armed attacks" on Chinese frontier outposts. In urging Indian troops be pulled back from areas on the McMahon line where they were sent last spring, Chou appar- ently was trying to shift to Nehru the responsibility for easing the current situation. Nehru--firmly committed to the McMahon line--will refuse to accept Peiping's territorial claims and to withdraw troops from established Indian posts, but probably will agree to diplomatic discussions.
*In a move to soft-pedal the dispute, Moscow issued a TASS statement on 9 September stressing the USSR's friendly relations with both India and Communist China and carefully refraining from assigning blame to either party. The statement said "Soviet leading quarters" are confident that the two governments will reach a peaceful settlement based on mutual interests and "traditional friendship."

Watch Committee conclusion--Taiwan Strait: Available in- formation on air, ground and naval activities does not indicate that a major military undertaking by the Communists is in pre- paration for the immediate future. However, the Chinese Commu- nists retain the capability to initiate military action in this area with little or no warning.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

[PAGE 05]
Watch Committee conclusion--Laos: (The dissidents, with probable North Vietnamese assistance, continue to have the objective of establishing themselves in a strong position, par- ticularly in the northern provinces, which they could use as the basis for political negotiation or for the expansion of mil- itary operations to include the greater portion, if not all, of the country, should government resistance weaken.)

Singapore: (British members of the Singapore Internal Security Council, who feel they have no alternative without sus- pending the constitution, have tentatively agreed to vote with the Singapore delegation at the council's 17 September meeting in favor of releasing from jail about forty left-wing extremists of the ruling People's Action party of Singapore. The Malayan Gov- ernment fears their release but reportedly will go along with a British decision. The release would enhance the prestige of the extremists' pro-Communist leader, Lim Chin Siong, and add a well-trained group of leaders to the steadily growing strength of the Communists.)

South Korea - Japan: President Rhee appears unwilling to agree to a program for the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to South Korea, which American officials have been urging to diminish the impact of repatriation from Japan to North Korea,

10 Sept 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]
scheduled to commence in November. Rhee has apparently been persuaded by his foreign minister's insistence that repa- triation to the north must first be stopped. In view of South Korea's continued negative approach toward its problems with Japan, the current Japan - South Korea talks hold little promise of settling any of the major issues between the two countries.
(Page 8)

Ethiopia: Ethiopia is planning to complete the annexation of Eritrea, according to the Italian consul general in Asmara, thus ending the federation arrangement sponsored by the United Nations in 1952. Ethiopian-arranged public demonstrations are reportedly scheduled for 12 September in Asmara, capital of Eritrea, in a move to pressure the Eritrean Assembly into voting for annexation. The American consul indicates Asmara is quiet, and although some annexation rumors are circulating, he has been unable to confirm them. While most of the Eritrean people probably would not willingly forfeit their last vestige of autonomy, they lack leaders and organization for mounting a significant protest, especially in view of Addis Ababa's effec- tive control of the territory.

Watch Committee conclusion--Middle East: (Situations sus- ceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist in the Middle East, particu- larly in Iraq and Iran. The initiation of significant hostilities is unlikely in this area in the immediate future.)

10 Sept 59    DAILY BRIEF    iv

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet Diplomat Comments on Khrushchev Visit
President Eisenhower and Premier Khrushchev should discuss "all issues" in or- der to achieve a "change in the atmosphere" between the two countries, but should not undertake detailed negotiations. He said "agreement" probably could be reached on cultural and economic exchanges and "progress" could be made on dis- armament and the control of nuclear weapons.

an agreement on trade and US credits for Soviet purchases at an early stage in Khru- shchev's visit would facilitate "political concessions" later. He commented that the "aging" Khrushchev wants to be remembered as the man who, after 40 years of revolutionary struggle, was able to raise the USSR's standard of living and bring about peace and prosperity. He said Vice Minister of Foreign Trade P. N. Kumykin will head the economic staff accompanying Khrushchev.

(He stated that the Chinese Communists definitely are un- happy about Khrushchev's visit to the United States, especially be- cause they feel the US has no intention of recognizing the Peiping government. Khrushchev's visit to China following his trip to the US, is to "appease" the Chi- nese Communists. Communist China's propaganda on the visits appears to reflect concern over the effect the talks in Washington might have on Peiping's international position; Peiping has formal- ly endorsed the exchange, but is emphasizing to a greater extent than other bloc commentators the charge that there is a lack of sincerity on the part of the United States.)

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

[PAGE 08]
Chou En-lai's Letter on Sino-Indian Border Dispute

In an 8 September letter to Nehru, Chou En-lai expressed Peiping's willingness to join in "friendly negotiations" for set- tlement of Sino-Indian border problems. While this display of reasonableness seems intended to repair some of Peiping's damaged prestige, Chou made even "provisional" settlement contingent on withdrawal of Indian troops from posts activated along the McMahon line last spring. This apparently is intended to shift to Nehru responsibility for easing the current situation.

Chou's letter, which is Peiping's first direct comment on the border situation, detailed Communist China's claims to dis- puted areas all along the border. Chou characterized India's claims as a legacy of British "imperialism." But, while he re- affirmed Communist China's right to the disputed areas, Chou said his government "consistently" advocated negotiated settle- ment and he suggested return of troop dispositions along the Sino-Indian border to the "status quo" which existed before the Tibetan revolt. In this situation, "provisional agreements" could be reached "concerning isolated places."

Chou was clearly seeking to counter India's charges and to ward against further public criticism. He accused the Indians of "repeated incursions" into Ladakh and of "armed attacks" on Chinese frontier troops north of the McMahon line. He indicated annoyance over India's "bringing pressure to bear on China mili- tarily, diplomatically, and through public opinion" and warned that continued Indian criticism can only "impair" relations.

Nehru will be irritated by Chou's unyielding attitude on territorial claims and by his placing full blame for the recent clashes on "trespassing" Indian forces. Chou's claims to ex- tensive border areas long regarded as Indian will be unacceptable to New Delhi, which has repeatedly declared its "internationally recognized" frontier is not subject to negotiation--except for minor modifications. In view of Nehru's public pledges to

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 09]
repel incursions south of the McMahon line, he is not likely to agree to pull his troops back from the outposts established near the line last spring, although he will be agreeable to dip- lomatic discussions.

In preliminary comment on 9 September, Indian officials adamantly denied Chou's charges, adding that New Delhi would welcome negotiations over minor disputes but would stand firm on the "present" frontier.

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 10]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
Early Release of Jailed Singapore Extremists Expected

(A tentative agreement for the release from jail of the re- maining left-wing extremists of the ruling People's Action party (PAP) of Singapore apparently was reached at the first meeting of the Singapore Internal Security Council on 28 August. Despite British and Malayan apprehensions, the council, which consists of one member from the Federation of Malaya, three from the United Kingdom, and three from Singapore, will probably vote unanimously for release at its next meeting, on 17 September. This would enhance the prestige of Communist leader Lim Chin Siong and add approximately 40 well- trained leaders to the steadily growing strength of the extremist wing of the PAP.)

(Britain's anticipated vote in favor of the release of the ex- tremists would be in line with its policy of supporting Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew on internal security matters in the be- lief that he is the best judge of how to control the extremist wing of his own party.)

(If Prime Minister Lee and the PAP "moderates" genuinely desire to control the pro-Communists, the move to release the detainees may be a tactical retreat to facilitate the extension of Singapore's stringent antisubversive laws, which expire next month. Presumably it will be easier for the PAP-dominated legislative assembly to vote for extension of the laws if no mem- bers of the party are in jail. Lee may also feel that the exten- sion of the public security laws and the popularity he will achieve by releasing the second-echelon extremists will strengthen his hand if he rearrests Lim Chin Siong, unquestionably the primary threat to Lee's domination of the party and government.)

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 12]
Rhee Refuses to Approve Repatriation of Koreans in Japan
To South Korea

(South Korean Vice Foreign Minister Kim Tong-cho on 7 September informed Ambassador Dowling that he had failed to persuade President Rhee to agree to a plan for repatriating Koreans in Japan to South Korea. Such a plan has been encouraged by US officials to diminish the impact of the proposed repatriation to North Korea, scheduled to begin in November.
Rhee also has stated recently that he will not relax the ban on trade with Japan and that a settlement of differences is out of the question unless Japan accepts all South Korean demands. He continues to express his intention to use force to block the repatriation to North Korea.)

(Although some South Korean officials recognize the futility of further opposition to the Japanese - North Korean repatriation agreement, Rhee apparently has been persuaded by Foreign Min- ister Cho Chong-hwan and Ambassador in Japan Yu Tae-ha that repatriation to North Korea must be blocked before Seoul agrees to accept repatriates. The negative policy of South Korea toward the Koreans in Japan has already resulted in considerable dis- content among non-Communist Korean groups in Japan who feel that Seoul is neglecting their interests.)

(In view of Rhee's attitude, the current Japanese - South Korean talks in Tokyo hold little promise of settling any of the major is- sues between the two countries. Although the two sides have ten- tatively agreed to an exchange of Koreans detained in Japan and Japanese fishermen seized by South Korea, Seoul may temporarily continue to hold the fishermen as hostages in the hope of extracting concessions from the Japanese. Even should they be released, how- ever, Seoul could seize more fishermen for violation of the "Rhee fishing line"--as it did early last year after a mutual release of prisoners. There has been no indication of progress on any of the other issues under discussion.)

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8

[PAGE 13]
Ethiopia Reported Planning Annexation of Eritrea

Ethiopia is planning to complete the annexation of the for- mer Italian colony of Eritrea, according to the Italian consul general in Asmara, thus ending the federation agreement spon- sored by the United Nations in 1952. This agreement provides for federal (Ethiopian) government control over national de- fense, foreign affairs, finance, and interstate commerce, while reserving matters such as health, education, police, and jus- tice to a semi-autonomous Eritrea.

Public demonstrations--presumably Ethiopian-inspired-- reportedly are scheduled for 12 September in Asmara, the capital, in a move to exert pressure on the Eritrean Assembly to vote for annexation. However, the American consul indicates the capital is quiet; some annexation rumors are circulating, but he has been unable to confirm them. While the Eritreans would not willingly forfeit their last vestige of autonomy, they lack leaders and organization for mounting a significant protest.

Addis Ababa has gradually increased its control over in- ternal Eritrean affairs since 1952. The extent of Ethiopia's in- fluence over political affairs was shown last December when the Eritrean Assembly--effectively controlled by Addis Ababa through threats and bribery--voted to adopt the Ethiopian flag.

10 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 9

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 15]
