Situation in Laos

The Boun Oum government appears to be shaping policies
that could have severe adverse consequences, both domestically and internationally. General Phoumi's faction, which
favors a sweeping overhaul of the entire government structure, seems to be overruling those who advocate parliamentary steps
to legitimize the government's status. King Savang, however,
is interested in establishing the full legality of the present government in international eyes, and his counsel may yet prevail in Vientiane.
Savang admitted that he was running into a great deal of difficulty, since the government leaders were a "revolutionary group."

The entire present leadership strongly resents the French,
and there is growing talk of ousting the French military training mission and closing down the French base at Seno, near
Savannakhet. Aside from its international political repercussions, such action would throw into question US support of the
Lao armed forces. Such support is carried out in cooperation
with the French, whose military presence in Laos is specifically
authorized by the 1954 Geneva Agreement. Laotian officials
have long been critical of what they consider France's inimical
attitude, and they now are accusing the French of helping the
Kong Le rebel forces prior to the recapture of Vientiane.

Phoumi's columns are continuing their slow advance on the
Kong Le - Pathet Lao stronghold of Vang Vieng, some 70 miles
north of Vientiane, but are meeting stiffer resistance. A government probe beyond the recently recaptured town of Phong
Hong, about 30 miles south of Vang Vieng, was turned back by
the heaviest enemy artillery barrage since the fighting in Vientiane. The terrain makes the Vang Vieng area easily defensible,
and the continuing build-up of the Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces
with bloc supplies makes it increasingly uncertain that the government operation will be successful.

All six of the Soviet AN-12 heavy transports which flew to
North Vietnam from the USSR on 27 December have either

31 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
