Peru Breaks Diplomatic Relations with Cuba

Peru has broken diplomatic relations with Cuba, it was
announced in Lima yesterday. Peruvian President Prado on
28 December had authorized Prime Minister Beltran to proceed
with such a move within three days, provided that some other
Latin American government would soon take similar action. Beltran felt that an editorial campaign in Lima newspapers and publication of correspondence recently seized in a raid on the Cuban
Embassy in Lima would be sufficient to win strong popular backing in Peru for such a move. One letter from the Havana Foreign
Ministry to the Cuban Ambassador in Lima reveals that Cuba has
been siding with Ecuador in the recent flare-up of the highly emotional dispute over the Peruvian-Ecuadorean boundary. According
to the letter, the Cuban Government also supports abrogation of
other territorial settlements in the western hemisphere, going back as far as Mexico's cession of territory to the United States.

The Peruvian Government has been seeking Argentine and
Colombian agreement to break relations with Cuba at this time.
The Argentine Government may not want to lose its listening post
in Havana, however--particularly since Argentine Ambassador
Amoedo, a long-standing friend of Fidel Castro although strongly
pro-US, has been particularly active there. Moreover, an Argentine
spokesman recently stated that the embassy in Havana was important as a refuge for anti-Castro Cubans.

Colombia and Cuba do not now exchange ambassadors, but
there has been no formal break in relations. Earlier this month
Honduran Foreign Minister Alvarado Puerto proposed to the
Colombian and Venezuelan Governments that the three jointly sever diplomatic relations with the Castro regime. On 28 December--possibly prior to the Peruvian demarche for a Colombian
break with Cuba--the Colombian Foreign Ministry announced that
its former ambassador to Havana would not return to Cuba but that a lower-ranking Foreign Ministry official was to be sent there.

The Honduran President, concerned over a strong pro-Castro faction within his own Liberal party, would be reluctant to

31 Dec 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
