Austrian Officials Fear Chancellor Raab's Handling Of Khrushchev Visit

Austrian government officials deplore Chancellor Raab's determination to make a "personal triumph" of Khrushchev's visit to Austria, 30 June to 8 July. Three members of the cabinet have tried in vain to persuade Raab not to ask economic favors from Khrushchev which in turn might lead the USSR to press for political and economic concessions disadvantageous to Austria.

One concession Raab may seek is a cancellation of compulsory oil deliveries. Under the state treaty settlement of 1955, Austria delivers a million tons of high-grade crude oil to the bloc annually until 1965, an arrangement which was modified in 1958 when Moscow agreed to give half a million tons of a poorer grade of Soviet crude oil in return. Austrian officials, once favorable to a further reduction, now fear the USSR might ask too high a price for such a concession. Finance Minister Kamitz would like to see Austria fulfill all its reparations payment without further bargaining, and maintains that the Austrian economy can well bear the cost. On the other hand, the government is under pressure from many business leaders to increase Austrian trade ties with the bloc in an effort to restore Austrian East-West trade to its prewar proportions, and they hope to explore such prospects during Khrushchev's visit.

Members of Raab's cabinet particularly deplore his decision to accompany Khrushchev on a four-day tour of the Austrian provinces, fearing that this may result in embarrassing situations in the event Khrushchev attacks nations friendly to Austria. Raab has already overridden the recommendations of his advisers to restrict Khrushchev's speaking opportunities in Vienna to a small auditorium and has put the city's newest and largest public hall at the Soviet premier's disposal.

Many Austrians fear Raab will make the same mistakes he did on his Moscow visit in 1958, when he became effusive over Austro-Soviet friendship and the need for greater cultural exchanges. Raab, however, has always regarded this visit as a great personal success and feels he knows how to exercise a restraining influence on Khrushchev. The chancellor considers the achievement of the 1955 state treaty his chief claim to fame in history, and he has come to believe he can make Austria a bridge between East and West.

25 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
