[PAGE 01]
3 September 1953

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


[PAGE 02]
SECURITY INFORMATION

SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Albania moves to re-establish relations with Greece (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Taipei seen hindering evacuation of troops from Burma (page 3).

SOUTH ASIA
3. Afghanistan may be willing to cease Pushtoonistan campaign (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Tribal unrest in Iran may pose problem for prime minister (page 4).
5. Zahedi states requirements for friendly Soviet-Iranian relations (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Largest Rumanian electrical power project reportedly abandoned (page 5).
7. Yugoslavia believed ready to abandon all previous proposals for Trieste settlement (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
8. Reports of Italian troop movements toward Trieste held erroneous (page 7).


[PAGE 03]
SECURITY INFORMATION

GENERAL

1. Albania moves to re-establish relations with Greece:

the Albanian government has made a demarche for a resumption of "normal relations" with Greece. The Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs, however, received the Albanian advances with indifference.

Comment: Such a demarche at this time would be in line with Soviet desires to ease Balkan tensions and to mitigate any threat to Albania which may arise from the Balkan pact. The American embassy in Athens believes that the Soviet embassy there has indirectly intimated to the Greeks that Bulgaria is also prepared to discuss the resumption of diplomatic relations.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Taipei seen hindering evacuation of troops from Burma:

The Chinese Nationalist representative to the four-power committee in Bangkok has proposed deleting from the evacuation plan now under consideration the names of places in Burma to be turned over to the Burmese army.

The American embassy in Bangkok comments that this development appears to implicate the Nationalist government in a maneuver to stall or scuttle the evacuation effort, since its representative admittedly acted on specific instructions. The embassy further states that this move also lends credence to reports that General Li Mi intends to retain his Mong Hsat headquarters and that Taipei plans only a token evacuation.


[PAGE 04]
Comment: This report is consistent with other indications of Nationalist intentions to remain in Burma and is contrary to recent press reports that implementation of an agreed evacuation plan is imminent. It also contradicts the Nationalist position that Li Mi alone is responsible for obstructing the evacuation.

SOUTH ASIA

3. Afghanistan may be willing to cease Pushtoonistan campaign:

The Afghan government allegedly is willing to cease further agitation for an independent Pushtoonistan and to recognize the disputed Pushtoon tribal area between Afghanistan and Pakistan as belonging officially to the latter.

Afghan willingness, however, is contingent upon finding a face-saving formula, such as giving the tribal territory a separate name.

Comment: These new suggestions for ending the most important dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan represent a retreat from the usual Afghan position demanding public Pakistani recognition that a problem exists and insisting that the tribal area should be made independent.

It may also be significant that in August the only independent Afghan paper, in which the Afghan prime minister reportedly is interested, ceased printing Pushtoonistan propaganda, which usually constitutes the bulk of Afghan news.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Tribal unrest in Iran may pose problem for prime minister:


[PAGE 05]
Comment: The Iranian army can handle isolated disorders created by any of these perennially troublesome tribes. However, concurrent unrest in the widely separated areas inhabited by the Javanrudi, the Qashqai and Boir Ahmadi tribes would strain army capabilities and present a serious problem to Prime Minister Zahedi, who is still consolidating his hold on the Iranian government.

5. Zahedi states requirements for friendly Soviet-Iranian relations:

On 31 August Prime Minister Zahedi told Ambassador Henderson that, in reply to an inquiry from the Soviet embassy, he had stated that Iran wishes to maintain normal and friendly relations with the Soviet Union. Such relations would be possible only if the USSR refrained from interfering in Iranian internal affairs, particularly from giving material and moral support to the Tudeh and other subversive organizations. He added that the USSR must treat Iran as an equal and that relations between the two countries must be maintained on a basis of mutual advantage.

Comment: The fact that Zahedi informed the American embassy promptly and in such detail regarding his intentions is a good indication of his desire to cooperate with the United States.

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Largest Rumanian electrical power project reportedly abandoned:


[PAGE 06]
SECURITY INFORMATION

Comment: The suspension of work on such projects suggests that Rumanian leaders are implementing their recently announced policy of making large investments in agriculture and consumer goods industry at the expense of heavy industry and public works.

The V. I. Lenin hydroelectric station, which has been under construction at Bicaz, Moldavia, since 1950, is the largest and most important of Rumania's electrification projects. It has been publicized as the leading electrification project in the ten-year electrification program, and ranks in importance with the recently suspended Danube-Black Sea canal project.

7. Yugoslavia believed ready to abandon all previous proposals for Trieste settlement:

On the basis of talks with Yugoslav undersecretary for foreign affairs Bebler on 31 August, the American, British, and French chiefs of mission in Belgrade agree that Yugoslavia intends to abandon its previous proposals for a solution of the Trieste problem and to demand the return of the entire Free Territory with the possible exception of the city of Trieste. Yugoslavia's intention would be to offset the official Italian position calling for a return of the entire territory to Italy.

The three Western diplomats believe that Yugoslavia actually wants a Trieste settlement through some form of internationalization of the territory with heavy guarantees for the rights of the Slovene population. In the talks, Bebler stated that earlier Yugoslav proposals for a condominium would have to be revised, implying that this idea had not yet been wholly rejected by Belgrade.


[PAGE 07]
Comment: In his 30 August conversation with the American charge, Bebler indicated that in his 6 September speech Tito will attack the Allied Military Government policy in Trieste "which was permitting the Italianization of the zone," will give assurances that Yugoslavia intends to remain calm and adopt no adventurous and unilateral measures, and will offer a new proposal for the settlement of the Trieste question.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. Reports of Italian troop movements toward Trieste held erroneous:

on 1 September told the American army attache in Rome that there had been no movement of Italian troops in connection with the Trieste dispute. He added that press observers had probably been misled by the movement of units returning to their barracks after summer maneuvers.

Comment: This report suggests that Prime Minister Pella was bluffing when he told an American embassy official on 31 August that one Italian regiment was being dispatched to Monfalcone, on the Gulf of Trieste.
