Demonstrations in Iran Increase in Intensity

The present demonstrations are more serious than those following the rigged parliamentary elections earlier in the year--demonstrations which had been confined almost entirely to university students and attracted little public support. The strike has been planned for some time and climaxes a period of increasing teacher activity which has included peaceful one-day strikes in Tehran and the provinces. Prime mover in the teachers' activities has been Mohammad Derakhshesh, chairman of the "Licentiates Society," who was arrested on 1 May in an attempt to head off the strike. He has since been released. The standard teacher's salary is about $40 per month, little better than that of many common laborers. The government budget for this year provides for an additional $4,400,000 to raise salaries by 10 to 15 percent, but the demonstrators now are demanding an even greater increase. A probable further complication is Derakhshesh's desire to demonstrate his influence with the teachers. His rival for leadership of the teachers, who was government-sponsored, was elected to parliament.

The schools and the bazaar are closed and there are rumors that employees of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Health, as well as bus and taxi drivers, may join the strike. The antigovernment National Front is reported to be debating whether or not to throw its support to the strikers. The National Front will have an opportunity to turn it in force on 5 May to attend the commemoration services being held on the 40th day after the death of former Prime Minister Mossadeq's finance minister.

The army, unlike the police, is not trained in riot control, and further large demonstrations could lead to more bloodshed. However, the willingness of the army to fire on the demonstrators has not been tested; if it refuses, this would probably mark the beginning of a precipitous decline in the prestige and influence of the Shah.

5 May 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
