to capture and disarm the Hungarian troops without violence, but in the event of opposition the order appears to be to destroy them. the Soviet commanders are under orders not to conduct negotiations, to break opposition ruthlessly, and to disperse the population.

Resistance to the Soviet attack, launched throughout the country at about 0500 hours on 4 November, apparently was disorganized and conducted largely by irregular forces, including armed workers and students. The Hungarian defense minister and the chief of staff were arrested before the attack began by Soviet officers who had been engaged in negotiations--begun the previous day--with them concerning Soviet troop withdrawal. Premier Nagy and most of the ministers in his short-lived coalition government were arrested in the morning when Soviet troops captured the Parliament building in central Budapest. Nagy had time only to announce the attack over Budapest radio at 0515 and to appeal desperately for help from the outside world. Virtually all free Hungarian radio stations in the country were in Soviet hands by noon.

The USSR's decision to resume military action against the Hungarian revolt apparently was made on 31 October after it had become clear that the program of the Nagy regime would result in the severance of close Hungarian ties with Moscow. Mikoyan and Suslov, the two Soviet leaders most closely concerned with Hungarian developments in the past, arrived in Budapest on 31 October, perhaps to announce this decision to Kadar.

The new Communist government headed by Kadar was formed coincidentally with the Soviet attack on 4 November; one of its first acts was to appeal for Soviet armed assistance to put down the "counterrevolution" of the "sinister forces of reaction." Nevertheless Kadar, in a speech at 0810, assailed the "Rakosi-Gero clique" for violations of legality, promised to carry out a national Communist, Gomulka-like program and, after calm is restored, to negotiate with the USSR and other Warsaw pact states for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungary.

The fate of Hungarian political leaders who during the past week had declared themselves in open
