Shah States His Terms for Iranian-Soviet Nonaggression Pact

The Shah of Iran informed the Pakistani ambassador to Iran and a British Foreign Office official in separate audiences on 29 January that he has offered to sign a treaty with the Soviet Union which would include as its minimum terms a Soviet assurance that the USSR would not attack Iran and that it would discontinue hostile propaganda against Iran. In return Tehran would agree not to sign the pending bilateral defense agreement with the US and would not permit use of Iran as a base for aggression against the Soviet Union. The Shah stated that Iran would remain in the Baghdad Pact and that he has refused Soviet economic aid. The Soviet delegation which arrived by special plane in Tehran on 29 January presumably brought a response to the Shah's terms or at least authority to negotiate further.

The Shah is definitely prepared to sign the nonaggression treaty if the Soviet Union meets Iran's terms, but that if Soviet counterproposals are rigid he "may have second thoughts." The Pakistani ambassador had reported to his government that the Shah intended to sign a 30-year nonaggression pact with the USSR on 1 February.

The Shah had indicated he would wait one week before making his final decision regarding an Iranian-Soviet treaty.

Turkish officials fear he may take precipitate action which will have serious repercussions both on domestic politics in Turkey and throughout the Middle East. Turkish Prime Minister Menderes was particularly depressed following these talks. The Shah emphasized to the Turks Iran's dissatisfaction with the "small repayment" for joining the Baghdad Pact, and reiterated Iran's need for $107,000,000 in budgetary assistance. He criticized the US for offering only $20,000,000 and complained that the US would not supply Iran with antiaircraft missiles and training necessary for their use.

Court Minister Ala has informed US Ambassador Wailes that the Shah will be glad to see him at any time, presumably to keep the way open for US offers of increased aid designed to forestall the Iranian-Soviet rapprochement.

31 Jan 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
