Austrian Chancellor Reportedly to Resign Soon

Chancellor Raab's health has been precarious following a stroke in 1957, and he has been reported on the verge of retirement since he stepped down last February as party chairman in favor of Gorbach. An effective and able political leader, Raab has brooked no opposition from his associates. His foreign policy reflected his desire to serve as a mediator or bridge between East and West, which on occasion led him to pursue a more conciliatory course toward the USSR than was deemed wise or expedient in many pro-Western quarters. His prestige suffered somewhat last summer during Khrushchev's visit to Austria when--against the wishes of his cabinet and party--he accompanied the Soviet leader on a tour of the country and made no protest against Khrushchev's violent attacks on Austria's Western friends. It was Raab's hope, only partially realized, that Moscow would reduce Austrian reparations payments and increase mutual trade.

Raab's hand-picked successor, 62-year-old Alfons Gorbach, is a stanch right-wing conservative. His elevation to the party chairmanship last year was a minimum concession to those who were demanding reform within the party organization to broaden its popular appeal. In domestic policy, he may be somewhat more liberal than Raab. He is said, however, not to be a warm advocate of a representative form of government but to prefer the rule of an intellectual elite undisturbed by interference from the mass below.

A veteran of World War I, in which he lost a leg, Gorbach is a member of the National Defense Committee of the Austrian Parliament, a strong opponent of neutralism and communism, and an advocate of "military neutrality" for his country. His aversion to communism has led him to endorse certain neo-Nazi activities in rural Austria as a matter of vote-getting expediency. A shrewd and tough negotiator in party affairs, he enjoys good relations with the Socialist leaders in the coalition government. His impressions of the United States, gained from a 60-day leader exchange grant visit in 1957, are reported to be favorable. His foreign policy is likely to be similar to that of his predecessor.

16 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 8
