[PAGE 01]
16 April 1952

Copy No. 52

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
25X1A

SUMMARY

FAR EAST

3. Viet Minh division survives concentrated French assault (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

4. Future of Kashmir negotiations still undecided (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Shah still unwilling to remove Prime Minister Mossadeq (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA

8. American Embassy predicts copper strike in Chile (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Viet Minh division survives concentrated French assault:

The Assistant US Army Attache in Hanoi reports that the Viet Minh 320th Division, which has been the target of a major clearing operation by the bulk of French mobile ground forces and aircraft in Tonkin over the past several weeks, is still in "fairly good condition." A new operation against this division is scheduled to start soon.

Comment: As late as 13 April, American officials in Saigon were led to believe, on the basis of casualty figures supplied by the French Army, that "the 320th's capabilities as an entire unit have been reduced to practically zero for several months to come."

Reports from French sources on this campaign follow a previously noted pattern -- highly optimistic and misleading claims during the progress of an operation, followed by far more moderate estimates of the significance of the concluded operation.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Future of Kashmir negotiations still undecided:

The Pakistani Government has informed United Nations Representative Graham that it desires to see his full report on the Kashmir situation before committing itself to continuing negotiations. The government also desires clarification of the part to be played in the negotiations by Admiral Nimitz, plebiscite administrator-designate.

Comment: The Pakistani Government can do little to influence decisions in its favor except to display belligerency or hesitancy from time to time. It cannot long refuse to participate in further discussions without endangering its prestige and security, and it may be expected to acquiesce in the relatively near future.

The Indian Government is not likely to reverse its earlier agreement to the resumption of talks. It has left itself an avenue of escape, however, by raising the possibility of delaying the eventual plebiscite by refusing to appoint Admiral Nimitz as plebiscite administrator on the grounds that his impartiality would be open to question.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Shah still unwilling to remove Prime Minister Mossadeq:

Removal of the Mossadeq government, the Shah told the American Ambassador on 13 April, might come about by its own resignation, by Majlis action, or by intervention of the Crown. He added, however, that the time was not yet ripe for the Crown to act.

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
The Shah said that the present government's popularity was decreasing while his was increasing, and predicted that Mossadeq would retire when his government was thoroughly discredited. He hoped that it would be replaced by one more friendly toward the West and that the United States would then assist Iran.

Comment: Mossadeq has been meeting with the newly-elected Majlis deputies to explain his economic and financial program and learn their reactions. In contrast, the Shah recently refused to advise a group of deputies who called for instructions.

- 6 -

[PAGE 07]
LATIN AMERICA

8. American Embassy predicts copper strike in Chile:

With regard to the copper strike threatened for 25 April in Chile, an Anaconda official has stated that the slightest increase in operating costs would force his company to shut down the already marginal operation at Potrerillos, and would put the larger but more economical operation at Chuquicamata in the red. He adds that the company can increase wages only if it receives a more favorable exchange rate.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
The US Embassy comments that "the uncompromising position of management, when coupled with the equally uncompromising position of copper labor," makes an industry-wide copper strike inevitable unless the Chilean Government agrees to issue a new copper exchange decree. This appears unlikely, since a similar decree was declared unconstitutional last year.

Comment: The president of the Chilean Copper Workers Confederation earlier this month regarded a copper strike at the Anaconda and Braden mines as inevitable. Anaconda's Chuquicamata and Potrerillos mines produced about 160,000 and 40,000 metric tons respectively in 1951.

- 8 -
