WESTERN EUROPE

3. De Gaulle attacks European integration plans:

A recent statement by General de Gaulle is interpreted by the US Embassy as a possible forerunner of attacks against the US and French Governments for having failed at European unification by allowing Germany to become too powerful.

At a recent press conference, De Gaulle gave the first indications that if his current bitter attacks against the European Army should fail, he would then launch an assault on the alleged German comeback, saying that German "hegemony" could have been prevented had he been granted power in time. The General predicted that the present "weak piecemeal approach" to European integration would lead to "disappointment and disgust" with the European idea, and would result in the failure of European union and in "Atlantic disunity."

Comment: Both the current Gaullist line and these indications of future party tactics spell continued difficulty for the middle-of-the-road government. De Gaulle's criticism closely parallels Communist vituperations against the European Army and the "American occupation of France." Such a propaganda assault is especially serious in France, where popular sentiment is innately apprehensive both of foreign troops on French soil and of the rebirth of a German war potential.

4. The Netherlands opposes other European Defense Community nations on internal defense force issue:

The Dutch delegates to the Paris Conference on a European Defense Community will accept the plan favored by the French, Germans and Italians, whereby all internal defense forces would form part of the European Defense Force, provided that only the national governments -- and not the Defense Community -- have the authority to commit these forces to SHAPE.

The German delegate, suspecting that the Dutch are trying to retain the nucleus of a national army, states that if the Dutch plan is adopted West Germany will also have to create some national forces in order to secure Bundestag ratification.

Comment: The German delegate's remark is prompted by his Parliament's insistence on equal treatment in the European Defense Community. Since the Allies, and especially the French Government, oppose the formation of any German national forces under a wholly German command, the Dutch proposal would in effect discriminate against West Germany.

The Netherlands and Belgium have intimated a willingness to accept a common budget under international control in exchange for a longer transition period. This may lead to conciliation on the less important issue of internal defense forces.
