[PAGE 01]
26 March 1952
Copy No. 49

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet position on German elections and frontiers reaffirmed (page 3).

FAR EAST

2. French High Commissioner disturbed over situation in Cambodia (page 3).
3. Burmese Communists propose joint action against Chinese Nationalists (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British Ambassador pessimistic over Anglo-Egyptian situation (page 4).
5. Egyptian Prime Minister repeats request for Turkish intervention (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Attempt to remedy inadequacy of fuel storage facilities in Bulgaria (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Some hope seen for Saar settlement (page 6).
8. Italy protests to Britain and United States regarding Trieste problem (page 7).
9. New wave of Communist-promoted strikes damaging Italian economy (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet position on German elections and frontiers reaffirmed:

Upon receipt of the Western answer to the Soviet proposal for a German peace treaty, Soviet Foreign Minister Vishinsky reaffirmed Soviet opposition to a UN-sponsored investigation of electoral conditions in East Germany.

The Soviet Foreign Minister reiterated to the American Charge that the USSR considered membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization incompatible with the principles of the UN, but maintained that it was not unnatural for a sovereign state to have its own defense forces.

With regard to the question of German frontiers, Vishinsky said that contrary to the interpretation contained in the United States' note, the Potsdam Conference had finally defined the Polish and German frontiers.

FAR EAST

2. French High Commissioner disturbed over situation in Cambodia:

Acting High Commissioner Gautier has told American Minister Heath that he is extremely disturbed over what he considers a deteriorating political and security situation in Cambodia. The French official cited the anti-French attitude of the Democratic Party cabinet, the King's "timidity," and the recent defection to the rebels of two widely popular and politically influential Cambodian leaders.

Heath considers the situation "disquieting but not immediately dangerous" and attributes most of the French troubles in Cambodia to lack of a friendly approach and the persistence of "a martinet old-line colonial" attitude on the part of French officialdom.

Comment: Opposition to French hegemony among Cambodian leaders, heretofore relatively quiescent, has become increasingly active as the authority and competence of the Cambodian Government have been strengthened.

[PAGE 04]
3. Burmese Communists propose joint action against Chinese Nationalists:

Representatives of the Burma Communist Party are reliably reported to have met with an official of the Burmese Government to consider a proposal by the party for joining forces to combat the Chinese Nationalists in northeastern Burma. While the results of this meeting are unknown, another is expected to take place soon to obtain a joint Government, Karen and Communist agreement, presumably also directed at the Nationalists.

Comment: Another source recently reported a Communist decision to propose such joint action to Premier Nu, but indicated that Nu would reject it and continue his insistence upon a complete Communist surrender.

On the other hand, the inclusion of a number of extreme leftists in the reorganized Burmese cabinet indicates that such approaches would at least be carefully considered.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. British Ambassador pessimistic over Anglo-Egyptian situation:

According to the British Ambassador in Cairo, Anglo-Egyptian relations have deteriorated so drastically that the Western proposal for a Middle East Command can no longer be considered useful in solving the dispute.

The Ambassador intends to suggest to his government in London that the early removal of the British military headquarters from Egypt be considered. He will also recommend that further study be given to the possibility of establishing a sizable British garrison at Gaza, in Palestine.

[PAGE 05]
Comment: The recent views of the British and American Ambassadors in Cairo emphasize the continuing divergence of outlook between Egypt and Britain. Until one side or the other compromises -- and there is no evidence to date that either is ready to do so -- genuine negotiations are impossible.

5. Egyptian Prime Minister repeats request for Turkish intervention:

The Egyptian Prime Minister has again asked for Turkish intervention in reaching an understanding with Britain. The Prime Minister urged that Turkey encourage the British to issue a declaration of their point of view in order to show their good will and desire to open negotiations.

The Prime Minister added that he would dissolve Parliament but would not hold elections within two months, as is required by the constitution. The Ambassador concluded that Egypt would be without a parliament for a year.

Comment: Egypt's repeated appeal to Turkey underscores the sense of urgency now felt in Cairo. Egypt, unwilling to make concessions, continues to ask for British gestures. While Turkey would like to see the Anglo-Egyptian dispute settled, there is no evidence that it is yet ready to become involved, even as a mediator.

Since this conversation was held, new elections have been scheduled for 18 May; however, it is still possible for the King and his Prime Minister to suspend the constitution and rule by decree.

EASTERN EUROPE

6. Attempt to remedy inadequacy of fuel storage facilities in Bulgaria:

Tolbukhin requested that Sofia immediately make arrangements "to have four tanks sunk temporarily," stating that "otherwise we will return the fuel."

[PAGE 06]
Comment:

Tolbukhin has become one of the major centers of Bulgarian Air Force activities. A fighter division, three regiments probably subordinate to it, and an airfield servicing unit are known to be located there.

Bulgaria has received increasing quantities of petroleum products from Rumania and the USSR during the past year, and the problem of finding adequate storage facilities has been a continuing one. There have been construction of underground tank facilities in various parts of Bulgaria, and there is evidence to indicate that measures might have been taken to expand temporary storage facilities.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Some hope seen for Saar settlement:

American representatives in France and West Germany, commenting on the 20 March talks between leading French, German, and Saar officials, believe that future negotiations may result in a settlement of the Saar issue, or at least a temporary truce. They observe, however, that the recent tug-of-war over interpretations of the "agreement" announced after the talks indicates that there was no real meeting of minds.

Although US High Commissioner McCloy notes that heated French-German arguments over the Saar usually subside in a few days, he warns that the Social Democrats are likely to raise the issue in the Bundestag as well as in the Council of Europe's forthcoming Assembly meeting.

American officials in Paris emphasize the importance, in the present dispute, of the French fear that the Germans are stressing the need for free elections in the hope of obtaining a new government which would repudiate France's favored economic position in the territory.

[PAGE 07]
8. Italy protests to Britain and United States regarding Trieste problem:

Italian Premier de Gasperi has forwarded to British Foreign Secretary Eden several "suggestions" for "improving" the situation in the Free Territory of Trieste. The first is that Britain restate its support of Italy's claim to the territory, and that the British statement refer to the "essentially Italian character of Trieste." He also suggests that elections in Trieste be announced for 25 May, a position in which he is supported by the US Embassy in Rome. De Gasperi further proposes that the United States, British and Italian Governments discuss the future status of Zone A.

In Trieste Italian officials continue to agitate against the Allied Military Government. The neo-Fascists, who helped spark the demonstrations, are generally pleased with the furor they have created. The Communists, having protested against the Allied Military Government's "brutality and undemocratic policy," are "keeping clear and playing a waiting game."

Comment: The most serious aspect of the Trieste disturbances is that they show the extent to which the Italian Government has yielded to nationalist and neo-Fascist influences in encouraging the disorders. American observers expect little change in the Italian attitude in view of the forthcoming local and national elections.

9. New wave of Communist-promoted strikes damaging Italian economy:

A new wave of strikes throughout Italy promoted by the Communist-dominated General Confederation of Labor is having serious economic repercussions. American Embassy officials in Rome believe that the non-Communist labor unions are having difficulty restraining their members from supporting these work stoppages.

[PAGE 08]
Most of the current trouble is in the mechanical, metallurgical, mining, chemical, and ceramics industries. The strikes seem to be following a carefully planned pattern, taking place in different industries on different days.

Comment: Labor unrest in Italy, besides slowing down the defense production program, is also likely to jeopardize the chances of the present government parties in the coming spring elections in the south.

The Communist-promoted "chain-reaction" pattern of strikes began over a month ago after the Fiat factory in Turin fired a number of employees for engaging in political activity while at work. The rising dissatisfaction among factory workers over the discrepancy between wages and prices has made it easy for Communist agitators to induce many non-Communists to join in the strikes.

*****
Correction to Current Intelligence Bulletin

Please change the first sentence of item 6, page 6, to read
