[PAGE 01]
18 June 1957

Copy No.

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. BRITAIN SEES SOVIET UNION MOVING TOWARD DISARMAMENT AGREEMENT

3. EGYPTIAN ELECTION DEVELOPMENTS

[PAGE 03]
1. BRITAIN SEES SOVIET UNION MOVING TOWARD
DISARMAMENT AGREEMENT

British foreign secretary Lloyd told US
disarmament delegate Stassen the UK
was astonished that the Soviet Union had
agreed to accept inspection on the suspen-
sion of nuclear tests. British government leaders evidently
feel that the latest Soviet proposals considerably increase the
possibilities of achieving a disarmament agreement.

This view of the latest Soviet proposals
is shared by Labor Party leader Gaitskell. His prompt pub-
lic statement urging the West to accept them may put pressure
on the Conservative government. In past months, the govern-
ment has insisted that an agreement to limit testing must be a
part of a comprehensive disarmament agreement.

The principal objective of the Soviet pro-
posal for a two- or three-year suspension of nuclear tests un-
der international control apparently is to force a showdown on
an issue which Moscow regards as the most vulnerable point
in the West's position. Khrushchev in his 13 June Helsinki
statement attacked the West's insistence on control "as a con-
dition for disarmament" and asserted that "all objective possi-
bilities" now exist for an agreement limited to a suspension of
tests. He apparently hoped thereby to strengthen Moscow's
contention that the subcommittee should agree to an immediate
suspension independent of other aspects of the disarmament
problem. A Soviet broadcast to North America on 15 June twice
referred to the test suspension proposal as a "first step" which
would facilitate a future solution of "more complicated ques-
tions."

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
3. EGYPTIAN ELECTION DEVELOPMENTS

The Nasr regime has reportedly elim-
inated approximately 50 leftists and
Communist sympathizers from candi-
dacy in the parliamentary elections
scheduled for 3 July. Using the "constitutional authority"
granted to the National Union, Egypt's only legal political
"party," all applications for candidacy were reviewed by an
executive committee selected by Nasr. One of those elim-
inated by the committee was Kamal al-Bindari, former am-
bassador to Moscow and famous as Egypt's "Red Pasha."
However, another well-known Communist, Khalid Muhyi
al-Din, editor of the newspaper Al Misai, was permitted
to run.

More than 2,500 applications were re-
ceived, but only 1,320 were approved to compete for the
350 seats in the National Assembly. Of those approved, 62
candidates, including 16 members of Nasr's cabinet, will be
unopposed in their constituencies.

Comment
The regime is obviously concerned over
the large number of Communist applica-
tions, estimated at approximately 150. Most of the possible
antiregime candidates were eliminated by an executive decree
issued on 10 May directed against all individuals who had been
under "administrative custody" since 1952. This applied to all
the groups suppressed by the regime at one time or another,
including Communists, the Moslem Brotherhood, and prerevolu-
tionary political figures.

A recurrence of terrorist activity by the ex-
treme rightist Moslem Brotherhood and local antiregime demon-
strations have led to a stiffening of the regime's security pre-
cautions. Recent reports state that Nasr has increased his
personal guard, and the Egyptian army has been placed on a
50-percent emergency status for the period 13-28 June, to be
increased to 100 percent during 28 June to 7 July.

[PAGE 06]
