[PAGE 01]
30 November 1955

Copy No.
100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH CABINET CRISIS (page 3).

2. NEHRU REBUKES BULGANIN AND KHRUSHCHEV (page 4).

3. TAIPEI THREATENED WITH UN OUSTER IF IT VETOES OUTER MONGOLIA (page 5).

4. CHOU EN-LAI TELLS FRENCH SOCIALIST NO FORCE WILL BE USED AGAINST TAIWAN (page 6).

5. RESIGNATION OF AFGHAN DEFENSE MINISTER (page 7).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 8)

[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH CABINET CRISIS

French premier Faure's overthrow by an absolute majority makes possible the dissolution of the National Assembly by the cabinet. Cabinet ministers, however, may be reluctant to approve dissolution until after an effort has been made to find another premier in the present assembly.

No top political figure is believed to be anxious for the premiership so close to the elections. The Mendes-France forces would like to campaign against a rightist-controlled cabinet, but at the same time they want to be in a position to exploit the current economic well-being and to take advantage of the radio and press facilities available to the government.

A compromise candidate frequently mentioned is Henri Queuille, who was premier of the caretaker government formed to set up the system for the 1951 elections. There has been some talk of investing a senator, who would be relatively remote from assembly bickering. Jean Berthoin, who has been identified with Mendes-France and who is on record in favor of cutting military expenditures, is the senator most frequently mentioned.

If, however, dissolution is decided on, elections must be held within 20 to 30 days, and the system used in the 1951 national elections would apply. This calls for party lists in each department rather than single-member constituencies, and permits parties to affiliate so that their votes would be counted as a unit. Any party slate or affiliated group getting a majority of the total vote gets all the seats for the department. Failing a majority, the seats are divided by proportional representation.

While this system was developed to cut Communist representation in 1951, it is expected to favor the Communist Party now. Some Socialists will affiliate with the Communists and dissension among the center parties will probably reduce the number of departments in which non-Communists can agree on an electoral affiliation.

[PAGE 05]
2. NEHRU REBUKES BULGANIN AND KHRUSHCHEV

Frequent unfavorable comparisons between East and West by Bulganin and Khrushchev on their Indian trip have provoked a public rebuke from Prime Minister Nehru. Following Khrushchev's speech in Bangalore on 26 November, which combined criticism of the West with announcement of the latest Soviet thermonuclear explosion, Nehru chided the Soviet leader by stating publicly on 29 November that comparisons between one country and another were not good and that, in any case, the comparisons should not be made in a hostile spirit. He said the challenge and menace of the atom bomb could not be met by another atom bomb.

On the same day, the Hindustan Times, spokesman for Nehru's Congress Party, also challenged Khrushchev by saying that "no more impressive testimony to the Soviet professions of peace. . .could be produced than a courageous and statesmanly decision. . .to lead the way by destroying all stocks of atomic weapons and declaring a total ban on them in the future. . . Even bomb tests are not without dire peril to the world." The paper added that the welcome accorded the Soviet leaders does not indicate India's endorsement of Communist ideology. "On the contrary, the visit of Soviet leaders to foreign countries may . . . have its effects on Soviet thinking, which has hitherto been conditioned by narrow isolationism."

[PAGE 06]
3. TAIPEI THREATENED WITH UN OUSTER IF IT VETOES OUTER MONGOLIA

The Brazilian UN delegate told Ambassador Lodge on 27 November he would move to expel Nationalist China from the UN if Taipei vetoes the admission of Outer Mongolia. He said he had informed the Nationalist delegate of his intentions.

Colombia's chief UN delegate also predicted to Lodge on 28 November that a Chinese veto on Outer Mongolia would result in the ouster of Nationalist China from the UN.

Lodge comments that this attitude seems fairly typical of General Assembly sentiment.

Comment

By blocking solution of the UN membership impasse, Taipei's use of the veto would arouse the antagonism of a majority of the UN members, Britain's chief delegate estimated on 28 November that the primary Soviet objective on the membership problem was to get Taipei to veto the admission of Outer Mongolia.

[PAGE 07]
4. CHOU EN-LAI TELLS FRENCH SOCIALIST NO FORCE WILL BE USED AGAINST TAIWAN

No force will be used in the "liberation" of Taiwan, according to statements made by Premier Chou En-lai and other Chinese Communist officials to Daniel Mayer, a French Socialist leader and chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the National Assembly. Mayer discussed with Ambassador Dillon in Paris his visit to China in late October and early November as part of a parliamentary delegation.

The Chinese Communists told Mayer that while they considered Taiwan to be an "internal problem" they recognized that events had in fact made it an international question, and in practice they would not use force to settle the issue. They stated that Taiwan would be restored to China peacefully in the "not-too-distant future," and are prepared to treat generously any Chinese officials on Taiwan who may help them gain control.

Comment

The Chinese Communists have sought to convince all foreign visitors of their peaceful intentions. Peiping's propaganda has repeatedly stated that Taiwan will be "liberated" by peaceful means "if possible," but that in any case it will be restored to China.

[PAGE 08]
5. RESIGNATION OF AFGHAN DEFENSE MINISTER

The announced resignation of Afghan minister of national defense General Arif will enable Prime Minister Daud to increase his control over the army. Daud is now in a better position to obtain more Soviet bloc military aid and to intensify pressure on the Pakistani border.

General Arif was a protege of King Zahir Shah, who reportedly in the past supported him in disputes with Daud. Arif's resignation was apparently forced by Daud, who temporarily takes over the Defense Ministry. Changes in the top army command will probably follow. No army opposition to the change has been reported, and in view of Daud's high personal prestige at the present, it is unlikely any effective opposition will develop.

Daud's manipulation of the recent Grand Assembly of Tribes, his apparent ability to carry other members of the royal family with him in times of crisis, and his removal of Arif indicate he now dominates the government.

[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 29 November)

No significant military activity has been reported. However, some action is reported on the Syrian frontier, which has been quiet in recent days. A Syrian spokesman charged on 29 November that an Israeli patrol had fired on the village of Tawafiq in the Syrian-Israeli demilitarized zone. In Damascus and in other Syrian cities, anti-Israeli and anti-Western demonstrations occurred.
