Discontent Reported Increasing in Ruling Thai Military Group

Grumbling within the ruling Thai military group over the leadership of Premier Sarit appears to be increasing. Complaints being increasingly voiced against Sarit include his failure to consult the military, the real basis of his power, on important policy matters; his reliance on civilian advisers and opposition leaders for guidance in planning his ambitious programs; a recent cut in the defense budget; and his alleged failure to provide satisfactory recompense to second-echelon officers for their support of his regime.

The latest important leader to express dissatisfaction with Sarit's actions is Lt. Gen. Krit Sriwara, the commander of the key First Infantry Division in Bangkok, a unit whose active cooperation would probably be essential for a successful coup attempt. He recently told the American army attache in Bangkok that the political situation had deteriorated since early August and that some members of the military group are seriously consulting on ways to curb Sarit. Krit intimated that "something" would be done in "the foreseeable future" to rid Thailand of "the Sarit-type operation."

Malcontents within the military group do not appear at present to possess a leader willing and strong enough to challenge Sarit, a resourceful and ruthless politician. The likelihood of a coup attempt might be increased if Sarit's health improves enough that it is apparent he will be able to stay on the job for an extended period. Disaffected elements within the military group until now have probably bided their time in the expectation that Sarit's serious liver ailment would soon remove him from the scene.

Any successful coup group would probably call on Deputy Premier Thanom to form a new government, even though he would be unlikely to be an active participant in a coup attempt. Thanom, while not a strong leader, is universally respected in the armed forces and would make an ideal front man for such a group. While apparently still loyal to Sarit, Thanom has serious reservations about the marshal's performance as premier and has had some bitter policy arguments with him. A more remote possibility as new premier in the event of a coup would be former Premier Phibun, now in exile in Tokyo.

31 Aug 59
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
