[PAGE 01]
20 November 1955

Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

BURMESE CABINET CRITICAL OF U NU'S BEHAVIOR IN USSR (page 3).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 4)
[PAGE 04]
BURMESE CABINET CRITICAL OF U NU'S BEHAVIOR IN USSR

Prime Minister U Nu has been twitted unmercifully by his cabinet on his actions in Russia, according to U Win, the Burmese ambassador-designate to the United States. The prime minister became quite annoyed when several cabinet members accused him of returning "thoroughly indoctrinated."

U Nu asserted that his invitation to Bulganin to attend the next Asian-African conference arose from a remark he made that most of the Soviet officials at a dinner he attended looked more Asian than European. He said the invitation was never intended to be taken seriously.

Several cabinet members protested his inviting numerous Soviet technicians to Burma. U Win remarked to the American ambassador that, in view of the cabinet opposition, he did not believe the United States need worry about many actually being invited.

Comment

The cabinet's treatment of U Nu cannot be considered indicative of a firm stand against U Nu's professed interest in Soviet economic and technical assistance. Although some members may question the wisdom of closer ties with the USSR, it is doubtful that they would seriously oppose any plans of the popular prime minister.

Moscow probably is prepared fully to exploit Burma's desire for closer trade relations. Even those Burmese leaders who are suspicious of Soviet intentions will welcome barter arrangements which would materially assist in disposing of Burma's surplus rice.
[PAGE 05]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 20 November)

No significant military activity has been reported. UN officials estimate that one Israeli brigade has been withdrawn from the area between the El Auja demilitarized zone and Beersheba, but that Israeli forces around El Auja have not been reduced and are well dug in. General Burns believes that the recent incidents on the Jordanian-Israeli border, which have been attributed to Egyptian-trained terrorists, may have been directed by low level Egyptian military commands or possibly by the Mufti of Jerusalem without the concurrence of Prime Minister Nasr.

The Syrian minister of defense and the chief of staff have informed the American ambassador in Damascus that although Czechoslovakia and the USSR have offered arms, Syria has not signed and does not want to sign any arms agreement with the Soviet bloc. The defense minister said Syria preferred to buy American arms. The chief of staff said that though he was under increasingly strong pressure from leftist circles in the army to conclude a deal with Czechoslovakia, he was determined not to do so,
[PAGE 06]
unless the United States rejected Syria's requests for vehicles and antiaircraft guns. If the United States refused, he said, he would have no alternative but to accept the Soviet offer.

The Syrian statements to the American ambassador may be aimed at setting the stage for a public announcement to the effect that Syria is compelled to turn to the Soviet bloc because the United States refuses to furnish arms.

Moscow has formally announced that the USSR and Syria have agreed to raise their diplomatic missions to the rank of embassies.

The American embassy in Beirut reports a widespread belief in Lebanon and other Arab states that the United States is reappraising its Middle East policy and that some new announcement or proposal regarding the Palestine problem is imminent.
[PAGE 07]
