[PAGE 01]
27 November 1951
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
[[PRED_REDACTION_1]]GENERAL
FAR EAST[[/PRED_REDACTION_1]]
NEAR EAST
5. Lebanese President appeals to West for help against Egypt (page 5).
6. Egyptian Minister suggests US resolve Suez dispute (page 5).
WESTERN EUROPE
7. German Parliament will consider ratifying Schuman Plan following French passage (page 6).
8. Shortage of brown coal in Berlin continues (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
[[PRED_REDACTION_2]]GENERAL
FAR EAST[[/PRED_REDACTION_2]]
[PAGE 04]
3. Chinese Communist plans for the invasion of Formosa reported:
A Chinese Communist plan to attack Chinmen and the Pescadores Islands, off the coast of Fukien province, early in 1952, and to invade Formosa in the summer, was recently prepared under the direction of the Chinese Communist Politburo, according to. This plan calls for the use of 1,500,000 troops. Attacks by destroyers, gunboats and many small craft, in addition to 200 jet and other fighter planes and 60 bombers, will be coordinated with amphibious landings. Underground forces in Formosa will begin activities simultaneously with the attacks.
Comment: This reported plan involves a greater number of troops than are believed available for such an operation at this time, since Chinese Communist field forces are estimated at less than two million men. At the present time, there is no evidence of a build-up of ground-air forces in the area from which an invasion would be launched.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST
5. Lebanese President appeals to West for help against Egypt:
The Lebanese President has appealed to the British Minister in Beirut requesting the four sponsoring powers of the Middle East Command to take urgent action in an effort to prevent Egypt from forcing the Arab states to take a public stand which might make it difficult or impossible for them to join the Command. The President states that he can not take the lead in breaking the Arab front. He suggests that the British concentrate on the Iraqi Prime Minister and that the US approach the Saudi Arabian King.
Comment: Reports on the extensive behind-the-scene maneuvering make it evident that Arab leaders on the whole disapprove of the Egyptian position. It is also clear, however, that at present no Arab state is prepared to defy Egypt and pursue an independent course.
6. Egyptian Minister suggests US resolve Suez dispute:
The Egyptian Minister in Damascus expressed disappointment over the fact that the US had not mediated or resolved the Anglo-Egyptian dispute.
[PAGE 06]
During his conversation with the American Minister to Syria, he stressed that the US and Egypt are "natural allies."
Comment: Various Egyptian as well as Arab officials have approached US representatives with the suggestion that the United States solve the present Anglo-Egyptian dispute. However, none has offered realistic proposals as to how a solution might be achieved, nor have there been any firm indications that the Egyptian Government is willing to make a realistic compromise.
WESTERN EUROPE
7. German Parliament will consider ratifying Schuman Plan following French passage:
In response to French inquiries, Chancellor Adenauer's State Secretary for Internal Affairs has stated that the Schuman Plan's ratification would be considered in the Parliament as soon as the Plan is brought before the French Assembly. Upon the receipt of this statement, the French informed the German Government that final Assembly ratification would probably take place in two weeks' time. Hence coalition parties in the German Parliament are considering placing the matter on the agenda in the next fortnight.
The floor leader of the coalition Free Democrats has predicted that the Plan will be ratified by a substantial majority vote.
Comment: Final balloting in the German Parliament on the Schuman Plan has been considerably delayed. When the bill was passed at its first reading in July, the Chancellor intended to present it for final passage in September. At that time, however, he decided not to do so until the French Government had taken further action.
Whether or not the French Assembly will complete its debate of the Plan within two weeks is problematical. The French Government, however, feels that it can rally sufficient votes to pass the Plan.
[PAGE 07]
8. Shortage of brown coal in Berlin continues:
The shortage of Berlin's winter supply of brown coal has not yet been alleviated. US officials in Germany report that, although 100,000 tons of West German coal have been allocated to Berlin, shipments have been limited because of a shortage of canal barges.
The minimum needs of the city are estimated at 3000 tons daily, mainly for the heating of private homes and public institutions; the present stockpile is sufficient for only about 20 days.
Comment: With the breakdown of the interzonal trade negotiations, East German deliveries of brown coal to Berlin appear to have been indefinitely postponed. Normal deliveries from West Germany are not sufficient to fill this gap and the Allies have attempted to increase those shipments in order to avoid the necessity for emergency measures during the course of the winter.
