FAR EAST

1. Chinese Communists feel they enter negotiations with strong position:
the Chinese Communist Field Commander in Korea, General Peng Teh-huai, advised CCF tactical commanders on 1 July that Chinese delegates to the cease-fire negotiations represent a victorious army, that South Korean demands will be ignored, and that, if negotiations prove unsatisfactory, the CCF will launch their summer offensive. This source also reported that, on the same date, the logistical commands of the CCF Third and Fourth Field Armies informed General Peng of the movement of 80,000 new "volunteers" from Manchuria to the Korean front. The US Far East Command endorses the 8th Army warning that, should this report be true, no significant concessions can be expected -- at least in the political field. Further, the time gained by the enemy during extended negotiations would permit them to concentrate forces equal to or greater than those employed during the April offensive and to construct and repair forward airfields for close air support.

2. Chiang Kai-shek expresses his views on Asian situation:
Chiang Kai-shek observed privately to the US Charge at Taipei on 30 June that the Chinese Communists in Korea badly needed a respite and quite likely would agree to a cease-fire and armistice. The Chinese Communists will not move into Burma, Chiang stated, because it is a "weak link" that will "break automatically" if Thailand or Indochina falls. Further, any overt move into Burma, he felt, would arouse India. Despite Chinese Communist concentrations near the Indochinese border, he does not expect an early operation there; he concluded, however, that Indochina remains one of the numerous potential targets for aggression that could be exploited on short notice.

Comment: Supported by a large intelligence network, Chiang's observations should be based on the best information available. However, Nationalist intelligence reports to US officials regarding Chinese Communist intentions have usually been unreliable. Chiang's departure from the customary Nationalist prediction of imminent Chinese Communist aggression throughout Southeast Asia is of possible significance.
