*Dominican Republic: Dominican authorities may be having some success in creating the impression that the regime is turning away from the ruthless policies of the past. The presence of the OAS subcommittee, which arrived in the Dominican Republic on 7 June, will temporarily hamper General Ramfis Trujillo in any public manifestation of his drive to consolidate his position in the armed forces.

On 7 June his public relations adviser remarked to a newsman that General Jose Roman, minister of defense, had "escaped." He had earlier been reported under arrest, and yesterday a presidential decree formally removed him from his post. General Roman, believed friendly to the US, is known to have had personal difficulties with Ramfis in the past and to have had contact with dissident elements prior to the assassination. Ramfis probably considers Roman's elimination a necessary step in gaining full control of the armed forces.

Official Dominican allegations on 7 June that the assassination of Trujillo was part of a "vast conspiracy with ramifications in a foreign country" are probably a prelude to an effort to implicate Venezuelan President Betancourt. This charge, which could probably be backed up by the Dominicans with plausible evidence, could be used in an attempt to urge removal of the OAS sanctions imposed against the Dominican Republic last August and prompted by Trujillo's effort to kill Betancourt. The American Consulate believes that the now-publicized contacts which a private American citizen had with the dissidents may later be used in an effort to implicate the United States, if this should serve the regime's purposes.

The Venezuelan foreign minister told Ambassador Moscoso yesterday that Colombia, earlier reported as reluctant to join possible joint action against the Dominican regime, is now agreeable to advancing the date of Venezuelan-Colombian joint fleet maneuvers previously agreed on for 18 to 25 June, and to moving its participating vessels from Colombian waters to the vicinity of the Dominican Republic. The Colombian vessels will consist of two destroyers and a frigate. Venezuela will have three destroyers participating. Both countries are agreeable to continuing the maneuvers as long as necessary. A Venezuelan navy captain was to leave for Colombia yesterday to serve as liaison between the two fleet units.

9 June 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii
