[PAGE 01]
7 July 1959
Copy No. C 63

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
7 JULY 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Soviet deputy foreign minister to attend revolution-day celebrations in Baghdad; more Soviet military aid reaches Iraq.
More bloc aircraft delivered to UAR; Soviet-UAR arms negotiations continue.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
UAR—Elections on 8 July likely to leave no well-organized Syrian group in opposition to Nasir’s control.
Cyprus—Rift between Makarios and Grivas threatens to split Greek Cypriot right wing.
Terrorist campaign may be launched in French Cameroun.
Comment on Sukarno’s proclamation of 1945 constitution.

III. THE WEST
De Gaulle envisages consultation between France and five other Common Market members to coordinate positions in NATO and East-West discussions.

LATE ITEM
Comment on USSR rocket launch of 2 July.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
7 July 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Iraq: The composition of the Soviet delegation to Baghdad for revolution-day celebrations on 14 July reflects Moscow’s continuing efforts to maintain the momentum of its campaign of “friendship” with the Qasim government. The delegation will be led by First Deputy Foreign Minister V. V. Kuznetsov. The US and UK delegations will be headed by resident ambassadors. Deliveries of Soviet military equipment to Iraq continue, with the arrival at Basra of at least three additional shiploads of aircraft, armored cars, and other equipment in June. More arms aid is scheduled to arrive shortly.
(Page 1)

Bloc-UAR: Delivery in May of 15 crates of Czech aircraft, possibly MIG jet fighters, on Polish vessels to Alexandria. Negotiations for both civil and military aircraft have been under way between the UAR and Moscow officials for the past year. Other agreements already reached in the course of negotiations call for the shipment of additional naval vessels, aircraft, and artillery to meet the long-term needs of the UAR armed forces. Soviet leaders apparently are continuing to depend on their economic and military aid programs to restore the amicable relationship with the UAR which was interrupted by the exchange of recriminations between Moscow and Cairo earlier this year.
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR: Nasir apparently intends to use the 8 July elections of the National Union—the only authorized party in the UAR—both as a concession to the public desire for more participation in government and as an opportunity to test the real strength of the Syrian Baathist party. In Syria, a concerted effort has been organized by diverse political elements to defeat Baathist candidates, reportedly with Nasir’s covert approval. The results are likely to bring a reduction in Baathist influence in Syrian affairs, leaving no well-organized political group which might oppose Nasir’s control.
(Page 2)

Cyprus: The widening rift between Greek Cypriot leaders Archbishop Makarios and former terrorist leader General Grivas, now in Athens, threatens to split the controlling Greek Cypriot right wing. The Cypriot Communists, while overtly backing Makarios, are clandestinely trying to widen the breach. Makarios told the Greek consul general on Cyprus that he recently wrote Grivas a letter expressing strong displeasure with the general. Grivas has been critical of the Cyprus agreements themselves and the way they are being implemented.
(Page 3)

Indonesia: President Sukarno’s proclamation of the 1945 constitution provides a legal basis for the virtually unrestricted powers he has acquired in his ten-year rule. It does not necessarily mean that he will make any determined new effort to solve Indonesia’s pressing political, economic, and military problems. Sukarno’s return to the old constitution is strongly supported by the army, which hopes to get several posts in the next cabinet. Should it achieve a greater political role, the army may make further efforts to curtail the growth and activities of the Communist party.
(Page 4)

7 July 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
Cameroun: Violence, perhaps initiated by the extremist wing of the outlawed Communist-influenced nationalist movement, the Union of the Cameroons Population (UPC), appears possible in this French trust territory, which is scheduled for independence in January 1960. Terrorist bands have recently attacked widely scattered targets—generally involving European interests—and caused at least 13 deaths. The outbreaks of terrorism may be related to threatened labor unrest and reported plots to assassinate pro-French government leaders in a UPC effort to focus international attention on Cameroun and influence the United Nations to order new elections before its independence.
(Page 5)

III. THE WEST

France: De Gaulle, in his efforts to enhance France’s standing in the Western alliance, now apparently envisages regular high-level consultation among France and the other five Common Market members to coordinate the “European” position in NATO and in East-West discussions. The Italians, who in the 25 June talks with De Gaulle in Rome steered him away from his initial proposal for a French-Italian-German combine, appear receptive, and Bonn is giving high-level attention to the proposal.
(Page 6)

LATE ITEM

*Soviet missile: The Soviet Union on 2 July launched another geophysical rocket carrying three animals and extensive scientific instrumentation, according to a TASS announcement on 6 July. A missile was launched in a vertical

7 July 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
direction from the Kapustin Yar Missile Test Range at approximately 0341 GMT on 2 July, reaching a height of about 130 nautical miles. On the basis of available information, the operation does not appear significant from the standpoints of altitude and payload; telemetry analysis will be required to determine the significance of the biological and scientific experiments.
(Page 7)

7 July 59 DAILY BRIEF iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Moscow Continues to Cultivate Qasim Regime

The high-level composition of the delegation scheduled to represent the USSR at the Baghdad revolution-day celebrations on 14 July reflects continuing efforts by Moscow to maintain the momentum of its “friendship” campaign with the Qasim government.

The delegation will be led by First Deputy Minister V. V. Kuznetsov, who is second only to Gromyko in the Foreign Ministry. Other members of the five-man Soviet delegation include a deputy minister of culture and Khrushchev’s son-in-law, A. I. Adzhubey, who was recently made editor of Izvestia.

The designation of Kuznetsov is apparently in deference to Iraqi desires, as conveyed recently to Rumanian diplomats, that foreign delegations be headed by someone of deputy foreign minister rank or only slightly below. Rumania is expected to follow the Soviet procedure, as are other bloc countries. The United States and Britain, as well as Turkey and Iran, plan to have their ambassadors resident in Baghdad lead their delegations; West Germany, however, is scheduled to send a group headed by a high-ranking Foreign Ministry official.

Soviet leaders probably expect that displays of bloc military equipment by Iraqi armed forces at the celebrations will also enhance the USSR’s posture as a big-power friend of Iraq. Deliveries of Soviet military equipment to Iraq continue at a high rate. At least three shiploads of arms arrived at Basra in June, including jet aircraft, antiaircraft artillery, armored cars, trucks, and other materiel. In addition, another Soviet vessel is scheduled to arrive at Basra shortly; this is the 15th arms cargo dispatched by the USSR to Iraq since late 1958. Deliveries to date include more than 65 jet aircraft (at least 15 of which are IL-28 jet light bombers), from 100 and 150 medium tanks, and substantial quantities of various types of artillery and infantry weapons.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

UAR National Union Party Elections

Elections to membership in the UAR’s single political organization, the National Union, are to take place on 8 July. Over 30,000 members are to be elected; these will subsequently form local and provincial government councils and provide a political cadre from which President Nasir will choose a national assembly.

Only in Syria, where the Nasir regime is concerned over local discontent with the region’s subordinate role in the UAR government, is there competition between various factions and real popular interest in the outcome. In general, the regime appears to be giving a large measure of freedom to Syrian voters. Public security offices throughout the region have been ordered to “observe neutrality in whatever is connected with the National Union elections.”

At the same time, however, Nasir is supporting various Syrian political elements engaged in a combined effort to end the dominant role in Syrian politics played by the leftist-oriented Baathist party, led by Akram Hawrani. Nasir reportedly is relying on strong-man Abd al-Hamid Sarraj, Syrian interior minister, who is directly responsible for election activities in Syria and may be coordinating opposition to the Baathists.

Syria apparently will emerge from the elections without a single political group well organized or influential enough to offer serious potential opposition to control from Cairo.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
Open Rift Threatens Among Greek Cypriots

Greek Cypriot unity is apparently being seriously undermined by the widening rift between Archbishop Makarios, head of the interim Cyprus government, and General Grivas, influential former terrorist leader who is now in retirement in Athens. The archbishop is still trying to maintain a facade of solidarity among the Greek Cypriots, and it seems doubtful that an open struggle will erupt at this time.

Makarios apparently realizes that his control is being challenged by Grivas and that he must risk an open breach. Despite his recent public statement to the contrary, Makarios has disagreed with Grivas’ public statements regarding Cyprus and intimated to the Greek consul general on Cyprus that he had written to Grivas of his displeasure “in a forcible style.”

The Communists, while continuing to recognize Makarios as the legitimate leader of the Greek Cypriots, are covertly exploiting the split in the right wing by spreading rumors designed to widen the breach.

Grivas is the undetermined factor in the future of Greek Cypriot affairs. Despite his earlier promise to remain aloof from Cypriot politics, his silence has been rather tenuous and required little stimulus to be broken. Any statements by him might accelerate the normal Greek tendency toward political factionalism. Should Grivas emerge as a prime contestant on the Greek political scene, however, and seek to exploit his Cyprus role, there could be serious repercussions on Cyprus which could endanger the smooth transition of the Cypriot government.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Reinstitution of 1945 Constitution Legalizes Existing Indonesian Situation

President Sukarno’s reinstitution of the 1945 constitution on 5 July provides a legal basis for the increased executive powers he has pre-empted over the past ten years and paves the way for continued direct presidential government. Two years ago Sukarno assumed virtual dictatorial powers when he abandoned parliamentary government by appointing his own cabinet. This presidential cabinet, led by Prime Minister Djuanda, resigned on 6 July.

President Sukarno himself will head the next cabinet, although a prime minister apparently will carry the bulk of administrative work. A legislature, including regional and functional representatives, and an advisory council are to be created “within the shortest possible time”; the means of their formation—whether by elections or appointment—has not been specified.

The change in constitution does not provide any ready-made solutions to Indonesia’s chronic difficulties, nor does it indicate that Sukarno will make a determined new effort to cope with the problems of a growing Communist party, continuing insurgent activities, and a deteriorating economy. The vaguely written 1945 constitution will lend itself to a flexible, improvised, and highly centralized administration.

Sukarno’s return to the old constitution is strongly supported by the army, which hopes to hold several portfolios in the next cabinet. Should it achieve a greater political role, the army may make further efforts to curtail the growth and activities of the Communist party.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
Increased Violence Appears Possible in Cameroun

The growing number of terrorist attacks within the past week in the French trust territory of Cameroun suggests that nationalist extremists may be initiating the disorders in order to focus international attention on the territory. The violence, directed at a wide variety of targets, has already resulted in at least 13 deaths, including six Europeans. The government has announced a state of alert in several areas, and armed police patrolled the streets of the capital on 6 July.

The violence appears similar to the former activities of the Union of the Cameroons Population (UPC), the outlawed nationalist movement which created serious disorders in the seaport of Douala in 1955 and subsequently conducted guerrilla warfare against the government for three years. The UPC apparently split up following its military defeat last autumn, and several former supporters are engaged in ostensibly legal political activities. An extremist wing, however—probably led by Felix Moumie—carries on anti-government activities from other African countries, particularly Guinea, and reportedly may plan to organize a revolt in Cameroun including an attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Ahidjo.

The UPC’s expatriate representatives are trying to obtain backing in next fall’s UN General Assembly session for new elections—under international supervision—before Cameroun gains its scheduled independence in January 1960.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
[PAGE 13]
III. THE WEST

De Gaulle Proposes “European” Policy Coordination

French President de Gaulle proposed to Italian President Gronchi on 25 June regular high-level consultations among France, Italy, and Germany to organize a common “European” policy. At Italian insistence, he agreed to extend the group to take in all six Common Market countries.

De Gaulle apparently envisages the creation of a new bloc, whose position would be coordinated but whose decisions would not be binding on its members, to speak for “Europe” in NATO and in East-West discussions. He reportedly told the Italians that such a formation would permit its members to indicate to the Soviet Union the existence of a strong, united European force. He probably also has in mind the effect of such a combination as a counterweight to US and British influence within NATO.

The Italians, who seemed pleased to have persuaded De Gaulle to broaden his “club” and to work within the NATO framework, appear receptive to his plan, and Bonn, contacted separately, is giving high-level consideration to it. German Finance Minister Etzel stated that the time has come to take a step forward toward European integration on the political level, if the six-nation cohesiveness needed for the Common Market is to be maintained.

De Gaulle’s proposal is another in the series of moves he has made to try to enhance France’s standing in the Western alliance and to make Paris the spokesman for Continental Europe.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 6
[PAGE 14]
LATE ITEM

Soviet Missile Activity

The Soviet Union launched a missile in a vertical direction from the Kapustin Yar Missile Test Range at approximately 0341 GMT on 2 July. The preparatory activities included a “readiness eight hours” announcement at the beginning of the countdown.

On 6 July the TASS news service announced that on 2 July the USSR had routinely launched another single-stage, upper-atmosphere research rocket containing two dogs and a rabbit which were recovered successfully. The total scientific payload weight, announced at 2,000 kilograms (4,410 lbs.), included equipment for studying ultraviolet rays, the structure of the ionosphere, micrometeorites, direction and speed of air currents at different altitudes, as well as the density, pressure, temperature, and composition of the atmosphere at different heights.

On the basis of available information, this operation does not appear significant from the standpoints of altitude and payload. Telemetry analysis will be required to determine the significance of the biological and scientific experiments, although there appears to be nothing new in evidence. The altitude achieved in the 2 July flight is estimated to be about 130 nautical miles—substantially lower than the heights achieved in the three previously verified similar operations.

7 July 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
[PAGE 15]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 16]
