Situation in Algeria

De Gaulle's 19 May press conference, virtually endorsing the recent actions of military and rightist civilian leaders in Algeria, appears to have encouraged those elements to intensify their pressure for a change of regime in Paris. Exuberant new demonstrations, highlighted by renewed demands that Premier Pflimlin make way for De Gaulle, swept Algiers when National Assembly deputy and former Governor General of Algeria Jacques Soustelle told a wildly cheering crowd that the position taken by De Gaulle showed his "heart is with us."

Soustelle has assumed the role of principal spokesman and rabble rouser for the elements now in control of Algeria, but so far has been assigned no formal role other than "technical and political adviser" to General Salan, whose titular authority is still recognized. The ambitious Soustelle is already reported to have clashed with Salan, and he may assume more open authority if the extremists' continuing doubts cause them to remove Salan.

Meanwhile, General Massu's Algiers committee of public safety has been further expanded to 38 members, and a 24-member all-Algeria committee--reportedly including both Massu and France's top air force commander in Algeria--has been formally established. On 19 May a spokesman said that the new committee is "certainly not a government," and Soustelle has specifically disclaimed any desire to see a "rupture" between France and Algeria. He is quoted as adding, however, that "events" would have to be judged "as they happen." A strong protest by the Algiers committee over measures taken by the Pflimlin government against "plotters" in France appeared to move the committee a step closer to a final break with the present Paris regime.

As a corollary to strenuous efforts by the French leaders in Algiers to provide evidence of widespread Moslem support for the "new Algeria," General Salan, in his most dramatic initiative to date, has apparently offered the Moslem rebels of the National Liberation Front a "pardon" if they will lay down their arms. This gambit, however, is unlikely to have much effect.

20 May 58    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
