[PAGE 01]
7 February 1957
Copy No. 131

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. KING HUSSAIN'S POSITION CRITICAL (page 3).

2. KING SAUD ORDERS NEW ARMS AID TO YEMEN FOR HARASSING BRITISH IN ADEN (page 4).

3. SOVIET EFFORTS TO UNDERCUT GOMULKA (page 5).

4. BONN CONSIDERING CLOSER RELATIONS WITH POLAND AND OTHER SATELLITES (page 6).

5. INDIA PURCHASES 68 BRITISH JET LIGHT AIRCRAFT (page 7).

6. CENTRAL SUMATRA THREATENS MORE DRASTIC ACTION AGAINST DJAKARTA (page 8).

[PAGE 04]
1. KING HUSSAIN'S POSITION CRITICAL

Comment on:

King Hussain's recent anti-Communist actions have involved him in a critical battle with leftist elements which could result in his loss of the throne.

Reports that the government, at Hussain's insistence, has banned Communist publications indicate that the king is still trying to follow through on his 2 February letter which pointed out the danger of Communism and implicitly aligned him with the West.

Nuwar was supporting the Nabulsi cabinet in its refusal to follow the king's wishes in regard to appointment of key officials. Nuwar knew the army would not support him in any other course. The pro-Egyptian "free officers" were "very confident" and "prepared for any eventuality;" that the major political parties--especially the left-wing Socialists and the Communists--had decided to stand together to resist the king, and that more than two thirds of the members of the lower house of parliament support the cabinet.

This Egyptian picture of nearly unanimous opposition to the king is probably overdrawn, but it is clear that the leftists and extreme nationalists are, with Egyptian assistance, rallying their supporters. The king seems unlikely to prevail against them unless he evinces more determination than he has shown in the past and receives substantial outside assistance.

[PAGE 05]
2. KING SAUD ORDERS NEW ARMS AID TO YEMEN FOR HARASSING BRITISH IN ADEN

Comment on:

King Saud instructed his brother, Crown Prince Faisal, on 1 February to send "not less than a thousand" rifles "quickly" to Yemen "by the well-known way,"

A few days earlier the Imam of Yemen had asked Saud for 1,000 rifles and ammunition--saying he was unable to fulfill all the requests for arms from inhabitants of Aden Protectorate who wished to resist British oppression. The Imam claimed that Egypt had not sent the necessary arms and that the USSR had offered to barter a very large arms supply which Yemen had refused. The Imam closed by asking what Saud would think if Yemen were to buy arms from Czechoslovakia, "since as your majesty realizes, necessity knows no law!"

The Imam's message suggests that Saud may be unaware of the extent of Yemen's arms deals with the Soviet bloc. In addition to a large shipment of Soviet arms to Yemen during October prior to the closing of the Suez Canal, some emergency shipments of Soviet light arms are being flown to Yemen via Saudi Arabia, apparently without the king's knowledge.

[PAGE 06]
3. SOVIET EFFORTS TO UNDERCUT GOMULKA

The Soviet embassy in Warsaw is interfering in Polish internal affairs in order to undermine the position of First Secretary Gomulka and Gomulka is convinced that he must inflict a final defeat on the Stalinists and purge them from the party administration,

the embassy was reported to be concentrating on strengthening Stalinist elements in local party organizations. Numerous Stalinists had been elected as delegates to the forthcoming Warsaw party conference, and Gomulka is reported to have ordered investigations to determine if these elections were fraudulent. These elections threaten the position of Stefan Staszewski, Warsaw first secretary who was one of Gomulka's most prominent supporters during the October revolution. The Soviet embassy is giving support to Stanislaw Pawlak, a secretary of the Warsaw provincial party organization.

Local Economy

Minister Mijal's recent public attack against Gomulka's agricultural policies was made at the instance of the Soviet ambassador. The embassy is also trying to prevent the official recognition of several youth organizations representing various points of view as a replacement for the Polish Communist youth organization.

[PAGE 07]
4. BONN CONSIDERING CLOSER RELATIONS WITH POLAND AND OTHER SATELLITES

The head of the political division of the West German Foreign Ministry told American representatives on 4 February that the government is actively considering ways and means of reorienting Polish trade toward the West and increasing German-Polish cultural and technical contacts.

On the same day, a Foreign Ministry spokesman told the press that Bonn was thinking of establishing trade missions in the Satellites generally.

Comment

Bonn is apparently planning a cautious improvement in relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. This is the first official statement that trade missions are contemplated. Chancellor Adenauer, however, told journalists in Berlin on 2 February that West Germany was not contemplating a long-term loan to Poland.

[PAGE 08]
5. INDIA PURCHASES 68 BRITISH JET LIGHT AIRCRAFT

New Delhi has announced its signature of a contract to purchase 68 Canberra jet light aircraft from Britain, according to the American air attaché in New Delhi. A press report from London states that the order calls for 54 bombers, six trainers, and eight photographic reconnaissance aircraft.

The air attaché in New Delhi notes that the timing of India's decision may have been influenced by the UN resolution on Kashmir.

Comment

India has been negotiating with Britain for over a year over the purchase of Canberras. Although technical considerations were a factor which held up the signing of the contract, the chief cause of the delay apparently was indecision as to whether or not to accept a Soviet offer to provide IL-28 jet light bombers, reportedly at half the price of Canberras.

The government's decision reflects its unwillingness to become dependent on Soviet sources of supply for important types of military equipment despite the difference in cost.

[PAGE 09]
6. CENTRAL SUMATRA THREATENS MORE DRASTIC ACTION AGAINST DJAKARTA

Comment on:

The resignation of Indonesian prime minister Ali was demanded at a mass rally in Padang, Central Sumatra, on 5 February. A resolution calling for the resumption by former vice president Hatta of joint responsibility with President Sukarno was passed. The resolution called on the Central Sumatra ruling council to "take more radical action" in the event that Ali refuses to resign.

The renewal of Sumatran demands, coupled with threats to break with Djakarta, probably results from the failure of the recent conference of Sumatran army officers with the chief of staff to solve Sumatran military and political problems. The Nahdlatul Ulama, the Moslem party which is the key to the cabinet's survival and which has followed a vacillating course in response to events in Sumatra, may again decide to desert Ali, and thus bring about the fall of the cabinet.

Meanwhile, dissident military authorities in South Sumatra have banned strikes following reports that the Communist labor federation planned to promote labor unrest in protest against the arrest of several Sumatran Communist leaders.
