[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

14 April 1956

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH REPORTED NEGOTIATING CEASE-FIRE IN ALGERIA (page 3).

2. PARIS TO PROPOSE MOROCCO AND TUNISIA FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE UN (page 4).

3. CZECH ARMY EXERCISE HELD IN EAST GERMANY (page 5).

4. JAPANESE-SOVIET DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS MAY ARISE FROM FISHERIES NEGOTIATIONS (page 6).

5. FRANCE REPORTED ABOUT TO RECOGNIZE COMMUNIST CHINA (page 7).

6. NEHRU MAKES "FINAL OFFER" TO PAKISTAN ON KASHMIR (page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 9)

[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH REPORTED NEGOTIATING CEASE-FIRE
IN ALGERIA

Premier Mollet would accept the following terms for a cease-fire in Algeria: truce without obligation to surrender; guarantee for the lives, families and property of combatants; general amnesty for prisoners; and safe conduct for negotiators.

Comment

So far Paris has avoided negotiating a general political settlement with rebel spokesmen. Mollet, however, is under sharp pressure within his cabinet to bring the Algerian imbroglio to the point where negotiations could be started with responsible Moslem leaders; and the increasing budgetary squeeze resulting from mounting military expenditures will probably oblige him to explore every possible solution.

[PAGE 05]
2. PARIS TO PROPOSE MOROCCO AND TUNISIA FOR
MEMBERSHIP IN THE UN

On 12 April, Secretary of State for Moroccan and Tunisian Affairs Alain Savary disclosed to Ambassador Dillon that France has decided to sponsor Morocco and Tunisia for admission to the United Nations. A public announcement will be made once the subject has been discussed with these countries.

Comment

Paris probably estimates that this move would counter any Arab-Asian attack in the UN this fall on France's Algerian policy. It would also forestall sponsorship of the countries by the Soviet Union or a Moslem state, such as Egypt.

[PAGE 06]
3. CZECH ARMY EXERCISE HELD IN EAST GERMANY

Czech forces held an exercise recently in the Doebeln area, between Dresden and Leipzig in East Germany.

the "comrades come on invitation of the minister of defense, carry out their combined operations and vanish." Local officials, who were disturbed because their immediate superior had not been informed, were told "with kind regards from Comrades Ulbricht and Stoph," that he "will not know about such things in the future either."

Comment

This is the first positive identification of ground forces of any Warsaw pact member other than the Soviet Union conducting exercises outside its own country. It is not clear whether this activity was a combined exercise with Soviet or East German troops or a Czech demonstration.

Czech officers were noted in the general area of Doebeln in mid-February observing a Soviet exercise, possibly in preparation for some combined military activity. Soviet forces in Germany held a large-scale command post exercise involving all major commands from 30 March to 8 April.

[PAGE 07]
4. JAPANESE-SOVIET DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS MAY
ARISE FROM FISHERIES NEGOTIATIONS

Certain Japanese government leaders have expressed themselves as fearing that at the forthcoming fisheries negotiations at Moscow the USSR will seek the restoration of diplomatic relations with Japan as the price for a fisheries settlement. Ambassador Allison reports that the Japanese believe they may be forced by both Soviet and domestic pressure to resume diplomatic relations without first settling Japan's territorial claims, or at least to reduce such claims to make a fishing settlement possible.

Japan's top defense official told Allison on 12 April that several members of the government party are worried over the appointment of Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Kono as chief Japanese negotiator since his political ambitions might lead him to make "unwise concessions."

Comment

Japan is highly vulnerable to Soviet economic pressure on fishing activity, and the present situation provides a good opportunity for the views of those Japanese elements which favor a quick peace treaty with the USSR to outweigh the influence of the advocates of a strong stand. Soviet threats to the fishery industry reportedly are weakening popular support for a firm position.

Kono is closely connected with the fishing interests and is at present one of the most powerful men in the government. His power appears to be declining, however, and he probably believes that his prestige can be increased by conclusion of a settlement with the USSR.

[PAGE 08]
5. FRANCE REPORTED ABOUT TO RECOGNIZE
COMMUNIST CHINA

Comment

Current reports that France has agreed to exchange trade and cultural representatives with Communist China may have given rise to rumors of diplomatic recognition.

France would not recognize Communist China "under present circumstances."

While France is unlikely to make the move at present, there is continuing support within the French assembly for recognition.

[PAGE 09]
6. NEHRU MAKES "FINAL OFFER" TO PAKISTAN
ON KASHMIR

Comment on:

Prime Minister Nehru's public offer on 13 April to Pakistan to settle the Kashmir dispute by making the present UN cease-fire line a permanent border will probably be rejected outright by Pakistan, which has just announced its decision to resubmit the Kashmir issue to the United Nations.

Nehru described the offer as "the farthest India is prepared to go." He said that American military aid to Pakistan had destroyed the "roots and foundations" of a plebiscite in Kashmir and "we have therefore to think and solve this problem in a different way."

Although Pakistani leaders have in the past privately discussed various possible partitions of the state, they have always insisted on either a plebiscite or joint rule over the Indian-held Vale--the area centering on Srinagar, which is the only economically important part of Kashmir.

Pakistan's claim to all of Kashmir has been kept alive in the Pakistani public mind since 1947, and it is unlikely that the present government could accept the Indian offer and remain in office.

[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 13 April)

Only one incident, a minor skirmish on the Israeli-Jordanian border, has been reported since the air battle on 12 April. Despite subsequent claims that another Egyptian and an Israeli plane were shot down in that action, there is no good evidence any planes were lost other than the Egyptian jet which fell in Israeli territory.

On 13 April, UN secretary general Hammarskjold asked the American embassy in Cairo to forward to the Israelis a message stating that he is convinced Egypt wants to avoid war and that "the question of war and peace at present is in the hands of Israel."

Hammarskjold was earlier reported to be working on a plan to restore some semblance of effectiveness to the armistice agreements. He postponed his departure from Cairo for 24 hours in order to talk further with the Egyptians. Hammarskjold also replied brusquely to Israeli prime minister Ben-Gurion's message which denounced Nasr's agreement to cease fire as worthless and demanded assurances that Egypt would live up to the agreement. The secretary general reminded Ben-Gurion that Israel had not yet confirmed that it had issued orders to carry out the agreement. (Press)

The first six of the twelve Mystere jet fighters Israel has purchased left France on 11 April and arrived in Israel

[PAGE 11]
the same day. The other six were scheduled to depart on 13 or 14 April.

The first operational movement of Egypt's newly acquired Soviet motor torpedo boats was noted on 10 April when six of them left Alexandria harbor at dawn.

On 3 April, the Saudi Arabian defense minister ordered that the Saudi air force B-26 light bombers be made combat-ready in 60 days. The Saudis have nine B-26's, of which four are believed operational.

believe the planes cannot be made combat-ready even in 120 days. (SECRET)
