General Torres, who has just returned from a tour of military units, apparently believes that he has sufficient support for a successful revolution. Until now, he has helped resist Movement efforts to oust the junta by force, because he favored the Movement's return to power through peaceful elections. Late last month a pro-US military group demanded that Torres be removed; this and the lack of elections may have prompted him to act at this time.

The Movement, which is strongly anti-US, has the support of the small Communist Party. Its program calls for a labor-type government, nationalization of the tin mines, and higher prices for tin. General Seleme, an opportunist, reportedly favors a Peron-type government, and Paz Estenssoro, the Movement's leader in exile in Argentina, reportedly was promised arms from Peron.

7. Strike of Chilean copper workers regarded as inevitable:

Manuel Ovalle, president of the Chilean Copper Workers Confederation, regards a copper strike at the Anaconda and Braden mines as inevitable. According to him, the companies have made no counterproposal, and have indicated that they cannot grant any further pay increases unless the government grants them preferential exchange treatment.

President Gonzalez Videla has stated that the government will fulfill its agreement with the companies by sending the new copper exchange and tax reform bill to Congress; but he has also said that the companies could pay for the wage increase out of current profits. Ovalle believes that it will be absolutely impossible to secure approval of this legislation.

Comment: The strike, now scheduled for 25 April, would involve the three important American-operated mining properties which account for about 95 percent of Chilean copper production or approximately 360,000 metric tons a year.

The Chilean Government's policy on copper has been under attack by all elements of the opposition. The US Embassy commented last month that approval of the new legislation "appears to be a remote possibility in this highly volatile pre-election atmosphere."

- 7 -
