[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

27 February 1960

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
27 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Greece: Soviet Ambassador Sergeyev, since returning to Athens in early February from home leave, has been contacting various ministers of the Greek Government to repeat Moscow's desire for closer political, cultural, and economic relations. In a recent meeting with Foreign Minister Averoff, Sergeyev complained of Athens' "indifference" to Moscow's efforts for an international detente and the unwillingness of top Greek leaders to accept an invitation to visit the USSR. Ambassador Briggs believes that Moscow is planning to exploit Greece's present economic difficulties with "some spectacular offer" at the opportune moment.

Bloc-Iraq: Czechoslovakia has offered Iraq an aid credit of about $30,000,000. Iraq will probably accept this additional bloc assistance and may use the credit for a series of quick-impact projects designed to impress the populace.

[PAGE 04]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

South Vietnam: The Diem government reports that, according to recently captured documents, the Vietnamese Communists plan intensified terrorist activities in Saigon and the countryside in the immediate future. American personnel in South Vietnam, who are likely targets, have been advised to increase their normal vigilance. While the reported Communist intentions may be exaggerated, the security situation in South Vietnam has deteriorated in recent months. The estimated 3,000 terrorists have become bolder.

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 06]
Renewed Soviet Overtures to Greece

Soviet Ambassador Sergeyev, just back from home leave, has continued to emphasize to Greek government ministers Moscow's desire for closer political, cultural, and economic relations. In a recent meeting with Foreign Minister Averoff, Sergeyev complained of Athens' "indifference" to Soviet efforts for an international detente and the unwillingness of top Greek leaders to accept an invitation to visit the USSR. He assured Averoff that the Soviet leaders' desire for friendly, peaceful, and warm relations with all countries was not just a matter of current or temporary policy and cited as evidence of their good faith the recent decision to reduce Soviet armed forces by one third.

Similar arguments last November failed to win Greek approval for Soviet requests for expanded cultural exchanges and air service routes through Athens. Sergeyev also suggested at that time that Averoff and Prime Minister Karamanlis visit the USSR, and angled for an invitation to Khrushchev to stop over for talks in Athens on his way to Paris trip in March.

While Greek officials have shown little enthusiasm for Moscow's overtures, growing agricultural surpluses, increasing unemployment, and inability to secure admission to the European Common Market make bloc offers increasingly difficult for Athens to reject. In their recent conversation, Averoff told Sergeyev that further trade expansion was difficult, as the USSR insisted on barter agreements but produced few goods that Greece could use. Subsequently, Averoff admitted to Ambassador Briggs that while Greece actually could use many Soviet-produced items, the government had no intention of allowing the USSR to "dig itself into the Greek market."

Ambassador Briggs believes that the Soviet leaders are "playing their cards carefully" and are planning to exploit Greece's economic difficulties with "some spectacular offer."

[PAGE 07]
Czech Economic Aid Offer to Iraq

Czechoslovakia's offer of a $30,000,000 credit to Iraq will make it possible for Baghdad to carry out quickly several small projects having immediate domestic propaganda value. Sensitive to public disillusionment, Baghdad needs to fulfill soon at least some of its public promises of economic development, and will probably accept the offer. Prague, under the bloc's aid program for underdeveloped countries, has displayed an ability to carry out projects of a light industrial nature quickly and efficiently.

Iraqi economic conditions have deteriorated steadily since Qasim came to power, and long-range projects--financed primarily by the Soviet $137,500,000 line of credit--are still in the early stages of implementation. Iraq has recently been attempting to induce Western contractors who have been active in Iraq in the past to undertake a number of projects on which it wants quick reliable performance.

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Communist Terrorism in South Vietnam

Communist plans for an early increase of terrorism in South Vietnam are allegedly revealed in a Communist directive captured recently in a raid on a dissident command post in the southwestern border area. The Diem government apparently is convinced that the document is genuine. Three Communist agents captured subsequently have reportedly confirmed a Communist intent to stage some kind of dramatic incident in Saigon.

Although the document refers to an "armed coup" to take place sometime in the early future, South Vietnamese officials interpret this to mean a show of force, possibly involving coordinated attacks in widespread areas. Vietnamese Communist guerrilla forces in South Vietnam, augmented in recent months by personnel infiltrated from North Vietnam, are believed to number only about 3,000. There are no specific indications that American personnel are intended targets, but precautions are being taken in view of past Communist attacks on members of the American Military Aid and Advisory Group in 1957 and 1959.

While the report of Communist intentions may be exaggerated, the security situation--particularly in the southwest--has deteriorated during the past six months, and Communist terrorists have become bolder. Assassinations and kidnappings of local officials and villagers have increased to between 20 and 35 per month, and large Communist bands have been attacking government patrols and security installations.

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
