Indonesian President Rejects Further Chinese
Communist Protests

President Sukarno underscored Indonesia's firmness in its
recent relations with Peiping when he told the Chinese Commu-
nist ambassador on 20 November that, despite Peiping's objec-
tions, Djakarta will implement its decree banning alien retail-
ers in rural areas. Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio, who
described the interview to the American ambassador, said Su-
karno had not given an inch and had been even tougher than he,
Subandrio, had been.

Sukarno told the Chinese ambassador he would listen to no
further objections to the Indonesian ban at this time but would
consider complaints after a lapse of four months. When the am-
bassador accused Sukarno of playing into the hands of Western
imperialists, the President told him he needed no advice on this
subject. He said that Indonesians, when accused by foreigners
of making mistakes, were likely to re-examine their actions
but were capable of "coming back hard" if no fault were found
and the critic persisted.

Sukarno refused to lift restrictions on the movements of
Chinese Embassy personnel but agreed to release a Chinese
consul general placed under house arrest by the Indonesian
Army for obstructing the decree in West Java. Subandrio said
the government would find a way to ease him out of the country
without declaring him persona non grata.

The Indonesian Communist party, which has been placed in
an embarrassing position by Peiping's pressure on the Indonesian
Government for repeal of the decree, has charged that the Indo-
nesian Army is responsible for the Sino-Indonesian tension. A
party statement of 21 November accused the West Java army
command of implementing the decree in a manner which opposed
the spirit of the Sino-Indonesian joint communique of early Octo-
ber, issued when Subandrio visited Peiping. This criticism of
the army may provoke further army measures to limit Commu-
nist party activity.
24 Nov 59      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN      Page 3
