Soviet Military Aid to Indonesia

Moscow, in keeping with its past performance in certain other underdeveloped countries--such as the UAR, Afghanistan, and even Yemen--apparently is willing for political reasons to provide modern weapons to the Indonesian armed forces regardless of Indonesian ability to utilize such materiel.

Since the Soviet Union's extension of a $250,000,000 economic credit to Indonesia during Khrushchev's visit to Djakarta last February, Moscow has engaged in a program with far-reaching political implications to ensure Soviet participation in Indonesia's economic and military development. It has effectively capitalized on the Indonesian President's sensitivity to what he considers US hostility to himself. The Soviet Union probably hopes that this approach, combined with its economic aid and well over in military assistance since February 1960, will strengthen Sukarno's resolve to bring members of the Indonesian Communist party into his cabinet.

Previously the anti-Communist posture of Army Chief of Staff General Nasution and the Indonesian Army had forestalled Sukarno's intentions in this regard. However, on Sukarno's orders, General Nasution led the Indonesian mission to Moscow in January which resulted in the army's acceptance for the first time of a substantial amount of bloc military equipment. Moscow may feel that Nasution's acceptance of this materiel will undercut his opposition to President Sukarno's plans. In addition, Soviet officials also impressed Nasution with their support of Indonesia's intention to recover West New Guinea.

Since the conclusion of the January arms agreement, Moscow radio has launched a steady propaganda barrage in support of Indonesia's position on Guinea. Subandrio told the US ambassador in Djakarta that accommodation with the bloc "had been unavoidable" since no alternative was available to the Soviet offer of political support on the question of New Guinea. Moscow probably hopes that Soviet assurance of continued full diplomatic support for Djakarta in the New Guinea campaign will strengthen the Communist party in Indonesia in its efforts to expand its role throughout all levels of the government.

10 Feb 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
