[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

21 November 1952

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. USSR-based MIG-15's engage US Navy jets off Korea (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
2. Cotton export crisis reportedly endangers Egyptian regime (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE
4. West German federal elections postponed (page 5).
5. France intends no basic changes in Saar conventions (page 5).

LATIN AMERICA
6. Colombia to replace infantry in Korea with artillery battalion (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. USSR-based MIG-15's engage US Navy jets off Korea:

Comment: Although Soviet fighters based in the Southern Maritime area have patrolled the Soviet-Korean border during previous UN attacks on targets in northeastern Korea, this is the first combat contact.

The proximity of the engagement to the Soviet border suggests that the USSR has established in this area a line well out to sea beyond any claimed territorial jurisdiction which it will defend against potentially hostile penetrations. The USSR has taken a similar position with regard to the Hokkaido-Kurils demarcation line.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. Cotton export crisis reportedly endangers Egyptian regime:

Three members of the Egyptian army inner circle have emphasized to Ambassador Caffery that the slump in cotton prices is
[PAGE 04]
"well-nigh disastrous." They maintain that unless Great Britain resumes large-scale purchases or the Soviet Union and the Satellites make some offers for cotton, the existence of their regime will be endangered. The peasants are reportedly comparing present conditions unfavorably with those under the previous government.

Comment: There have been reports of peasant dissatisfaction in recent weeks.

The Egyptian cotton trade is suffering from the world depression in the textile industry as well as from the speculation under Farouk's regime. The United States does not need to stockpile cotton at present and there is apparently no commercial demand. Great Britain has also indicated that because of a slump in its textile industry, it is not buying as much Egyptian cotton as heretofore.

WESTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 05]
4. West German federal elections postponed:

Chancellor Adenauer has decided to defer federal elections from June to September. He believes that the Bonn and Paris treaties will be approved by all signatory members by that time, whereas elections in June might allow his opposition to exploit the protracted delay in ratification.

Comment: The postponement also averts a possible coincidence of the West German election campaign and the French parliamentary debates on the treaties. Both the campaign and the debates will put a serious strain on French-German relations.

5. France intends no basic changes in Saar conventions:

According to a high Foreign Ministry official, France does not intend to change the substance of the conventions with the Saar but merely to reduce the preponderant French influence on judicial, economic, and fiscal committees. A public statement regarding this revision, which would have to be ratified in both Paris and Saarbruecken, may be made prior to Saar elections on 30 November.

Comment: The French-German negotiations on the Saar recently broke down when the French refused to relinquish their economic ties with the Saar. The French are now trying to strengthen the Saarlanders' attachment to the status quo.

LATIN AMERICA

6. Colombia to replace infantry in Korea with artillery battalion:
[PAGE 06]
Comment: The Colombian army is currently making an all-out effort to crush guerrilla activity, and its 1,050 battle-trained troops from Korea would prove a valuable domestic reinforcement.

The substitution of an artillery battalion for an infantry battalion would enable Colombia to reduce its troop commitments to the United Nations forces by about one third.
