Concessions by Prime Minister Amini Aggravate Iran's Economic Problems

The antiregime National Front has already clashed with Amini over the issue of elections, demanding that they should be held within a month rather than be delayed as Amini insists. The National Front has been reported considering a general strike if its elections demands are not heeded.

the group would like to avoid a strike because it might be difficult to control the crowd, and the resulting disorder could be used as an excuse for a military coup. The embassy believes that the National Front, although disorganized and without a clear program, "has spurted to a prominence and degree of influence which has many conservative elements concerned if not frightened."

The prime minister has given the Front every indication of his willingness to try to work with its members on a "sensible basis" but has said that if it is obvious in future meetings that the Front plans to be unreasonable, he "will warn it of the possibility of a military government."

Although Amini has publicly announced Iran's continued support for CENTO, the embassy comments that his position has not received popular support and that his government, if it stays in office, may have to espouse a more neutral position.

In his efforts to buy time, Prime Minister Amini has taken some measures which complicate Iran's economic and financial problems. The granting of wage increases to the teachers, a continuation of credits to the merchants, the granting of increased load limits to truck owners, and a projected land reform program create a pattern of concession to special interest groups which could lead to more costly demands. The American Embassy doubts that Amini has enough capable staff members for the committees he has appointed to devise solutions to major problems. He is not using a number of competent Iranians because of their association with the Eqbal government.

The Shah has completed his official visit to Norway and is returning to Tehran. Prior to his departure from Tehran on 17 May, it had been announced that his visit would be limited to about a week and that his unofficial travels in Europe would be canceled.

26 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
