II. ASIA-AFRICA

Laos: Communist bloc propaganda is giving increased prominence to the declared readiness of the Laotian dissidents to negotiate a peaceful settlement with the government. Both Peiping and Hanoi have publicized the recent offer attributed to General Kaysorn, ranking Neo Lao Hak Zat (NLHZ) leader at large. Conditions set for settlement include withdrawal of United States military personnel and weapons, cessation of Laotian Army operations against the rebels, release of imprisoned NLHZ leaders, and resumption of International Control Commission (ICC) activities in Laos. Kaysorn is quoted as warning that should the Phoui government "continue to use American weapons to further the civil war,... the Laotian people will fight resolutely to the end."

The Communists probably feel that the degree of success achieved by the rebellion places them in an advantageous position from which to bargain. By dangling the bait of a peaceful solution, they apparently hope to bring domestic pressure on the government and international pressure on the United States to accept a negotiated settlement along the lines of the November 1957 agreement guaranteeing Communist participation in a coalition government.

The Laotian Government has spurned the NLHZ overtures, and American Ambassador Smith feels this position will not change so long as the Phoui regime stays in power. The military and young reformist group championed by influential Crown Prince Savang, recently named regent, are also strongly opposed to any concession.

Probably anxious to head off UN or other external intervention in Laos, the Communists are at some pains to deny "slanderous" charges of North Vietnamese participation in the conflict. Some fighting reportedly continues in northern Laos; a complete cessation of activity coincidental with the arrival of the UN mission would tend to refute the Communist portrayal of a "popular uprising."

Laotian officials admit the possibility of some unintentional exaggeration in communiques on the fighting to date, but express

14 Sept 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
