[PAGE 01]
10 July 1955

Copy No.
99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Comment on Communist China's 1955 budget (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Outcome of Indonesian elections predicted (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Early fall of Iranian cabinet seen possible (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. CSC president seeks US co-operation during atomic pool talks (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Comment on Communist China's 1955 budget:

Almost one fourth of the record $12 bil-
lion Chinese Communist national budget
for 1955 will be spent on defense, ac-
cording to an announcement from Peiping on 6 July. Total budgeted
expenditures are 21 percent higher than the amount spent in 1954,
while the rise in military spending is set at 24 percent.

Moreover, the military budget of approx-
imately $3 billion is probably understated by 10 percent or more
because it does not cover investments for military purposes made
by industrial ministries.

The large increase in defense expendi-
tures in 1955 is explained by Peiping as being necessary because
"the imperialists are still encircling China and she has to pro-
tect her independence and national constitution, liberate Formosa,
and safeguard her territorial integrity."

Emphasis on military spending may have
cut into funds for industrialization, which comprise about 22 per-
cent of the budget. A rise of only 11 percent in industrial in-
vestment is planned this year over 1954, but heavy industry is to
receive a greater share.

The military spending figure is about
10 percent of China's gross national product of more than $30 bil-
lion, and economic investments constitute another 20 percent. The
peasantry will continue to bear the main burden of these large mili-
tary modernization and industrial programs. Although the budget
report stated that direct farm taxes would drop to 12 percent of
total revenues in 1955, the regime can expect increased revenues
from the stepped up program of forced purchases of agricultural
products at low prices.

[PAGE 04]
Page Denied

Next 1 Page(s) In Document Denied

[PAGE 05]
3. Outcome of Indonesian elections predicted:

the
Masjumi and two smaller Moslem par-
ties can be expected to win at least 50
percent of the seats in parliament in the forthcoming national
elections. The National Party, which heads the present govern-
ment coalition, on the other hand, is not likely to obtain more
than 15 percent of the seats.

Socialist Party would strive to win a tenth of the parliamentary
seats. In areas where there was no chance of electing its own
representatives, it would support the Masjumi so as to prevent
gains by the Communist Party.

Comment: Since Indonesia has never
held national elections and conditions are unsettled, any predic-
tion regarding the outcome of the elections--scheduled for late
September--should be treated with considerable reserve. On
the basis of available information, however, it appears that the
parties now in opposition will win the elections, if genuinely free,
but by a smaller margin than indicated in the above report.

There is some reason to expect the
Indonesian Communist Party to obtain more votes than the Na-
tional Party, which it is presently supporting, and thus become
the second strongest party in parliament.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Early fall of Iranian cabinet seen possible:

Iranian prime minister Ala told the
American chargé on 7 July that attacks
on his government were coming from
all sides and that the regime, if not in
retreat, was definitely on the defensive. Even cabinet members
and progovernment Majlis deputies are actively speculating on
its chances of survival.

[PAGE 06]
The embassy comments that the resigna-
tion of the government in the near future is quite possible, either
as a result of the prime minister's and the cabinet's discouragement
or the Shah's belief that the cabinet is not carrying out his directives.

A no-confidence vote by the Majlis is,
however, unlikely, and most of the deputies will continue to sup-
port Ala as long as the Shah desires it.

Comment: The Shah is heavily committed
to the success of the present government and probably will try to
maintain it as long as possible.

Any new government would--like the Ala
cabinet--be likely to suffer from the attempts of the Shah to par-
ticipate in day-to-day government operations.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. CSC president seeks US co-operation during atomic pool talks:

President René Mayer of the Coal-Steel
Community's High Authority told Ameri-
can observers to the CSC on 7 June that
he was gratified by Washington's sympa-
thetic attitude toward the negotiations
scheduled to begin in Brussels on 9 July for a European atomic
pool. He hoped, however, that the United States would not sign
any new bilateral atomic energy agreements with any of the six
CSC countries while these talks were in progress.

French opposition to further European
integration will be overcome, Mayer said, provided France's con-
tribution to an atomic energy pool is matched by an equivalent
contribution in raw materials by other prospective members.
This would involve, however, a revision of the American-Belgian
accord on uranium supplies.

Comment: Mayer's anxiety regarding
possible bilateral agreements apparently results from the Ameri-
can invitation to a number of countries on 10 June for negotiations
about agreements on peaceful uses of atomic energy.

[PAGE 07]
The Brussels conference of experts
was set up at the 1-3 June meeting of the foreign ministers of
the six CSC countries, which showed great interest in the pooled
development of atomic energy to keep Western Europe indus-
trially abreast of the United States and the Soviet Union. A
sharp dispute arose between France and Belgium, however, over
their respective contributions to the proposed atomic energy pool.

Belgian foreign minister Spaak, the
"pro-European" chairman of the Brussels talks on atomic energy,
wants to use the Belgian Congo's resources in uranium as a lever
to induce Paris to take a decisive step toward further suprana-
tional integration. There appears to be broader French political
support for a common European effort in the atomic field than in
any other. (Concurred in by OSI)
