[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

16 January 1957

Copy No. 131

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept. review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

4. BRITISH FOREIGN OFFICE VIEWS ON YEMEN-ADEN SITUATION

5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

6. YUGOSLAVS SUPPORT KADAR REGIME
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
25X1A

4. BRITISH FOREIGN OFFICE VIEWS ON YEMEN-
ADEN SITUATION

The British Foreign Office is disturbed
over the extent of the Yemeni propaganda
campaign alleging British aggression
across the Aden border. Britain is "ur-
gently" trying to start a joint inspection of the Yemen-Aden
frontier area which has been under discussion with Yemeni
representatives in London since early December, accord-
ing to the American embassy there. Foreign Office officials
minimize the extent of the actual fighting in progress.

The Foreign Office is also considering
asking for a UN fact-finding or boundary demarcation mis-
sion. London fears, however, that submitting the question
to the UN might benefit only the Asian-African bloc or lead
to unworkable procedures for adjudicating the border dispute.

Comment

Under present tensions, the prospects ap-
pear very slim for reaching a settlement
of the border dispute either by direct negotiation or under UN
auspices. The British evidently consider they must make some
public gesture toward such negotiations, however, in order to
offset the effect of Yemeni, Egyptian, and Soviet propaganda.
Meanwhile, there are indications that British military opera-
tions in the disturbed area are more extensive than London's
guarded statements reveal.
[PAGE 08]
25X1A

5. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

The withdrawal from the Indonesian
cabinet of the small Moslem party
PERTI on 15 January may provide the
impetus for further defections from a
regime which now has lost three of its
eight participants. Other minor mem-
bers which are considering withdrawal
are one Moslem and two Christian par-

pating further defections, is said to be planning the forma-
tion soon of a "revolutionary council" under his leadership
to which the cabinet would be responsible. This council
would implement his proposal of a "guided democracy" and
permit him almost unlimited control over the government.

The Communist Party, which now has
about 16 percent of the seats in parliament, has demanded
proportional representation in any new cabinet. Sukarno
would be likely to press for leftist or Communist participa-
tion in the cabinet in order to realize "national unity." He
may also insist on Communist participation in his "revolu-
tionary council."

Meanwhile, in the Celebes, preparations
are reportedly being made to proclaim the central Celebes
area an "autonomous province." Efforts by the Djakarta
government to resume normal relations with the three
Sumatran provinces continue to be ineffective.
[PAGE 09]
25X1A

6. YUGOSLAVS SUPPORT KADAR REGIME

Several recent actions by the Yugoslav
government indicate that it intends to
support the Kadar regime in Hungary
for the present. On 11 January, a Yugo-
slav spokesman announced that a $2,000,000 credit, and "cer-
tain facilities in mutual trade exchange" had been granted at
the recent request of the Hungarian government. He said
Hungarian-Yugoslav relations were "normal" and implied
that Belgrade was no longer pressing the issue of the Soviet
abduction of ex-premier Nagy last November.

A new Yugoslav ambassador is about to
depart for Budapest, a post vacant since shortly after the
Nagy kidnaping, and Hungary has named a new man for its
post in Belgrade, vacant since late October. The Belgrade
press gave tentative acceptance to the program outlined by
Premier Kadar on 6 January, despite its heralding of im-
pending harsh policies and close allegiance to Moscow.

Most Yugoslav Communist leaders prob-
ably recognize that only a harsh program by Kadar will
maintain Communism in Hungary at present, even though
this view conflicts with Vice President Kardelj's speech on
7 December, with its implied condemnation of the Kadar re-
gime and its extolling of the workers' councils as the only
true socialist force in Hungary. The Yugoslavs may feel
that eventually a more liberal regime can evolve in Hungary.

Belgrade's attitude toward Hungary may
also be in part designed to counter the Soviet bloc ideologi-
cal criticisms of the Yugoslavs as "revisionists."
[PAGE 10]
