GENERAL

1. Comment on Chou En-lai's call for "liberation" of Formosa:

Chinese Communist premier Chou En-lai concluded his review of foreign policy before the Central People's Government Council in Peiping on 11 August with a call for the "liberation" of Formosa as the final step in "complete victory." Chou's speech is the most aggressive in a series of anti-American propaganda blasts about Formosa which began on 9 July.

The speech has since been supported by declarations from government, military and party leaders and from alleged representatives of the people. This is Peiping's normal way of underlining major pronouncements, and was used, for example, immediately prior to China's intervention in Korea in 1950.

Chou charged the United States with a "consistent position of hostility" against Communist China and with encouraging the Chinese Nationalists in an increasing "war of harassment and destruction" against the mainland and coastal areas. He specified for the first time that the Nationalists are conducting a "blockade" of the coast.

Chou also said that the United States and Nationalist China are negotiating a "so-called bilateral treaty of mutual security." Denouncing any American-Nationalist treaty as illegal, Chou warned that interference in Chinese "internal affairs by foreign aggressors" would have grave consequences. With a truce achieved in Indochina, Formosa is now the ideal issue for stimulating morale in Communist China and for widening differences between the United States and its allies and the Asian neutrals.

Peiping's tough line on Formosa also has certain immediate aims. The Chinese Communists clearly hope to frighten weak Far Eastern governments from joining any regional security arrangement. They also hope to deter the United States from supporting Nationalist harassing actions and from signing a bilateral security pact with Taipei. Peiping seems to be particularly concerned over Nationalist seizures of Orbit shipping, as the disruption of this trade since June has cost Peiping and the rest of the Orbit at least $2,000,000.
