Turkish Internal Situation

The new government of Turkey has established a special committee to investigate the activities of former Premier Menderes and the members of his regime. If this investigation reveals evidence of misdeeds in office, the officials involved will stand trial and be barred from future political activity, according to the present head of government, General Cemal Gursel. An aide to Gursel has indicated that the charge against them would be "acting against the constitution." Meanwhile, unconfirmed reports continue to circulate in Turkey that the deposed officials were plotting to destroy the effective opposition of dissatisfied elements in the army and universities. Reports of corruption in the highest levels of the old regime are also being disseminated by spokesmen for the new government.

Selim Sarper, foreign minister in the new government but a long-time acquaintance of the highest-ranking members of the old regime, informed the American ambassador in Ankara that he recently visited the military academy where the Democratic party leaders are in custody. Menderes, ex-President Bayar, and former Foreign Minister Zorlu reportedly are in good health. According to Sarper, the trials of these men, originally to be postponed until after election of a new government, may be held much sooner in order to prevent loss of evidence of misdeeds and to reduce the excessive nervous strain on the accused. This decision appears to have followed the suicide of former Minister of Interior Namik Gedik after he suffered what the government described as a "nervous breakdown."

Sarper also indicated that there is a division within the cabinet between moderate and extremist wings, with Sarper among the former. The moderates will be encouraged by Republican People's party (RPP) leader Ismet Inonu's promise during a press conference on 1 June to take no vindictive measures against the ousted leaders. In case of RPP victory in the forthcoming elections, Inonu would become premier.

2 June 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
