[PAGE 01]
8 December 1951
Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Indonesian President seeks US support on New Guinea question (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. New British restrictions increase Egyptian animosity (page 3).
3. British will not alter their plans for the Sudan (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Dutch see Western European support for German admission to NATO (page 5).
7. German Party pursues chauvinism to preserve unity (page 6).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Indonesian President seeks US support on New Guinea question:

During a conversation between President Sukarno and the US Ambassador to Indonesia, the former expressed a hope for American support on the New Guinea issue. Sukarno explained that if the pending Dutch-Indonesian conference fails to solve the New Guinea question he anticipates a unilateral denunciation of the Union by Indonesia; he said he could not predict "to what level the sentiments of the populace might rise."

The US Ambassador observes that should Indonesia resort to unilateral action and incur the ill will of the western world, a "strong reciprocal reaction might be expected" from Indonesia. Such a reaction could involve the loss of Indonesia as a link in the eventual Pacific security chain, and the loss to the United States of Indonesia's genuine and growing friendship.

Comment: Netherlands-Indonesian discussions on the disposition of New Guinea are expected to end in an impasse. In such an event, leftist and nationalist elements in Indonesia will press for abrogation of the Union and other Dutch-Indonesian agreements, which would create serious economic problems for both Indonesia and the Netherlands.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

2. New British restrictions increase Egyptian animosity:

The new series of restrictions imposed by British military authorities in the Suez Canal area have again resulted in a reduction in Egypt's oil supplies.

[PAGE 04]
The US Ambassador in Cairo warns that, while he appreciates the current difficulties of the British which have led to imposition of these restrictions, Egyptian animosity toward the British "has risen to such a white heat that a real explosion seems inevitable."

3. British will not alter their plans for the Sudan:

British Foreign Secretary Eden, who is still unwilling to trade the Sudan for Suez base rights, has stated privately that the Sudanese problem can be settled under the existing program for self-government by the end of 1952.

Comment: British plans for Sudanese self-government by the end of 1952 may be hampered by the recent resignation of six of the thirteen Sudanese on the Constitutional Commission, which was appointed in March 1951 to recommend steps to be taken toward self-government. Furthermore, one important political group has announced its intention to work against the establishment of a self-governing constitution under the present regime, and to advocate rule by an international commission until the Sudanese themselves decide their political future.

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Dutch see Western European support for German admission to NATO:

The Dutch Foreign Minister believes that all NATO members except France would approve the admission of Germany to NATO in a status of full equality. He has stated that this is the only means by which the West can gain Germany's cooperation in European defense.

Comment: Though West Germany will probably be willing to enter the European Defense Community without being a member of NATO, it will probably expect membership after a relatively short time.

7. German Party pursues chauvinism to preserve unity:

Ultranationalism was the keynote at the recent convention of the German Party, which is part of Adenauer's coalition. Despite the neo-Nazi tenor of the gathering, however, party chairman Heinrich Hellwege, leader of the moderate wing, seemed to be in full control.

Prior to the convention, Hellwege had privately told US officials that his party had to sound nationalistic in order to keep its members from defecting to the self-avowed Nazi-like Socialist Reich Party.

Comment: Although Hellwege's control seems unthreatened at the moment, it is significant that the extremists must be courted in order to preserve party unity. This may force the party still more to the right and embarrass the Adenauer coalition. This rightist trend will be strengthened by the reported accession of seven Bundestag delegates of the Bavarian Reconstruction Party, another rightist radical organization, and by the likely accession of members of the Socialist Reich Party if, as is probable, this party is outlawed.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
