Soviet Position on Disarmament and Nuclear Test Ban

Gromyko's statements together with remarks by the head of the Polish UN delegation, Deputy Foreign Minister Winiewicz, suggest that, although the USSR will not abandon its insistence on an agreement in principle to general disarmament, Moscow may be considering a procedural move to meet US emphasis on giving priority to "first-step" measures in negotiations. Winiewicz claimed that Gromyko told Zorin that the fact that the American suggestions for immediate measures were not new did not lessen their importance. Prior to these conversations he had told Western officials at the UN that Moscow was thinking in terms of two parallel negotiations, one on complete and general disarmament and the other on first-stage measures.

On the nuclear test ban conference, Gromyko maintained the generally pessimistic line taken by the Soviet delegation at Geneva. He said that the USSR hoped for new things to be brought out by the US at Geneva, and would make a serious study of the proposals. He added, however, that Moscow was not impressed thus far. As an example he stated that the USSR did not consider Western reduction in proposed control posts in the USSR from 21 to 19 an important gesture. Gromyko admitted that the proposal for a tripartite administrator reflected the USSR's desire for a veto but contended that Moscow would be "reasonable" in the operation of the veto.

The Polish delegate's remark on the link between the test ban talks and the general disarmament negotiations may foreshadow a Soviet move to merge these issues. Since the talks between Khrushchev and Ambassador Thompson on 9 March, Soviet officials have minimized the importance of a test ban. The chief Soviet delegate at Geneva told the British delegation that a test ban was of "extremely limited significance," and Gromyko made a point of asking Ambassador Stevenson whether the US considered a test ban agreement a condition to agreement on general disarmament, which Gromyko viewed as a separate although "related subject." An Izvestia correspondent in Geneva also told an American official that if the US

6 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 7
