11 April, "There is no cease-fire; the Laotian Government may go at any time." He saw little hope for a successful neutral coalition government for Laos, and said that "a coalition will lead to eventual takeover by the Communists."

While he apparently did not elaborate on the Soviet Union's public position on the Laotian issue, Khrushchev in a 10 April discussion with Walter Lippmann gave the latter the impression that the Laotian problem would be satisfactorily settled. A further indication, however, of Moscow's determination to press for the most advantageous terms for negotiations is provided by the remarks of the Soviet charge in Paris.

The Soviet spokesman, who had earlier remarked that the USSR could not accept a cease-fire as a prerequisite for a conference, stated flatly that the Soviet Union would definitely not agree to call for a cease-fire before the date of the international conference is set. The Soviet charge was unusually blunt and went on to say that the "Russians would unquestionably win in Laos, thanks to the stupid mistakes of Americans."

During the recent discussions on Laos with the UK ambassador in Moscow, Soviet officials have attempted to secure a definite date for the opening of the conference. They have also reacted unfavorably to the British draft proposal which stipulated that the conference would convene as soon as the cease-fire in Laos has been reported fully effective by the ICC chairman. Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin indicated that his first impression was that the Western powers were still making the conference conditional on a cease-fire. Soviet reaction on this issue strongly implies that, while the USSR may join the British in issuing a joint appeal for a cease-fire and propose that all contending factions in Laos begin truce negotiations, Moscow intends to press for a firm date for the conference at the same time the cease-fire appeal is made and may even insist that cease-fire talks and the conference begin simultaneously.

Soviet airlift operations continue to be scheduled. Sixteen Soviet transports--six IL-14s and ten LI-2s--were detected in flights to Xieng Khouang on 11 April.

13 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
