Situation in Laos

Phoumi told Ambassador Brown on 11 April that the Laotians themselves could handle the governmental problem if international agreement were reached on a guarantee of Laos' neutrality, and on supervision of a cease-fire and arms delivery. He said he was anxious to see Souvanna Phouma as early as possible to try to obtain maximum agreement with him prior to a tripartite meeting with Pathet Lao leader Souphannouvong. Phoumi acknowledged that arrangements are already being worked out with King Savang to ensure Souvanna's presence at Luang Prabang on 28-29 April for funeral ceremonies for the late King Sisavang Vong, who died in October 1959. Laotian leaders have indicated that Prince Souphannouvong would also be welcome. A Pathet Lao broadcast on 11 April stated that people throughout the country should be permitted to participate in the ceremony, but criticized the "rebel Phoumi - Boun Oum group" as unfit to arrange the rites.

King Savang continues to respond negatively to the proposal that he take personal charge of the government. He has suggested that Souvanna might be suitable, provided he is "boxed in" by men like Phoumi and former Premier Phoui Sananikone, with the Pathet Lao excluded. Phoui, in a conversation with Ambassador Brown on 12 April, took the realistic view that the Pathet Lao would be very demanding and that Laos would need the help of Western nations.

The Diem government in South Vietnam is concerned over the prospect that Souvanna may resume the premiership, which Saigon feels would result in the loss of Laos to the Communists from within. The Vietnamese authorities fear that this would endanger South Vietnam's security, since Communist infiltration via southern Laos--already a serious problem--would be facilitated.

Thai officials are also becoming increasingly restive over the military and political trend in Laos. Bangkok has announced that defensive measures are being taken in the border area, and particular concern has been voiced over the possibility of a Communist attack on Thakhek. Premier Sarit told newsmen on

13 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
