[PAGE 01]
14 December 1960

Copy No. C 75

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Department review completed
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
LATE ITEM

*Ethiopia (As of 0500 EST): The Ethiopian Imperial Bodyguard, in a surprise move early this morning sealed off the palace and key transport and communications installations in Addis Ababa. Leaders of the 6,000-man elite military force have given no explanation so far for the move, nor have the instigators been identified. No violence or crowd reaction was reported, and local business activity remained normal. The Emperor, who has been away from Ethiopia for several weeks on a tour of West Africa, is now in Brazil, and the government is nominally in the hands of the inexperienced crown prince.

The Bodyguard's action appears to be primarily a demonstration of its long-standing dissatisfaction with present salaries and privileges rather than an effort to overturn Emperor Haile Selassie's regime or to forestall a possible move by others against the throne. However, the Bodyguard's action may have serious repercussions if the Emperor decides to take drastic action against this apparent affront to his unlimited power.

In mid-November the Bodyguard officers reportedly were about to voice their grievances to the Emperor but were dissuaded by senior officers who promised to intercede in their behalf. The Bodyguard dissenters claimed to have the support of many army and police officers, but united action by them would be difficult. There is intense rivalry among Ethiopia's Bodyguard, 24,000-man army and 35,000-man security forces as well as friction within each service between older officers who support traditional leaders and younger men who have attended foreign or Ethiopian military schools. Furthermore, there is no suitable substitute for the Emperor who could hold the disparate country together. The logical successor, the crown prince, is not believed to have any significant political strength, and the following of any other important political leader is limited to provincial or factional support.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
14 December 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Somali Republic - UAR: The UAR, which is engaged in an extensive campaign to extend its influence in the Horn of Africa, apparently has offered substantial military and financial assistance to the Somali Republic. Somali Premier Abdirascid stated to parliament on 6 December that Nasir had offered to give a "certain number" of aircraft and other military equipment, to grant loans for public works totaling eleven to fourteen million dollars, and to guarantee a market for Somali exports. The UAR may also have agreed to subsidize up to seven Somali diplomatic missions.

Central African Republic - USSR: The announcement by the Central African Republic (CAR) and the USSR that they have agreed to exchange ambassadors "in the near future" marks the Soviet bloc's first diplomatic breakthrough in former French Equatorial Africa. It is also the first formal commitment by any African state of the French Community to accept a Soviet embassy. The economic weaknesses of the CAR and the other three now independent states of former French Equatorial Africa, along with the inexperience and instability of their governments, offer possibilities for a rapid expansion of activities throughout the area. The CAR's proximity to the Republic of the Congo--particularly Orientale Province--and the existence of considerable pro-Lumumba sentiment in the CAR could facilitate contacts between the bloc and Lumumba supporters in Stanleyville.

i
[PAGE 06]
ALGERIA (France)
LIBYA
UAR (EGYPT)
NIGER
CHAD
Lake Chad
Fort-Lamy
NIGERIA
BR. CAMEROONS (Trust Terr.)
CAMEROUN
Yaounde
RIO MUNI (Sp.)
Libreville
GABON
CABINDA (Angola)
Brazzaville
Leopoldville
ANGOLA (Port.)
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Bangui
Ubangi
CONGO
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
ORIENTALE PROVINCE
Stanleyville
Lake Albert
UGANDA
RUANDA-URUNDI (Trust Terr. Bel.)
Usumbura
Lake Tanganyika
SUDAN
White Nil

14 DECEMBER 1960
[PAGE 07]
Algeria-France: An uneasy calm prevails in Algiers and Oran after four days of rioting. Army commanders have made plain their determination to put down any further disorders, and De Gaulle reportedly intends to punish severely the European leaders of the riots. The funerals of those killed during the disturbances are being held and could spark further violence. The

ii
[PAGE 08]
killing of Moslems will accelerate Afro-Asian efforts to secure UN intervention in Algeria. Rebel Premier Ferhat Abbas has sent a protest to Secretary General Hammarskjold, and the Moroccan Government has officially protested to Paris. A sense of shock was evident in metropolitan France over the intensity of the Moslem demonstrations. De Gaulle returned to France last night, and reportedly will make a speech to the nation this morning.

iii
[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

West Germany - USSR: Bonn's insistence that West Berlin be included in the new three-year trade pact with the USSR has resulted in a categorical rejection by the Soviet ambassador. Although Bonn has from the beginning requested that the USSR include West Berlin, only at the last minute did Bonn apparently make the signing of the agreement conditional on this demand. According to press reports, the Soviet trade negotiators are preparing to leave Bonn, and Foreign Minister Brentano stated on 12 December that the Federal Republic would continue to try to reach agreement through diplomatic channels. Meanwhile, Bonn has also been insisting that West Berlin and West Germany be treated as one "currency area" in present negotiations with East Germany on a new interzonal trade agreement, and the East Germans have not to date refused to continue the talks within this framework.

iv
[PAGE 10]
UAR Extends Aid to Somali Republic

The UAR, which is engaged in an energetic campaign to extend its influence in the Horn of Africa, apparently has offered substantial military and financial assistance to the Somali Republic. Somali Premier Abdirascid told his parliament on 6 December that, during his recent visit to Cairo, Nasir offered to give a "certain number" of aircraft and other military equipment and to grant loans for public works totaling eleven to fourteen million dollars. According to a formal accord published on 11 December, the UAR has also agreed to guarantee a market for bananas and other Somali exports in exchange for a Somali commitment to purchase various manufactured goods in Cairo. In addition, the UAR reportedly offered to pay the costs of up to seven diplomatic missions for the poverty-stricken Somalis.

The agreements with Cairo will provide the Somali Republic with its first aid from a non-Western source. Heretofore, assistance has been furnished by the United States, Britain, and Italy--the latter having committed itself to increased short-term financial support only last month. The accords with the UAR are a further indication of the Somali willingness to seek assistance from all sources and will furnish Cairo with an enlarged foothold in the area.

14 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]
Uneasy Calm in Algeria

An uneasy calm prevails in Algiers and Oran after four days of rioting. Public transportation is beginning to function again, and some downtown shops are open. Army commanders have made clear their determination to put down any further disorders, and a 13 December attempt by Europeans to march on the Moslem sector of Oran was repulsed by security police. Army units in the city of Algiers have been reinforced and now number approximately 25,000. Some 40 Europeans arrested during the first day have been brought before an Algiers court.

The funerals of those killed during the disturbances are being held, and further violence might erupt among either the Moslem or European crowds attending. The killing of Moslems--Delegate-General Morin has admitted that at least 45 were killed in the Algiers area--will accelerate Afro-Asian efforts to secure UN intervention in Algeria, and the support shown for the National Liberation Front by the Moslem rioters will no doubt be used to undercut the long-standing French argument that the front represents only a small minority of the Moslem population.

Rebel Premier Ferhat Abbas, in a 12 December press conference, again rejected De Gaulle's plan to reorganize the public powers in Algeria, and soon afterward he sent a protest to Secretary General Hammarskjold regarding the killing of Moslems. The Moroccan Government has also sent a formal protest to Paris.

A sense of shock is evident in metropolitan France following the Moslem demonstrations in Algeria. French security forces continue to round up known rightist supporters to prevent trouble in France on the return of President de Gaulle. said De Gaulle cut one day from his Algerian trip to make a "solemn appeal" to the nation and Algeria this morning. There is no indication that De Gaulle has been dissuaded from his earlier plan for a national referendum on 8 January and the creation of an interim Algerian government with local autonomy, but he is reportedly angry over the rioting and may crack down on the leaders of both European and Moslem demonstrations.

14 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 13]
Bonn-Soviet Trade Talks Collapse

Bonn's insistence that West Berlin be included in the new three-year trade pact with the USSR has resulted in a categorical rejection by the Soviet ambassador. Although Bonn has from the beginning requested that the USSR include West Berlin, the decision to make the signing of the agreement conditional on this demand apparently was made only at the last minute. According to press reports, the Soviet trade negotiators are preparing to leave Bonn. Foreign Minister Brentano stated on 12 December that the Federal Republic would continue to try to reach agreement through diplomatic channels.

Bonn's chief negotiator, Hilger Van Scherpenberg, told American officials that Soviet negotiators had countered his attempt to include Berlin--either by an exchange of letters or by an oral statement--by arguing that Moscow had not authorized discussion of political questions. The three-year trade pact concluded in 1958, which expires on 31 December, did not specifically include West Berlin, but the USSR has tacitly allowed the city's trade to be treated as part of the West German "currency area."

Bonn was earlier reported to favor dragging out negotiations as long as possible in the belief that the Soviet desire to sell large quantities of oil and other products to West Germany in return for German industrial goods would facilitate the inclusion of Berlin in the treaty. Van Scherpenberg reportedly told members of the Bundestag Foreign Affairs Committee on 1 December that if the USSR threatened to break off negotiations over the Berlin issue, Bonn would have to back down. In late October, however, Brentano indicated that at the last minute Bonn would demand that the agreement also apply to West Berlin and would insist on new negotiations if the USSR refused.

Berlin leaders are strongly urging Bonn not to yield to the USSR on this issue. West Berlin Mayor Brandt stated on 11 December that "a failure to clarify Berlin's part in the new trade

14 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 14]
agreement would signify German agreement to a substantial part of the Soviet free-city proposal." Brandt stressed that "prestige" issues such as a formal "Berlin clause" in the treaty itself are not important as long as the present method of handling the city's trade is not changed. Bonn has announced that lack of an agreement would not preclude trade between the two countries, which can continue on the basis of individual orders.

Meanwhile, Bonn has also been insisting that West Berlin and West Germany be treated as one "currency area" in present negotiations with East Germany on a new interzonal trade agreement, and the East Germans have not to date refused to continue the talks within this framework.

14 Dec 60    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 15]
