[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
8 May 1952
Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed
TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
2. Anti-Communist demonstration in Tibet suppressed by force (page 3).
5. French official says cabinet adamant on Tunisia (page 5).
6. Greece and Turkey agree to military talks with Yugoslavia (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
7. Yugoslavia plans to occupy Albania in event of war (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. West German coalition will probably approve contractual agreements (page 7).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Anti-Communist demonstration in Tibet suppressed by force:

The Indian Ministry of External Affairs, commenting on the recent report from its Lhasa representative of a clash between Tibetans and Chinese Communist troops, attributes the demonstration primarily to a food shortage aggravated by the presence of Chinese soldiers, and to the growing unpopularity of the Chinese in Tibet.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
The American Embassy at New Delhi believes that the Chinese face an increasingly difficult situation in Tibet with the growing possibility of more uprisings.

Comment: The presence of from 10 to 15 thousand Communist troops has been a burden on Tibet's limited food supply. The Chinese, however, have full military control and can suppress any opposition.
[PAGE 05]
5. French official says cabinet adamant on Tunisia:

The Chief of the Protectorates Division of the French Foreign Office told the American Ambassador on 5 May that Foreign Minister Schuman's liberal attitude on Tunisia was not endorsed by other members of the Pinay Cabinet. The Cabinet, he said, was not in any mood to accept "dictates of the United Nations led by such feudal and backward countries as Yemen."

The official added that France would withdraw from the United Nations rather than submit to a "succession of attacks aimed at complete destruction of the French Union." France will not willingly allow the UN to make "unrealistic" decisions which weaken the family of free nations and serve the purposes of the Soviet Union.

Comment: Despite their oft-repeated assertions that matters affecting Tunisia are an internal French consideration, the French have under international pressure released former Tunisian Premier Chenik and his ministers and scheduled the Mixed Commission to meet before 16 May. These gestures, however, do not mean that the Pinay government intends to grant genuine reforms.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
6. Greece and Turkey agree to military talks with Yugoslavia:

Greece and Turkey agree that close collaboration with Yugoslavia is indispensable for their joint defense effort. Both countries are willing to approach Yugoslavia, and the Turkish Foreign Minister will inform the Yugoslav Ambassador in Ankara that Turkey wishes to start talks immediately.

Greek and Turkish officials believe that Yugoslavia wants military talks but is reluctant to start them because of its internal political situation. The Greek Foreign Office official who told this to Ambassador Peurifoy added that to create goodwill a group of Greek deputies plan to visit Yugoslavia soon, and a return visit presumably will be made by Yugoslav deputies.

Comment: There are increasing indications that Yugoslavia would welcome secret discussions concerning local military cooperation with Greece and Turkey. Ambassador Peurifoy also reported that the newly appointed Yugoslav Military Attache in Athens had told the Chief of the Greek General Staff that the Yugoslav Army will "protect" the Greek-Yugoslav border in case of war.

EASTERN EUROPE

7. Yugoslavia plans to occupy Albania in event of war:

The Yugoslav Minister to Greece informed a Greek Foreign Office official on 28 April that in the event of war or at the threat of war, Yugoslav forces would occupy Albania. The Greek official replied that by acting alone the Yugoslavs would unnecessarily weaken their long eastern front, and that they should discuss the matter with Greece, Turkey, and "perhaps with others." The Yugoslav Minister implied that his government would re-examine the question of military talks.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
Comment: It is apparent that the Greek Government will press the Yugoslavs for an agreement defining spheres of interest or at least planning joint military operations in Albania, whenever representatives of the two countries conduct proposed military discussions. This will be a delicate problem, as the Greeks have traditional territorial aspirations in southern Albania and both governments want to create a sympathetic Albanian regime.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. West German coalition will probably approve contractual agreements:

While the West German coalition parties have become increasingly critical of the Allied-German contractual agreements as the signature date approaches, it is generally felt in Bonn that in any showdown, Chancellor Adenauer will get their approval to sign the agreements. Rumors that the Allies might grant further concessions stimulated the criticism.

- 7 -
[PAGE 08]
No government party is willing to accept responsibility for either the breakdown of the current negotiations or the rejection of the agreements, since the alternative arrangement is the perpetuation of the Occupation Statute.

- 8 -
