[PAGE 01]
19 June 1952
Copy No. 53
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Soviet radar plotted US aircraft missing in Japan Sea (page 3).
2. Ranking members of Soviet mission in Japan returning to Moscow (page 3).
5. Rhee reportedly plans to discredit American Ambassador (page 5).
6. French behind removal of popular Cambodian Cabinet (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Arab League urged to give financial support to Tunisian struggle (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Satellite Economic Conference reportedly held in Budapest (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Soviet radar plotted US aircraft missing in Japan Sea:
an unidentified aircraft, probably the B-29 which has been missing since that date, was plotted along with two other aircraft, presumably Soviet, 20 to 25 miles off the Soviet coast near Vladivostok.

Comment: The last US radar check gave the B-29's position as approximately 25 miles west of the tip of Hokkaido. Aircraft wreckage was discovered on 14 June about 130 miles southeast of the Vladivostok area, in the vicinity of the last Soviet radar plot. Equipment near the wreckage indicates that there may have been survivors.

Ambassador Kennan in Moscow has been instructed to request an urgent Soviet investigation.

2. Ranking members of Soviet mission in Japan returning to Moscow:
Representatives of the Soviet mission in Tokyo called at the British Embassy on 14 June and requested transit visas to Hong Kong for five members of the mission, including the chief, Major General Aleksei Kislenko and a political adviser. The party desires to go to Moscow this week via Hong Kong and China.

Comment: The departure of some ranking members may be a Soviet gesture in response to recent Japanese demands for the mission's withdrawal. Retention of a working staff of approximately 65 in Tokyo maintains the Soviet position that the dissolution of the Allied Council for Japan is "illegal."
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
5. Rhee reportedly plans to discredit American Ambassador:
President Rhee is determined to build a case charging American Ambassador Muccio with interference in South Korean politics. Police have been collecting information on all Korean employees at American installations, subjecting many of them to interrogation, and have maintained a close watch on those in the American Embassy.

Comment: A plan to discredit Ambassador Muccio can not be confirmed. However, Rhee has told a ranking UN official that there was "corruption" in the American Embassy.

The Embassy has reported police surveillance during the past weeks, and some Korean employees have been subjected to pressure.

6. French behind removal of popular Cambodian Cabinet:
The US Charge in Saigon, in commenting on official French denials of implication in the King's 15 June overthrow of the Cambodian Cabinet, states that it is inconceivable that the King would have seized the initiative without securing French approval. French armored troops are now patrolling the Phnom Penh streets.
[PAGE 06]
The Charge in Phnom Penh points out that a democratic government, responsible to an elected legislature, has been replaced by a government responsible only to the monarch.

Comment: The deposed government, which holds two-thirds of the membership in the Cambodian Assembly, has in recent months increasingly insisted on a relaxation of French controls. The dismissal of the cabinet foreshadows certain political deterioration and may have repercussions in Vietnam.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Arab League urged to give financial support to Tunisian struggle:
The Iraqi Foreign Ministry to contact the Egyptian Foreign Ministry and the Secretary General of the Arab League with the object of lending Tunisian leaders funds for "continuing their activities and struggle." An Arab League contribution would depend on member states agreeing to which nationalist leaders the money should be paid.

EASTERN EUROPE

8. Satellite Economic Conference reportedly held in Budapest:
The Soviet-sponsored Council of Economic Mutual Assistance reportedly met in Budapest on 21-23 April to fix delivery deadlines for trade among the European Satellites, and to emphasize that production for export within the Orbit has priority over domestic requirements. Poland, East Germany, and Rumania were criticized for failure to meet schedules.
[PAGE 07]
Comment: Dissatisfaction with the Rumanian economic situation was the reason given for recent purges of prominent government officials which began shortly after this meeting. Further evidence of continued Soviet concern with Satellite economic performance was manifested on 1 June when work-norms in Hungary were raised in answer to Soviet demands.
