III. THE WEST

Italy: The Segni government faces an imminent crisis as a result of the Liberal party directorate's decision to withdraw its support. The Liberals are pressing the Christian Democrats to maintain the government's present rightist alignment rather than, as the Liberals increasingly fear, form a center-left cabinet dependent on Nenni Socialist abstention. The Liberals object to a number of the government's domestic programs and to foreign policy trends, and unless a working agreement can be reached before the Liberal national council meets on 20 and 21 February, Segni may be forced to resign. (Page 4)

Latin America: While there are continuing indications of plans for pro-Cuban propaganda demonstrations during President Eisenhower's visits to Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay from 23 February to 3 March, security elements are alerted to the situation. One example of plans to raise the Cuban issue is an urgent request from Cuba's Prensa Latina office in Buenos Aires to its Havana office to send a recorded message by Castro to use as the final number on the program of a meeting called by the left-wing Socialists in Buenos Aires on 22 February "in repudiation of Eisenhower's visit" and "in support of revolutionary Cuba." There have been reports of stepped-up travel to South America by Prensa Latina correspondents and other Cubans. The Cuban issue is considered susceptible of exploitation for propaganda purposes in the four countries which the President will visit. (Page 5)

Ecuador: Violence may break out on 20 February in Guayaquil--Ecuador's largest city--when controversial former President Velasco returns to begin his 1960 presidential campaign. Leaders of a rival, Communist-influenced coalition, whose strength is concentrated in Guayaquil, apparently intend to disrupt the reception being planned by Velasco's followers. Such a melee would afford President Ponce an opportunity to discredit two sets of political enemies at once. (Page 6)

19 Feb 60
DAILY BRIEF
