Situation in Nepal

Subarna Shumshere, leader of the Nepali Congress party exiles in India and former deputy prime minister, continues to regard what he interprets as rapidly worsening conditions in his homeland as encouragement for the launching of an early program of active resistance to the regime. He is still reported planning a widespread campaign of agitation in Nepal to coincide with the arrival of the monsoons in late June. Information from non-exile sources, however, does not confirm Subarna's estimates of the strength of his support in the countryside or of the widespread disaffection he claims exists in the army. Localized resistance against Katmandu's authority continues to plague the government and may be exploited by Subarna; however, the bulk of Nepal's illiterate and isolated population seems in fact to be largely unaware of political changes in Katmandu. Some army officers are dissatisfied, but there is little evidence of active plotting against the King.

Subarna's chances of success in the immediate future appear limited unless he receives substantial support from the Indian Government. While New Delhi remains concerned over the King's ineffectiveness and is sympathetic toward Subarna, Nehru told Ambassador Galbraith on 24 May that he foresees no immediate rise in Communist influence or imminent fall of the monarch. New Delhi also fears a violent resistance campaign would play into Communist hands.

The Communists are weak and divided, despite the freedom of movement which most Nepali Communist leaders are permitted by the palace. They never have had mass support on a countrywide basis such as the Nepali Congress built up. In addition, the party leadership is split between those who call for forceful and immediate opposition to the King, in concert with other parties, and those who feel that the party's best interests will be served by maintaining an aloof but alert posture so as to capitalize on the errors which they feel sure the King will make. Subarna maintains he has refused Communist offers of support.

27 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 9
