Communist Agents Propagandizing Journalists in Laotian Capital

Several newspaper correspondents in Vientiane report being approached recently by "some young Laotians" peddling the line that the current rebellion in Laos is strictly an internal affair set off by elements opposed to the Phoui Sananikone government. A number of journalists have also received a letter from a "Lao citizen" attributing the crisis in Laos to the sabotage of the Geneva agreements by the royal government acting under American pressure. The letter claimed that the Communist partisans have developed into a genuine popular army determined in its struggle against the "despotic" Phoui government. Charges of North Vietnamese involvement were derided and doubt cast on the ability of the UN mission to stop "this murderous war." The letter concluded with a reiteration of the Communist prescription for resolution of the crisis--the reactivation of the International Control Commission for Laos.

The American Embassy in Vientiane believes the letter may forecast the general line the Communists hope to take in connection with the UN fact-finding subcommittee and may herald a flow of Neo Lao Hak Zat- or North Vietnam-inspired "citizen petitions," a normal Communist tactic. The embassy also finds in the open distribution of the letter to correspondents a disconcerting exhibition of the impunity with which the NLHZ operates in Vientiane.

On 17 September, Hanoi made public a statement attributed to a spokesman of the central committee of the NLHZ which declared that the UN decision on Laos would open the way for further US interference, enlarge the "civil war," and lead to war in Indochina. Recent suggestions that representatives of the UN investigative subcommittee remain for some time in Laos were also attacked. Although the NLHZ spokesman reiterated charges that the UN action is illegal, the statement concluded with the hope that the UN would "take positive measures to settle the Laos issue on the basis and within the framework" of the Geneva accords.

19 Sept 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
