Jordan to Propose Plan for Palestine Settlement

Recent proposals by Iraqi Premier Qasim and the former Grand Mufti of Jerusalem for the establishment of a separate Palestine state have aroused critical comment in Jordan and have inspired a Jordanian counterproposal. The Jordanian Government intends to submit a plan for an over-all settlement of the Palestine question to the meeting of the Arab League foreign ministers in Cairo on 8 February. Although King Husayn has said details of the plan have yet to be worked out, he indicated it would involve abandonment of the "Arab legend" that Israel should be pushed into the sea and would propose a frontier somewhere between the 1947 UN partition lines and the present armistice lines.

The plan reportedly also advocates Arab recognition of Israel as a "religious state," establishment of Arab-Israeli trade relations, demobilization of Israel's armed forces, and suspension of Israeli immigration pending a settlement. These terms as a whole are unlikely to be acceptable either to the other Arab states or to Israel, and since the plan would reverse Arab attitudes toward Israel, it is bound to evoke hostile criticism at the Arab League meeting. Husayn nevertheless hopes the plan can be framed in a manner which will forestall charges that Jordan is a traitor to the Arab cause. Jordan's position will be kept secret until the conference.

The Jordanians probably feel compelled to take some counteraction in view of the direct threat to Jordanian sovereignty posed by proposals for a separate Palestine state and army. Jordan's West Bank (of the Jordan River), formerly part of Palestine, was annexed by King Abdullah in 1950, and roughly two thirds of Jordan's population of over 1,500,000 are Palestinians, of whom about half are refugees. Jordan's annexation of Palestinian territory has not been recognized by the Arab League and has even been criticized as a traitorous act. King Abdullah was assassinated in 1951, apparently because of his moderate attitude toward Israel and his secret contacts with the Israelis in an effort to achieve a settlement.

29 Jan 60
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
