[PAGE 01]
18 July 1960

Copy No. C 73

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR central committee plenum reports indicate good economic progress but admit problems in introducing new technology and improving quality of goods.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesian president may soon replace Army Chief of Staff Nasution with army's next-ranking officer, Lt. Gen. Gatot Subroto.

Lebanese president planning to send emissaries to Cairo and Damascus to ascertain UAR attitude in event of necessity to install military regime in Lebanon.

Republic of Congo--Tension in Leopoldville complicated by signs of resentment of local Belgians toward initial contingents of UN force.

III. THE WEST

West Berlin official alleges Adenauer advocates avoidance of any acts in Berlin which would provoke USSR.

Italy--Negotiations for new government proceeding as result of growing clamor to replace Tambroni's neo-Fascist-supported regime.

Haitian police chief arrested in attempt to suppress what may be widespread conspiracy against Duvalier administration.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR: Soviet accounts of the party central committee plenum on industry and transport indicate progress in modernizing Soviet industry and continued good results in fulfilling plan goals, but admit that serious problems still exist in introducing new technology and improving quality. The TASS summary of the plenum resolution contrasts sharply with the June 1959 plenum resolution which set up a comprehensive program for promoting industrial modernization and outlined numerous specific tasks to be completed by government and party organizations by the end of last year. However, the plenum just ended made scant reference to these tasks, suggesting unsatisfactory performance on the part of the organizations held responsible for their completion. The plenum also formalized the release of the new Soviet President, Leonid Brezhnev, from the central committee secretariat and accepted the resignation of aged former President Voroshilov from the party presidium. (Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: President Sukarno may soon replace Army Chief of Staff Nasution by Lieutenant General Gatot Subroto, the army's next-ranking officer. Nasution would retain his defense and security post in the cabinet. Although he lacks Nasution's political acumen, Gatot Subroto is firmly anti-Communist. Sukarno might regard such an appointment as temporary while he maneuvers to reduce further the power of Nasution and strongly anti-Communist officers in the army command.
[PAGE 05]
Lebanon: Lebanese President Shihab reportedly plans to send emissaries to Cairo and Damascus to ascertain the UAR's attitude "in the hypothetical event it is necessary to install a military regime in Lebanon." Establishment of the proposed military government is said to be dependent on whether the newly elected parliament becomes a source of communal strife. This information supplements earlier reports of Shihab's disgust with Lebanese politics and of dissatisfaction among senior Lebanese army officers who want the former army commander to head a military regime. (Page 2)

Congo: Tension remains high in Leopoldville, where the continuing danger of a major incident between Belgian troops or civilians and Congolese elements has been complicated by signs of resentment on the part of local Belgians toward the initial contingents of the UN force. At the same time, Belgium's continuing reinforcement and tactical deployment of its forces and its apparent determination to buttress the separatists' regime in Katanga Province are further widening the breach between Brussels and the Lumumba government. Lumumba may, as a result, soon direct a more specific second appeal to the USSR for aid against Belgian "aggression."

At the UN Security Council meeting which has been set, on Soviet initiative, for 19 July, Moscow can be expected to press strongly for the speedy and complete evacuation of Belgian forces from the Congo--a position which will almost certainly win wide support among the independent African states. (Page 3)

III. THE WEST

West Berlin: The West Berlin city official responsible for liaison with the West German Government alleged that during the cabinet session of 8 July, Chancellor Adenauer took the position that any acts in Berlin which would constitute provocation to the USSR should be avoided. Discussing the proposal to locate the headquarters of the German radio in Berlin,
[PAGE 06]
alleged that the chancellor did not distinguish between normal events and the initiation of new acts. He said West Berlin Mayor Brandt was sending the chancellor a letter presenting the strong objections of the city government to Adenauer's attitude.

repeated familiar arguments in favor of avoiding any steps which could be interpreted as yielding to Soviet pressure and threats against Berlin.

Italy: Negotiations for the formation of a new Italian government are the result of growing clamor for replacement of Tambroni's neo-Fascist-supported regime before the fall local elections. The small center parties--apprehensive over the polarization of Italian politics--have been anxious to compose their differences in order to support a new all-Christian Democratic minority cabinet which could serve as a transition to a more representative government. Socialist leader Pietro Nenni said he would not vote against it. To avoid isolation, the Communists, in whose interest it would be to retain the present regime, have been careful to say they would support any government dedicated to the principles of the constitution. Tambroni himself had previously suggested that his government was indispensable as the defender of Italy against the Communists. (Page 5)

Haiti: The arrest on 15 July of Clement Barbot, secret police chief and presidential secretary, was an attempt to suppress what may be a widespread conspiracy against the corrupt Duvalier administration. Only a few hours before his arrest, Barbot told the American ambassador that he had discussed the political situation with army leaders and they agree with his view that President Duvalier's policies are plunging Haiti toward a new period of political chaos and "the situation cannot continue much longer." They are also disturbed at the growing influence of pro-Communist presidential aides. (Page 6)
[PAGE 07]
Soviet Central Committee Plenum

Soviet accounts of the central committee plenum on industry and transportation which ended on 15 July indicate that, despite progress toward industrial modernization and continued good results in fulfilling plan goals, serious problems still exist which have resulted in failures to make use of new gains in science and technology, cut production costs, and improve the quality of goods produced. The TASS summary of the final resolution failed to indicate what measures may be undertaken to overcome deficiencies.

This is in marked contrast to last year's industrial plenum, which launched an ambitious modernization program and assigned specific tasks to governmental and party agencies in an attempt to facilitate the introduction of new technology. Completion dates have already passed for all the tasks for which there were specific time limits, but there have been only slight indications of progress in the Soviet press. Possible remedial action by the regime might include personnel shifts or organizational changes.

Progress in improving technology is especially important if the ambitious gains in industrial productivity envisaged during the Seven-Year Plan period (1959-65) are to be achieved. Despite criticisms of failures in technological advances, Soviet industry continues to show good progress. The economic report for the first six months of this year indicates slightly higher gains in industrial labor productivity and the gross value of industrial production than are called for annually by the Seven-Year Plan.

The plenum routinely released Leonid Brezhnev from the central party secretariat and accepted the resignation of Kliment Voroshilov from the party presidium. Brezhnev gave up his secretarial responsibilities last May, when the Supreme Soviet elected him president of the USSR to succeed the aged Voroshilov.
[PAGE 08]
Possible Plans for Military Regime in Lebanon

Lebanese President Shihab, who apparently remains dubious about prospects for political stability in Lebanon following the recently concluded parliamentary elections, may be considering the establishment of a military regime.

Nadim Dimechkie, Lebanese ambassador to the United States who is visiting Lebanon, reportedly said Shihab, former commander in chief of the army, is planning to send emissaries to Cairo and Damascus to ascertain the UAR's attitude "in the hypothetical event it is necessary" to install such a regime. Dimechkie is said to have expressed the opinion that Shihab would set up a military government within six months if the newly elected parliament became a source of communal strife. The new parliament is scheduled to convene on 18 July.

senior Lebanese army officers, fearing the election of pro- and anti-UAR extremists will lead to conflicts between Moslem and Christian elements in Lebanon, intended to ask Shihab to head a military regime. The president, who has expressed disgust with Lebanese politics and stated "the Lebanese cannot govern themselves--they must be governed," may have been receptive to this overture. The senior officer group was believed to be composed largely of Christians and to be in contact with disgruntled Christian politicians.
[PAGE 09]
Situation in the Congo

Tension remains high in the Congo, especially in Leopoldville and other important urban centers where there is a continuing danger of major incidents between Belgian troops or civilians and Congolese elements. The situation is further complicated by signs of resentment on the part of some Belgians, especially military personnel, toward the initial UN contingents which so far have come only from African states.

Belgium's continuing reinforcement and tactical deployment of its military forces, despite the relatively rapid buildup of the UN force and Congolese Premier Lumumba's demand that Belgian troops be withdrawn entirely from the Congo, has widened the breach between Brussels and the Lumumba government. Brussels' position--which seems to be hardening in response to rightist pressures in Belgium--is that its troops will not be withdrawn until the UN forces are clearly in control of the situation and then only to the Belgian bases at Kamina and Kitona.

The Belgians' apparent determination to buttress the separatist regime in Katanga Province while withholding, at least for the present, formal recognition also stands in the way of any possible reconciliation with Lumumba. In a communique issued on 16 July, Brussels took official "note" of Katanga Premier Tshombe's independence proclamation and pledged Belgium's "cooperation" with Katanga. Subsequently, a special Belgian emissary arrived in Elisabethville to facilitate direct contact between Tshombe and the Belgian government, which is probably also working to align other provinces with Tshombe and against Lumumba. Tshombe claimed on 16 July that leaders in neighboring Kivu and Kasai provinces and in the Belgian trust territory of Ruanda-Urundi want to federate with Katanga.

Lumumba, who flew to his personal political stronghold in Stanleyville on 16 July amid speculation he might be about to switch Congo's capital to that city, may react with a second,
[PAGE 10]
more specific appeal for Soviet aid against Belgian "aggression." The reported resignations on 17 July of four moderate members of his government--including Foreign Minister Bomboko and Economic Affairs Minister Yava--would increase the likelihood of such an appeal.

At the UN Security Council meeting which has been set, on Soviet initiative, for 19 July, Moscow can be expected to demand speedy implementation of the paragraph in the resolution adopted last week which calls for the evacuation of Belgian forces from the Congo. This position appears certain to win wide support among independent African states where there is a strong tendency--openly proclaimed in the case of Guinea--to view Belgium's action in the Congo as an attempt by "imperialism" to restore control over a former colony.

Brussels, meanwhile, has rejected the Soviet note accusing Belgium and other western powers of "aggression" against the new Congo state and is charging Communist bloc agitators with responsibility for the chaotic situation. The Belgian radio reported on 17 July that a Polish ship was about to deliver "300 tons of armament" to the Congo. However, there is no other information available on this alleged shipment.
[PAGE 11]
The Italian Political Situation

Negotiations for the formation of a new Italian government were inspired by the widespread anti-Fascist demonstrations in late June and early July. The ruling Christian Democrats feared facing nationwide local elections, now scheduled for 23 October, under the stigma of their present parliamentary alliance with the neo-Fascists.

Although right-wing Christian Democrats have urged that the government should not resign under Communist fire, left-wing Christian Democrats and the parties of the center-left have insisted that a new cabinet which could lead to a government of the center-left is necessary to halt the drift toward polarization of Italian politics.

The conservative Liberals, similarly apprehensive over this trend and anxious to regain the position they lost when they withdrew support of the Segni government last winter, have agreed to join the others in supporting an all-Christian Democratic government disengaged from the neo-Fascists. Some of them have been given pause, however, by the fact that Socialist leader Pietro Nenni has said he would not oppose such a government if it is headed by former Premier Fanfani.

Presumably to avoid isolation, Communist chief Togliatti, whose interests would best be served by continuance of the present unpopular regime, now has gone Nenni one better by offering to support a government which would "respect the constitution."

While there was some talk of returning former Premier Scelba to his old post as interior minister, with either Tambroni or Segni in the foreign affairs post, Tambroni himself was making a strong effort to retain the premiership through attempts to exchange neo-Fascist for monarchist parliamentary support.
[PAGE 12]
Arrest of Key Haitian Official Reveals Dissension
In Duvalier Regime

The arrest on 15 July of Clement Barbot, secret police chief and presidential secretary, was an attempt to suppress what may be a wide-spread conspiracy against the Duvalier administration. Only a few hours before his arrest, Barbot told the American ambassador he had been discussing the political situation with key army officers and they agree with his view that President Duvalier's policies are plunging Haiti toward a new period of political chaos and that "the situation cannot continue much longer."

Although Barbot's claim of armed forces support against Duvalier cannot be confirmed, he is known to have been on close personal terms with Army Chief of Staff General Merceron and other key officers, who probably share his concern over recent trends in the Duvalier administration.

Duvalier for the past several months has been increasingly influenced by a clique of bitterly anti-US aides, including at least one probable Communist. This group is apparently at least partially responsible for the bitter attacks Duvalier has recently made on US economic aid to Haiti, which he maintains is both inadequate and granted under conditions inconsistent with Haitian sovereignty. He has promoted public anti-US demonstrations and hinted that Haiti may seek aid from the Soviet bloc. His use of the existing aid programs for political patronage has already crippled the desperately needed projects.
[PAGE 13]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 14]
