[PAGE 01]
12 April 1961

Copy No. C

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 04]
12 April 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

4. France-Algeria: De Gaulle takes firm line in press conference. (Page ii)

7. Conclusions of Special USIB Subcommittee on Berlin situation. (Page iv)
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 08]
*France-Algeria: De Gaulle's remarks on Algeria at his long-scheduled 11 April press conference will give the rebel leaders little encouragement that he intends to go any further toward meeting their conditions for holding negotiations. While he did not close the door on peace talks, he belittled the influence of the rebellion and questioned the provisional Algerian government's ability to take responsible action. In spelling

12 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     ii
[PAGE 09]
out additional details of his views on alternatives for Algeria's future, De Gaulle made his strongest threats to date designed to discourage the choice of "chaotic independence" without ties to France. He may, on the other hand, have sweetened for the rebels the alternative of association by indicating that it might involve French aid of various types in exchange for minority guarantees and base rights.

12 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iii
[PAGE 10]
CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB SUBCOMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has noted the following conclusions reached by its Special Berlin Subcommittee which reviewed the situation for the period 7 March 1961 through 10 April 1961:

1. We have no indications that the USSR plans to increase tensions over Berlin at this time.

2. There have been no significant developments with regard to access to Berlin and East Berlin during the period covered by this report.

3. Over the past month the bloc has devoted increased attention to the German and Berlin issues. Soviet propaganda commentary, statements by high-level East German and Soviet officials, and the 30 March Warsaw Pact communique have all stressed the necessity of concluding a peace treaty and solving the Berlin problem, but without any suggestion of deadlines.

12 Apr 61     DAILY BRIEF     iv
[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]
Next 6 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]
Possible Soviet Proposals on Berlin and Germany

Moscow, in support of a call for new negotiations on Berlin and Germany, may advance further proposals broadening the standard Soviet call for a German peace treaty and free city status for West Berlin by incorporating earlier East German schemes.

Moscow may endorse previous East German plans for a nonaggression pact between the two Germanys, a phased approach to disarmament in Germany similar to the Rapacki plan, and the formation of an all-German confederative council and a peace treaty commission--all of which were included in the plan proposed by party leader Ulbricht in February 1960. The Bonn Foreign Ministry is convinced that this report published in the Frankfurt paper on 30 March was in fact inspired by the Soviet Embassy. The Frankfurt paper was used in November 1958 to leak the Soviet proposal for a free city before the USSR officially presented the plan to the Western powers.

the USSR was considering the timing of a new diplomatic initiative on Berlin. Further confirmation of a possible Soviet offer along these lines was contained in Ulbricht's public statement on 1 April that his proposals were discussed "in detail" at Moscow.

The bloc's increased attention to the German and Berlin issues since the publication on 4 March of the Soviet memorandum to Bonn also suggests that the USSR is preparing further diplomatic moves on Berlin. Moscow's reference in that memorandum to an interim agreement on Berlin was the first such public reference since before the Paris summit, and Ulbricht in his speech to the East German central committee plenum in

12 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 7
[PAGE 19]
mid-March called for a solution in the "spirit of the Soviet memorandum." He also listed a number of initial measures for a Berlin solution, which appear intended as part of any interim agreement. The revival, well in advance of any negotiations, of the concept of an interim solution suggests that it will remain a principal element in any new package proposal.

12 Apr 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 8
[PAGE 20]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 21]
TOP SECRET
