II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos

There continue to be conflicting reports from Laos on the status and location of the main Communist forces which may pose a threat to the town of Sam Neua. The Laotian army G-2 admitted to the American army attache on 7 September that he had had no specific information on the situation in Sam Neua Province for two days. In speculating that some enemy forces may have withdrawn to North Vietnam, he emphasized that this was merely a possibility and remained unconfirmed. He said that he had ordered patrols out in an effort to determine the true situation.

Meanwhile, fresh Communist troops of about battalion size have been identified in southeastern Phong Saly Province, according to General Ouane, the Laotian Army chief of staff. Such an augmentation of Communist strength would further complicate the defensive problems of the already overtaxed Laotian Army.

High-ranking military representatives from Argentina, Italy, Japan, and Tunisia are expected to leave later this week for Vientiane, under UN Security Council auspices. As many as 15 men from each country may eventually make up the group because of the difficult terrain in Sam Neua and Phong Saly provinces which must be observed. The group has no authority to make recommendations but will merely report its findings to the council "as soon as possible."

A possible new line in North Vietnam's propaganda appeared on 8 September when Hanoi publicized an alleged Neo Lao Hak Zat statement which asserted that the only solution to the Laotian problem was negotiation between the two parties concerned--the Royal Government and the Pathet Lao forces. Heretofore, bloc propaganda has proposed revival of the ICC in Laos and strict observance of the Geneva and Vientiane agreements as the "only" solution to the situation. The new willingness to negotiate on the part of the NLHZ may reflect confidence that the rebellion has achieved sufficient success to provide a basis for negotiation.

9 Sept 59 Page 1
