Indian Communist Party Consults Moscow and Peiping
On Friction Between India and China

The dilemma in which the Indian Communist party (CPI) has been placed by the recent friction between India and Communist China over border problems is emphasized by its order to party secretary Ajoy Ghosh to review the situation in talks with Chinese as well as Soviet leaders.

Ghosh left for Moscow on 26 August under CPI instructions to inform Khrushchev of the embarrassing position in which Indian Communists find themselves as a result of recent Chinese action toward India. Ghosh was to point out that CPI sympathizers in India were turning anti-Chinese and the party was being isolated because of its inability either to join in the criticism of Peiping or to come out in open support of the Chinese. The CPI, in these circumstances, requested the "advice" of the Soviet party on what stand it should take.

In a subsequent letter to Ghosh in Moscow, the CPI executive reportedly directed him to discuss these difficulties with top Chinese Communist leaders during his scheduled visit to Peiping. The CPI had already sent a formal letter in mid-August to the Chinese Communist party explaining its position and recommending that Peiping confine its use of such terms as "Indian expansionists" in propaganda material to specific anti-Communist elements in India.

Ghosh is not likely to find the Chinese sympathetic to the CPI's plight. Chinese diplomatic officials in India reportedly have criticized Indian Communists for bungling the situation in Kerala and also questioned the CPI's public statement welcoming the Eisenhower-Khrushchev meeting. The Chinese leaders with whom Ghosh talks probably will insist that Peiping has no choice but to defend what it claims as Chinese territory. They will almost certainly suggest that the CPI support Peiping's formal position favoring "peaceful negotiations" on border problems.

In addition to discussing the border situation, Ghosh was empowered to convey to Moscow the "true facts" behind New Delhi's

9 Sept 59 Page 2
