[PAGE 01]
7 August 1957

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

This document contains classified information affecting the national security of the United States within the meaning of the espionage laws, US Code Title 18, Sections 793, 794 and 798. The law prohibits its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any manner to an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any manner prejudicial to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any foreign government to the detriment of the United States.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SOVIET BLOC MAY SUPPORT CHARLES MALIK FOR UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY PRESIDENCY (page 3).

2. INDIAN AMBASSADOR ASSERTS FAITH IN NASR (page 4).

3. CHINESE COMMUNISTS LINK PROMINENT CRITICS OF REGIME WITH COUNTERREVOLUTIONARIES (page 5).

4. SUKARNO TELLS COMMUNISTS TO ADOPT "PRO-INDONESIAN" POLICY (page 6).

[PAGE 04]
1. SOVIET BLOC MAY SUPPORT CHARLES MALIK FOR
UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY PRESIDENCY

Comment on:

According to Lebanese Foreign Minister Malik, the Czech minister in Beirut has stated that Czechoslovakia had decided to "shelve" its candidacy for the UN General Assembly presidency in order to avoid any break or split in the Asian-African bloc voting. He added that Czechoslovakia was not withdrawing its candidacy, but merely postponing it. The Czech minister hinted that the entire Soviet bloc would vote for Malik. Malik told the American ambassador that he thought he now had sufficient votes to win, but that he would regret gaining the presidency of the General Assembly through Communist bloc votes. He suggested that the US take the initiative in avoiding such a dilemma by meeting with the UN delegates of certain Western countries, including New Zealand and Canada, to find a "wise" solution to the problem.

The American UN delegation considers that New Zealand's Munro has a considerable lead, partly because this year is the Commonwealth's turn for the presidency. Several prominent members of the Asian-African bloc, most of the Latin Americans, and the Western European members reportedly have promised their support to Munro.

As presented by Malik, the situation would afford another opportunity for the Soviet bloc to appear as the champion of Arab interests against the West.

[PAGE 05]
2. INDIAN AMBASSADOR ASSERTS FAITH IN NASR

In a recent discussion with American Ambassador Hare, Indian Ambassador to Egypt Rajwade expressed the belief of his government, "including Nehru and himself," in President Nasr's "basic integrity." He added that this belief was the reason for India's "working so hard to induce him to take a more moderate and constructive line."

Rajwade stated that his government had been disappointed with the tone and content of Nasr's speeches of 22 and 26 July, which ignored the moderation advised by Nehru, Krishna Menon, and himself prior to delivery. He added that it was nevertheless his impression that Nasr had "learned his lesson," although he still appeared to have two obsessions, fear of Israel and suspicion of the United States.

Comment

Rajwade's statements appear to be in line with Nehru's expressed attitude toward Nasr, including recent indications of his disappointment in the Egyptian President. Nasr's speeches, and in particular the one of 26 July, were intemperate, with large portions devoted to attacks on Israel and the United States.

[PAGE 06]
3. CHINESE COMMUNISTS LINK PROMINENT CRITICS OF
REGIME WITH COUNTERREVOLUTIONARIES

Comment on:

During the past week, Peiping has described activities by five conspiratorial groups operating in widely separated areas of Communist China. The most recent of these reports, concerning the capture of a group said to have been operating in the Hunan-Hupeh border area during late June, has been used to link prominent non-Communist critics of the regime with attempts to overthrow the government. Leaders of this group are quoted as declaring that Chang Po-chun, minister of communications, and Chu An-ping, former chief editor of the Kwangming Daily, belong to their group.

By associating these men with plotters against the government, Peiping has cleared the road for possible major charges against them and against others who have voiced opposition to Communist policies. Peiping's principal objective may be to intimidate all dissidents by such an association with counterrevolutionary activity.

The Chinese Communists have been giving publicity to the capture of counterrevolutionary groups since their campaign against critics of the regime got under way in mid-June. This dissident activity, probably resulting mainly from discontent over food shortages throughout the countryside, has been under careful surveillance by the Communist police. Reports of the incidents have noted that public security forces stepped in as soon as unruly elements--armed with knives, spears and "other lethal weapons"--initiated demonstrations. Publicity given to the existence of these groups could be used to justify harsh wholesale repression.

[PAGE 07]
4. SUKARNO TELLS COMMUNISTS TO ADOPT "PRO-
INDONESIAN" POLICY

President Sukarno told Communist leaders and sympathizers recently that indiscriminate criticism of the United States must stop since it was not in harmony with Indonesia's "active, independent" foreign policy, according to Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio. Sukarno made his remarks after Communist leaders had criticized as pro-American his decision to attend the formal opening on 7 August of an American-built cement factory in Surabaya.

According to Subandrio, Sukarno criticized the Communist Party for always taking the Russian side in disputes with America and said that when America's actions were good, they should be praised. He felt the Communists' attitude would only develop pro-Russian and pro-American groups in Indonesia and that what he wants is a "pro-Indonesian group." Subandrio said that as a result of the Communist Party's criticism, Sukarno had decided to make a major event of the factory opening, taking with him members of the cabinet.

Comment

Sukarno's reported reproach to the Communist leaders probably does not indicate any change in his willingness to accept their support and his inclination to favor their interests.
