Japan

Potential successors to Prime Minister Kishi can be expected to step up their maneuvers following his statement, issued shortly after the exchange of documents of ratification of the US-Japanese security treaty on 23 June, that he intends to resign. Political maneuverings had already increased following Kishi's statement on 20 June to Shojiro Kawashima, secretary general of the ruling Liberal-Democratic party (LDP), that he would announce his plans to resign once the security treaty became effective.

Hayato Ikeda, minister of international trade and industry, is widely mentioned in the Japanese press of 22 June as most likely to succeed Kishi. Ikeda's supporters believe he has or will be able to obtain sufficient support to become prime minister immediately after Kishi's resignation, rather than after a period under an interim prime minister. Efforts of Ichiro Kono, archrival of Kishi who heads an anti-Kishi faction of the LDP, to develop a "stop Ikeda" campaign lend credibility to Ikeda's claim to be the strongest candidate, but observers feel that the matter is far from settled.

Ikeda, in addition to claiming support from leaders of Kishi's party faction, is reportedly confident of cooperation from Takeo Miki, another important rival leader. Miki has apparently long aspired to the post of foreign minister and has, within the past year, traveled to the United States and to Communist bloc and Middle Eastern countries to increase his prestige.

Bamboku Ohno and Mitsujiro Ishii are also potential prime ministers. The head of the LDP policy board considers Ikeda the most likely choice if a special national party convention is called to elect a new party president, whom the Diet would then install as prime minister. If, however, a party caucus should decide to select an interim party president in an effort to avoid a major fight between Ikeda and Kono, Ohno and Ishii would have good prospects.

any future Japanese government would probably adopt a much harder
