[PAGE 01]
22 March 1953
Copy No. 60
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Comment on new USSR Party Secretariat (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Japan to ask revision of Administrative Agreement with US (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Viet Minh offensive believed imminent (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
4. China seeking renegotiation of treaty between Nepal and Tibet (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
5. Submarine training reportedly starts for East Germans (page 5).
6. Chancellor Figl reportedly dropped in efforts to form Austrian Government (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA
7. Panama threatens to air Canal Zone case in international body (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Comment on new USSR Party Secretariat:
Malenkov's exit from the Secretariat of the Soviet Communist Party, announced on 20 March, may indicate a diminution in his power, but it is also possible that he turned over this important administrative position to trusted subordinates in order to concentrate his full efforts on policy matters.

Both Stalin and Malenkov advanced to leadership from positions in the Secretariat where they were able to control key personnel appointments and important party organizational affairs. While Stalin's title of General-Secretary was apparently dropped in 1939, the continual appearance of his name at the top of Secretariat lists since then has made the title of "first" secretary a symbol of party leadership to outside observers. Although it is surprising that Malenkov gave up this position, he may have considered that he could continue his close supervision of important party organizational matters and appointments from his top ranking post on the USSR's highest policy organ, the Party Presidium. It would seem unlikely that he could have been forced out of the very position through which his claim to the succession was established.

In the new Secretariat, Khrushchev, Shatalin and Ignatiev seem to be particularly close associates of Malenkov and the other two members, Suslov and Pospelov, have both had a long association with him in party affairs.

FAR EAST

2. Japan to ask revision of Administrative Agreement with US:
Japan intends to request revision of the Administrative Agreement with the United States after it becomes a year old on 28 April. The Foreign
[PAGE 04]
Office has hinted that changes will involve the articles which grant the US criminal jurisdiction over its forces in Japan and those concerned with "rent free" facilities now being used by the American forces for the Korean war.

Comment: Such a request would probably be designed to strengthen Japan's position in negotiating similar provisions in the United Nations Forces Agreement, and at the same time could be used during the current election campaign to refute charges that the present government is subservient to the United States.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Viet Minh offensive believed imminent:
Viet Minh military operations in northern Indochina are imminent.

In addition, there have been indications that training programs begun after the last campaign were to be terminated sometime this month.
[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

4. China seeking renegotiation of treaty between Nepal and Tibet:
Communist China is still pressing for the establishment of diplomatic relations with Nepal and is now seeking renegotiation of the Nepalese-Tibetan treaty, according to Ambassador Bowles in New Delhi.

Comment: On 17 February the Nepalese Foreign Secretary stated that twice recently the Chinese commanding general in Lhasa had approached the Nepalese representative and suggested treaty revision.

The question of diplomatic relations and treaty revision has arisen periodically since 1951. As recently as 7 March, however, a Tibetan delegation arrived in Kathmandu bearing the traditional annual tribute to the King of Nepal, thereby suggesting that the Chinese are not yet ready to force an issue with that country.

WESTERN EUROPE

5. Submarine training reportedly starts for East Germans:
Submarine training for the East German Sea Police is reported to have started at Sassnitz on Ruegen Island, with advanced training to take place in the USSR.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: This is the first indication that submarine training has actually begun in East Germany, although units of the East German Sea Police were said to be receiving instruction in submarine operations in Kronstadt, near Leningrad, in December. In January, the commanding officer of the Sea Police Coastal Patrol division reportedly announced to a class of students that four former German submarines of 250 tons displacement were lying in Sassnitz awaiting transfer to the Sea Police.

6. Chancellor Figl reportedly dropped in efforts to form Austrian Government:
Foreign Minister Gruber has informed the American Embassy in Vienna that the People's Party has decided to replace Chancellor Figl with Party Chairman Julius Raab in deference to demands from the members for "stronger leadership."

Ambassador Thompson is hopeful that negotiations next week between the People's Party and the Socialists on the formation of a new government will be successful, but he warns that a "most dangerous situation" will result if either party now increases its demands.

Comment: People's Party leaders probably feel that Raab, a former Heimwehr (Fascist) leader and head of the industrialist element of the party, would be better able to cope with the Socialists in a two-party coalition. It is also probable that he will be far more willing than Figl to turn to the right extremists as coalition partners should Socialist demands appear "excessive."

LATIN AMERICA

7. Panama threatens to air Canal Zone case in international body:
President Remon has threatened to bring his case for revision of the 1936 Canal Zone treaty with the United States to the forthcoming Inter-
[PAGE 07]
American Conference in Caracas or to the United Nations. He is reportedly requesting other Latin American countries to support Panama's claims.

Comment: Virtually all Panamanian opinion approves Remon's avowed effort to revise the 1936 treaty in such respects as the size of the annual payment made by the United States and the rights of Panamanian citizens in the Canal Zone. Remon, who is basically pro-US, has wanted for some time to discuss the problem personally with President Eisenhower and has become increasingly bitter at what he feels is official US discouragement of a Washington visit.

Remon will probably not take his case to the Inter-American Conference or to the UN unless he feels balked in his efforts to "obtain justice" for Panama through bilateral negotiations.
