[PAGE 01]
6 March 1955

Copy No.
88

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA, OSD and DOS review(s) completed.

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
2. Communists may use "peace" conference in India as prelude to Afro-Asian conference (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Paris reportedly to de-emphasize Sainteny mission in North Vietnam (page 4).
4. Hoa Hao general asks US support against Diem (page 5).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Comment on threat of new clashes on Egyptian-Israeli frontier (page 7).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

2. Communists may use "peace" conference in India as prelude to Afro-Asian conference:

The "Asian Conference for Easing International Tensions," described as a "privately organized" gathering, will convene in New Delhi on 6 April, according to press reports

[PAGE 04]
quoting the fellow-traveling Indian chairman of the preparatory committee. The main item on the agenda is to be the so-called "five principles" of coexistence, although other topics--such as colonialism, atomic weapons, and the dangers of military pacts--are also listed for discussion.

Some 300 delegates, representing several Asian and Middle Eastern countries as well as the USSR, are expected to attend. In addition to a large Soviet deputation, the Communists will have a large number of representatives from China, North Korea and North Vietnam.

Comment: The convocation of such a Communist-sponsored conference was first suggested by Indian representatives at the Stockholm "peace conference" last June, and the USSR has since shown unusual interest in its promotion.

The Afro-Asian conference opening on 18 April can be expected to assume a prominent place in the deliberations at Delhi, although there was originally no connection between the two. The Communists have an excellent opportunity at Delhi to plan their strategy for the Bandung meeting, to which the USSR is not invited. Their efforts will be facilitated by the fact that the topics to be considered at the two meetings are remarkably similar.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Paris reportedly to de-emphasize Sainteny mission in North Vietnam:

The French government has decided that the Sainteny mission in North Vietnam should revert to its original role of merely protecting French interests without attempting to experiment with coexistence,

[PAGE 05]
Comment: In view of the reluctance of the French government to close any avenue to an East-West detente, it is unlikely that an early change in Sainteny's status can be expected.

4. Hoa Hao general asks US support against Diem:

General Tran Van Soai, one of the several Hoa Hao chiefs, told the American chargé in Saigon that the time had come for a new government, which he hoped the United States would help to establish. Upon receiving no encouragement, Soai then said he would only continue to support Diem under certain conditions. The chargé notes, moreover, that Hoa Hao and Binh Xuyen representatives are reported to have come to a decision on 2 March to "take action" against the government.

Meanwhile, Diem has tripled the defenses around his headquarters in Saigon, and is said to be relying on the recently rallied troops of Cao Dai general Trinh Minh The to neutralize the Binh Xuyen.

Comment: The tendency of the sects to permit their "action" plans to become known, or even to discuss these plans with American officials, tends to cast doubt on their intention to take such action, and reflects their weakening position in relation to the government. The sects can be expected to explore every opportunity to check the growth of central government authority at the expense of their own, but they are probably realistic enough not to seek a forcible showdown. There is a possibility that the government, goaded by constant reports of conspiracy, may prematurely strike out against one or more of the sects.

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
7. Comment on threat of new clashes on Egyptian-Israeli frontier:

The continued violent reaction of Arab refugees in the Gaza area (see map, p. 8) to the 28 February Israeli attack injects an additional element into the explosive border situation. The more than 200,000 Palestinian Arab refugees, deeply embittered and frustrated after more than six years in camps, have demonstrated against both Egypt and the United Nations because of failure to provide protection against Israeli attacks. Under present conditions Egyptian forces may not be able to prevent refugee bands from making armed forays into Israeli territory, thus promoting more retaliation.

The Jordanian Arab Legion is reported to expect Israel to initiate a series of major incidents in an effort to provoke Arab retaliation which would lead to an outbreak of general hostilities. This appears to be an overstatement, even though Israeli army leaders have long urged a tough approach to frontier problems.

[PAGE 08]
ISRAEL*

RECENT ISRAELI BORDER ACTIVITY

28 February 1955

200,000 Palestinian Arab Refugees

Gaza area administered by Egypt since 1949.

International boundary
Armistice line
National capital

Statute Miles
Kilometers

NOTE: Some boundaries shown on this map are not necessarily recognized as definitive by the United States Government.

THE FRONTIERS OF ISRAEL SHOWN HERE ARE THE TEMPORARILY ESTABLISHED BY THE GENERAL ARMISTICE AGREEMENT BETWEEN ISRAEL AND THE SEVERAL ARAB STATES. THE FINAL INTERNATIONAL STATUS OF JERUSALEM HAS NOT YET BEEN DECIDED BY THE UN.

[PAGE 09]
