[PAGE 01]
2 July 1960
Copy No. C 71

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 2
NO CHANGE IN CLASS. X
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2010
AUTH: HR 10-2
DATE: 9 JUL 1980
REVIEWER:
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
2 JULY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japanese leadership crisis unresolved; leftists continue agitation. (Page 1)

South Korea renews seizures of Japanese fishing vessels. (Page 3)

New Turkish regime concerned that its "revolutionary" aims are too little known. (Page 4)

Nationalist extremist sentiment appears rising in Nyasaland; Federation of Rhodesia reported planning to move in troops in case of disorders. (Page 5)

III. THE WEST

Bonn inclined not to hold early Bundestag sessions in Berlin as customary to avoid giving Moscow pretext for protests or harassment. (Page 6)
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
2 July 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: The failure so far to resolve the leadership crisis in the ruling Liberal-Democratic party is providing ammunition for charges by the Japanese press that the conservatives are merely engaged in "cynical" and "undemocratic" bargaining. An early July gubernatorial election yet to be held may show the public's attitude toward the security treaty and left-wing mass violence. The public service unions of the pro-Communist Sohyo labor organization plan to hold daily demonstrations in Tokyo at least until 5 July as part of the leftist united-front effort to strengthen mass agitation against the treaty and build a Socialist election machine. (Page 1)

South Korea - Japan: The sudden renewal of seizures of Japanese fishing craft by South Korean patrols within the last few days will strengthen powerful Japanese interests which favor the use of force to protect Japanese fishermen on the high seas. The seizures, made well inside the "Rhee fishing line," may have been partly a response to indications that Tokyo will renew the agreement with Pyongyang for the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea for another year. Seoul has warned that renewal of the agreement would provoke a strong reaction in South Korea. (Page 3)

Turkey: The new regime is showing concern that its "revolutionary" principles and aims are too little known both at home and abroad. A strongly worded instruction from the premier's office, included in a circular message of 24 June, ordered a campaign to promote international good will toward the revolutionary government. A similar campaign to counteract "negative propaganda" is being undertaken inside Turkey. (Page 4)
[PAGE 05]
Nyasaland: African nationalist extremist sentiment again appears to be rising in Nyasaland following a tour by nationalist leader Hastings Banda. Widespread disorders similar to those of early 1959 could occur in this British protectorate later this summer if Banda fails to obtain major political concessions from the British Government at the official conference on Nyasaland scheduled for late July in London. The European-dominated government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland reportedly plans to move federal troops to Nyasaland within a few hours after any disorders begin. (Page 5)

III. THE WEST

West Germany: Leaders of Chancellor Adenauer's Christian Democratic party have told American officials in Bonn that they are inclined not to hold the Bundestag session in Berlin in September in order to avoid actions which the USSR could view as provocative. They feel, however, that such rights as that of the Bundestag to meet in the city should continue to be asserted. Socialist leaders are unlikely to go along with the government on this question. (Page 6)

2 July 60 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
The Situation in Japan

Failure of negotiations among Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) leaders so far to select a successor to Prime Minister Kishi is providing ammunition for press charges of a "cynical" and "undemocratic" struggle for power and is increasing intra-party pressure for agreement. There are reports that, unless the leadership decides on a successor by 4 July, party members will demand that an LDP Diet members' caucus or a party convention be called to resolve the issue. Already 50 Diet members have agreed to demand a progress report from the leadership and to ask that party executives begin preparations for a party convention.

Despite mounting criticism, observers see little indication that LDP officials feel any sense of urgency in establishing firm new leadership to unite conservative forces, to deal with subversive elements, and to restore international confidence in Japan. Reports suggest that leaders of anti-Kishi factions, irked by exclusion from party deliberations and by talk of disciplinary action for their failure to cooperate in the debate over the security treaty, may be discussing forming a new conservative party. Although this threat of a new party could be merely a bargaining maneuver to gain a greater voice in party affairs, the personal ambitions of Kishi's opponents could make such a threat the first in a chain of events which could ultimately split the LDP.

Ambassador MacArthur notes that the party has waged only indifferent campaigns in two early July gubernatorial elections which offer the first indication of whether the LDP's strength in rural areas has been affected by passage of the security treaty and by left-wing mass violence. Although local issues normally dominate prefectural contests, the Japan Socialist party (JSP) has made the treaty the major issue and has marshaled party leaders from Tokyo to support its campaign. LDP candidates have defended the treaty when pressed, but reports indicate that they have tried to avoid it by stressing local issues. The LDP candidate has won the 1 July election in Aomori, but the outcome in normally
[PAGE 07]
conservative Saitama prefecture, just northwest of Tokyo, will be more significant because of its proximity to Tokyo and the presence of several American military installations in the area.

The public service unions of the pro-Communist labor federation Sohyo, meanwhile, have announced plans for demonstrations every day except Sunday at least until 5 July to demand dissolution of the Diet, to continue opposition to the US alliance, and to protest disciplinary action by the government against union members who participated in political strikes during the past month. Plans beyond 6 July include probable continuance of protests by the nationwide People's Council Against the Security Treaty in order to strengthen for the anticipated general election the united front tactics which the Socialists have already used successfully to capitalize on antitreaty and anti-Kishi sentiment.

2 July 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 08]
Seoul Renews Seizures of Japanese Fishing Crafts?

South Korea's sudden resumption of seizures of Japanese fishing craft will strengthen powerful interests in Japan which favor the use of force to protect Japanese fishermen on the high seas. Korean patrols have seized three boats in the last four days and now hold 29 fishermen. The owner of a Japanese boat that managed to escape when two others were captured on 30 July is a conservative Diet member and representative of the Japanese fishing industry who last year pressed strongly for armed protection of Japanese boats.

The seizures, made well inside the unilaterally imposed "Rhee fishing line," may have been partly a response to indications that Tokyo will renew the agreement with Pyongyang for the repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea. Of the approximately 700,000 Koreans in Japan when the repatriation began last December, some 29,000 have gone to North Korea, and the Japanese estimate that between 100,000 and 150,000 may eventually choose to go. Seoul has warned that renewal of the agreement would provoke a strong reaction in South Korea.

The seizures come at a time when there are increasing signs that prospective new governments in Seoul and Tokyo are likely to take a more rigid attitude toward a settlement of outstanding differences between the two countries. A Tokyo Foreign Ministry official has noted that any future Japanese government which would undertake serious negotiations with the South Koreans probably would take a much harder line than the present administration. Acting Prime Minister Huh Chung in Seoul has recently warned that no South Korean government is likely to reach an easy settlement with Japan and reiterated that negotiations with the Japanese will not be resumed unless the repatriation to North Korea is ended.

There also is a possibility that Pyongyang may protract negotiations for extension of the repatriation agreement, which expires on 13 August, in the knowledge that a demonstration of Tokyo's desire to continue the program probably would further aggravate South Korean - Japanese relations.
[PAGE 09]
Turkish Regime Seeks to Justify Coup

The National Unity Committee (NUC) apparently is concerned over the lack of international interest in the "revolutionary movement" in Turkey and public criticism at home. Propaganda campaigns are under way to attract more popular good will. The regime appears to feel it still is necessary to justify the 27 May coup d'état and to win support for any measures it may take against the leaders of the former regime.

The provisional government is also trying to counteract what it has termed "negative propaganda in Turkey" by explaining the causes of the revolution in a 28 June broadcast to the Turkish people. The arrest of 61 members of the Democratic party in the Izmir area on 29-30 June for trying to promote "an underground organization against the national revolution" indicates that organized opposition is beginning to emerge.

Several persons overheard criticizing the regime have been arrested in various places in Turkey. A "protection of reform" law passed by the NUC on 28 June provides that anyone accused of being a "menace to the safety of the state" may be held for 30 days without trial. Military communications officers have been stationed in central telephone exchanges to monitor long distance and international telephone calls.
[PAGE 10]
African Unrest Growing in Nyasaland

African nationalist extremist sentiment is reported growing again in the northern province of Nyasaland following a recent tour of the area by nationalist leader Dr. Hastings Banda. The American consul has noted a deterioration in the security and political situation since late May. During a trip he made in late June, most Africans shouted political slogans at his passing vehicle, and an American missionary told of hostile receptions at all ports on Lake Nyasa by African crowds shouting "Europeans go home." The British governor has threatened punitive action if intimidation by Banda's Malawi Congress party continues in the protectorate's central province.

Banda has demanded separation of the Nyasaland protectorate from the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, which is dominated by white settlers, as well as the rapid Africanization of the protectorate's government. British officials plan to discuss Nyasaland's political evolution with Banda in London at an official conference starting 25 July, but it is most unlikely that his demands will be met. London wants to delay any major constitutional change in Nyasaland for several months because of its adverse effect elsewhere in the Federation.

Many local and British officials are concerned that Banda will order nationalist disorders for later this summer or autumn. Similarly inspired violence in early 1959 resulted in a score of deaths, considerable property damage, the imposition of martial law, and heightened racial tension in central Africa.

The federal government plans to dispatch troops and take over maintenance of order in the protectorate within seven hours if such an outbreak recurs.
[PAGE 11]
Bonn May Decide Against Holding Fall Bundestag Meeting In Berlin

Leaders of Chancellor Adenauer's Christian Democratic Union (CDU) have told American officials in Bonn that, in order to avoid actions which Moscow could use as a pretext for new protests or harassments, they are inclined not to hold the first few meetings of the Bundestag in Berlin this September, as is usually done. Heinrich Krone, CDU Bundestag chairman, indicated that Adenauer, Bundestag President Gerstenmaier, and other CDU leaders had agreed that while West German rights--such as that of the Bundestag to meet in the city and that of the Federal President to make official visits--should continue to be asserted, they were inclined against exercising them at this time.

Many German leaders including Adenauer reportedly expect that Khrushchev may make new moves against Berlin during the American election campaign. The Social Democratic party (SPD) and West Berlin Mayor Brandt, however, are expected to insist that cancellation of the annual fall meeting of the Bundestag would constitute an unnecessary concession harmful to Berlin morale. The attitude of the CDU may in part be motivated by a desire to undermine the position of Brandt, who is expected to be the SPD chancellor candidate in the 1961 election.
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 13]
