[PAGE 01]

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
1. Iranian Prime Minister disappointed with The Hague sessions (page 3).
2. Britain has no new proposals on Iranian oil settlement (page 3).

EASTERN EUROPE
4. Turkish Foreign Minister analyzes prospects for Yugoslav military cooperation (page 4).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

1. Iranian Prime Minister disappointed with The Hague sessions:

Prime Minister Mossa-deq is pessimistic regarding the Anglo-Iranian case now being considered by the International Court of Justice. Mossadeq is worried also over the situation developing in Iran during his absence.

Comment: Opposition to the Prime Minister, whose political strength was weakening prior to his departure for The Hague, has increased during his absence.

The government has authorized a demonstration to welcome him on his expected return to Tehran on 24 June. This will provide Mossadeq an opportunity to generate popular support through emotional appeal.

2. Britain has no new proposals on Iranian oil settlement:

Great Britain is not now considering detailed proposals for a long-term settlement of the Iranian oil dispute. The Foreign Office foresees a lengthy delay before a definite plan emerges, since the management company idea that is being considered involves many difficult problems.

There is the general feeling that an interim settlement might be acceptable to any new Iranian regime and provide the best means of resuming production while working toward a permanent settlement. No new specific interim proposals are being considered.

[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE

4. Turkish Foreign Minister analyzes prospects for Yugoslav military cooperation:

The Turkish Foreign Minister is convinced that Yugoslav leaders have no desire to discuss military plans with Turkey at this time. After discussing the subject with the Yugoslav Ambassador in Ankara, the Foreign Minister told the American Embassy that he believed the Yugoslavs would, however, be ready to coordinate defense plans after NATO plans for the defense of Thrace had been developed in conjunction with Greece and Turkey.

[PAGE 05]
The Foreign Minister stated that he had informed the French Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs, who was in Ankara at the time, and the Italian Ambassador of these views, and had specifically asked the latter to advise Premier de Gasperi.

Comment: Both the Turks and Yugoslavs have hesitated to undertake bilateral defense plans with neighboring countries.
