New Indonesian Cabinet Marked by Increased Army Influence

The installation of Sukarno's new presidential cabinet on 10 July leaves Indonesia's national leadership relatively unchanged. The trio which in fact has led Indonesia over the past two years--President Sukarno, Army Chief of Staff General Nasution, and Prime Minister Djuanda--has emerged with strengthened powers. The cabinet is distinguished principally by the increased political role of the army and the reduction of voting members from 27 to 10.

Sukarno's so-called "nucleus cabinet" is led by nonparty Dr. Djuanda, now designated "first minister" since Sukarno himself heads the cabinet. Djuanda will also serve as finance minister. Nasution has been given the defense portfolio; it has not been announced whether he will resign as army chief of staff or will hold the two posts concurrently. Foreign Minister Subandrio retains his portfolio. Of the remaining six posts, one is held by the army and another probably controlled by it, two are held by non-Communist leftists, and two by reasonably capable but politically insignificant non-Communists. Only one minister has not previously held a cabinet post, and all but two are holdovers from the previous government.

Seven ex officio ministers of state, who include the three chiefs of staff, the police chief, and three high civilian officials, may attend "plenary" cabinet meetings but will not have a vote. Yet to be announced are a group of deputy ministers whose political orientation and extent of responsibility may change the complexion of the cabinet.

The streamlined cabinet and its program indicate that an attempt will be made to cope with Indonesia's most immediate problem--that of economic deterioration. At least five cabinet posts are directly involved with the economic situation. The three-point program includes the adequate supply of consumer items for the people, the establishment of security, and the continuation of the "struggle" for West New Guinea. There is little indication that any effective economic remedial action is possible within the near future. Nevertheless, Sukarno's reinstallation of the 1945 constitution and his formation of a new cabinet may partially restore popular confidence in the government.

10 July 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
