Situation in Laos

Laotian Government delegates to the Namone talks have confided to American Embassy personnel in Vientiane that they have been given an "inferiority complex" by the Pathet Lao negotiators. They assert that the Pathet Lao and Souvanna Phouma representatives act like conquerors who have come to dictate terms. The presence of battle-hardened Pathet Lao troops in Namone village drives home to the Vientiane delegates the weakness of their position. This pressure is augmented by well-staged demonstrations by the villagers, peace-slogan placards, and such devices as having Soviet helicopters flying overhead as the government delegates arrive. The Souvanna group apparently is also feeling the pressure of the Pathet Lao presence; Peng Phongsavan, the delegation leader, remarked to the government delegation that "it is not as easy as you think to keep a position of independence when you are surrounded day and night by those fellows."

Kong Le and his troops are kept separate from the Pathet Lao forces. Kong Le is said to have five battalions, four of which are paratroop units. Pathet Lao strength in the Plaine des Jarres area is estimated at four infantry battalions, all of which have artillery sections attached to them. The artillery is manned largely by North Vietnamese troops. there are about 50 Soviet specialists in the area.

Indian Foreign Secretary Desai expounded at some length regarding the Indian Government's views on Laos, stressing its continuing reservations concerning the American position. New Delhi is convinced that the only feasible way to neutralize Laos, and thus effectively contain the Chinese Communists, is through acceptance of Souvanna as premier. India believes that US backing of Boun Oum and Phoumi only makes matters worse by creating a three-way split which gives the Pathet Lao increased influence. Since the Pathet Lao cannot be eliminated, India urges that the United States accept Souvanna as the "second-best solution." Concerning

24 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
