South Korean Situation

Elements of the 5th and 12th Infantry Divisions, which had been serving as reserve units on the northern border, and three field artillery battalions from the Sixth Corps, also in the same area, were withdrawn to the Seoul area shortly after the coup on 16 May. These units, plus rear-area marine and army airborne forces which actually carried out the coup, remain in or near the city. American military observers point out that the withdrawal of these forces has seriously weakened the combat front, particularly in regard to artillery support.

The Supreme Council for National Reconstruction (SCNR) has arrested two additional brigadiers, one a front-line division commander, and three colonels. Thus far, however, the SCNR has dealt leniently with Second Army Commander and former Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Choe Kyong-nok, who did not support the coup and temporarily blocked a military takeover in the city of Taegu. Choe has been relieved of command and ordered to proceed unescorted to army headquarters in Seoul.

The nationwide crackdown continues; military tribunals have been established throughout the country to handle "murder, arson, and rebellion, disturbances, and other criminal cases" except those which were being processed by civilian courts. Reserve legal officers have been recalled to the army, presumably to try such cases. Reserve medical officers who were released prior to completion of military service also have been recalled. The SCNR has issued an order authorizing the suspension of newspapers and other publications, and one unconfirmed report indicates that 75 of the nation's 110 newspapers have been closed. Radio listeners are reported turning to Pyongyang broadcasts for "uncensored news."

President Yun Po-sun, according to his personal secretary who talked with an American Embassy officer on 22 May, believes that a return to civilian authority is imperative and that the longer the junta remains in power, the worse it will be for the South

24 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
