[PAGE 01]
20 November 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Principal anti-Communist powers at UN favor Indian resolution (page 3).

FAR EAST

4. Comment on establishment of National Planning Committee in Communist China (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. Serious setbacks seen in Bundestag EDC action (page 7).
8. Delay seen in Italian and Dutch ratification of EDC (page 8).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Principal anti-Communist powers at UN favor Indian resolution:

The principal anti-Communist powers in the UN favor the Indian resolution for solving the Korean POW impasse, according to the American UN delegation.

Britain, France and Canada feel that support of the Indian proposal might gain ground for the West with India and other Asian nations. The British delegation argues that if the Communists accept the Indian resolution "we will have an armistice," and if they reject it the West will gain an important propaganda victory.

Comment: The Indian proposal is objectionable to the United States chiefly because it includes no provision for the release of POW's unwilling to be repatriated.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
[PAGE 05]
FAR EAST

4. Comment on establishment of National Planning Committee in Communist China:

The establishment on 15 November of a National Planning Committee provides Communist China with an organization, comparable to the Soviet Union's State Planning Commission, charged with the formulation of long-range plans for increasing industrial and agricultural production.

The committee includes top Chinese Communist officers, and its creation lends support to other evidence that China is preparing for economic expansion under a five-year plan. Peiping has already stated that "planned construction will begin in 1953," and the Moscow radio declared on 1 October that China was preparing "the outlines of the first five-year plan."

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Serious setbacks seen in Bundestag EDC action:

The Bundestag's rejection of the government's motion to consider the Bonn and Paris treaties this month is a serious setback to Chancellor Adenauer because it makes more likely a Constitutional Court decision on the legality of the treaties prior to Bundestag action. The Chancellor has been hoping through Bundestag ratification to present the court with a "political fact" and thus influence its decision.

The new delay may encourage some coalition deputies to press for further postponement of ratification until the court has rendered its decision.

Comment: Unless the court renders an unfavorable decision beforehand, the Bundestag is now expected to ratify the treaties by mid-December, or at the latest in January.

- 7 -

[PAGE 08]
8. Delay seen in Italian and Dutch ratification of EDC:

The chief Italian delegate to the EDC treaty interim committee believes that his government, unless subjected to strong US pressure, may submit the EDC treaty to parliament too late to obtain approval before the 1953 spring elections. In his opinion, the government is holding back in the hope that one or more of the other member countries may act first.

Meanwhile, the US Embassy at the Hague reports that the lack of progress on EDC ratification by other countries has weakened the Netherlands' desire to be in the forefront. The political director of the Foreign Ministry now believes that the Netherlands will not ratify the treaty before February.

- 8 -
