and he asserts that it is necessary to "strive for negotiations and agreements" with the West and to develop personal contacts with Western statesmen--a line which Peiping has derided. He makes it clear that the German and Berlin questions remain the cardinal issues in negotiations with the West. His threat to conclude a separate treaty with East Germany carries forward his recent private effort to create a certain sense of urgency on this issue without precipitating a crisis.

Other Tactics. Khrushchev defends at length his policy of wooing the nationalist leaders of underdeveloped countries, even at the cost of sacrificing the local Communist parties there. The Chinese have accused him of exaggerating the importance of the neutralists (e.g. Nehru, Nasir, Sukarno), and they have urged less Soviet aid and more of an effort to bring these leaders down. Khrushchev seems willing to move a little faster toward making pro-Soviet "national democracies" (e.g. Cuba) of the neutral nations, but still not as fast as Peiping wishes.

As for the tactics of Communist parties in the West, Khrushchev reaffirms a gradualist program for these parties, envisaging lengthy preparation--through "democratic" movements--for eventual revolution. The Chinese have argued that "revolutionary situations" exist today in Western Europe and should be exploited.

Discipline of the Movement. In the latter part of his speech, Khrushchev discusses the question of the discipline of the world Communist movement, which all along has been the underlying issue in the Sino-Soviet dispute. Khrushchev insists that the "unity" of the movement is of "foremost importance," and he reiterates that the Soviet party recognizes the "equality" of other parties and does not regard itself as the "center" of the movement. He follows this, however, by making clear that the Soviet party does indeed wish to be regarded as the principal party and as the spokesman for the bloc, and he in effect advises the other parties to get rid of those who sympathize more with Peiping than with Moscow. Several parties at the November conference had supported the Chinese on some issues, and many other parties were neutral or split.

Khrushchev in conclusion addresses himself directly to the Chinese, whom elsewhere in the speech he condemns (without

21 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 3
