agriculture, notably those concerning the "new lands," the corn-for-fodder program, and the substitution of incentives in place of coercion and Communist enthusiasm as motivation for the Soviet farmer, have been very forcibly restated.
(Page 5)

ASIA-AFRICA

*Laos: Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces on 20 January are reported to have taken Tha Thom, the government's last important post in Xieng Khouang Province. Garrison commanders had shown little disposition in recent days to make a strong stand and apparently intend to resort to guerrilla-type operations. The government troops recently forced out of Phou Khoun at the junction between the Vientiane - Luang Prabang road and Route 7 are being reinforced for an early effort to retake the key junction.
Soviet transports continued airlift operations into Laos through 20 January and additional flights are scheduled.
(Page 7) (Map)

*Congo: There are indications that the Moroccan Government is moving to dissociate itself from the UN Congo operation. The 3,000-man Moroccan unit in the country reportedly has been ordered not to fight against the forces supporting Lumumba, and the Moroccan crown prince recently stated that he had undertaken to begin the withdrawal of his forces by 5 February. Hammarskjold has told US officials that, with Kasavubu having made public his request for the removal of Dayal, chief UN representative in the Congo, he cannot now appoint a new representative. Hammarskjold implied, however, that Dayal's contract would not be renewed when it lapses two months hence. The situation along the border between Kivu Province and Ruanda-Urundi reportedly is explosive, with Congolese authorities expecting an imminent Belgian attack. The UN apparently has plans to move the UAR battalion from Equateur to Kasai Province, but the battalion's commander has objected to an early move, even by a part of his unit.
(Page 9) (Map)

*Iran: The Shah, faced by chronic financial difficulties and persistent nationalist opposition, is trying to strengthen his position with a new round of rigged parliamentary elections, now about 20-percent completed. The elections started in rural areas about a week ago and are scheduled for Tehran about the first of February. The Shah apparently has hoped that the elections, besides fulfilling constitutional requirements, would produce a favorable impression on the United States, on which he continues to rely for financial help. Although the Shah will obtain a reasonably docile parliament, the electoral methods and the disorders which may still result from them, particularly in Tehran, will maintain the breach between the Shah and the people, and the possibility of a coup against him continues. In an effort to moderate Soviet propaganda the Shah plans to send a "good-will" mission to Moscow in March. Khrushchev accepted the mission in principle on 8 January. Iranian Foreign Ministry officials feel, however, that the USSR will continue to press for a prior agreement on some points which could be announced in Moscow on the occasion of the visit. The USSR's aim is a political accommodation which would at least begin to weaken Iran's ties with the West, but the Shah insists he will agree to nothing which would compromise Iran's obliga-

UAR-Jordan: Prominent Jordanian exiles in the UAR and UAR officials, including Nasir, have agreed during recent discussions in Cairo that inherent dissatisfaction within Jordan should be supported and exploited with the aim of eventually overthrowing the Jordanian monarchy and "freeing" Jordan from Western control, according to a fairly reliable source. Abdullah Rimawi,

21 Jan 61
DAILY BRIEF
iii
