Khrushchev Speech on World Communist Policy (Preliminary Analysis)

Most of Khrushchev's 6 January speech to a group of Communist party functionaries--the full text of which is now available in the current Kommunist--is devoted to a confident reaffirmation of Soviet positions in the Sino-Soviet dispute on world Communist strategy. Reporting on the November 1960 conference of 81 Communist parties, Khrushchev in effect notifies the rank and file of the world Communist movement--more clearly than did the often equivocal declaration produced by the conference--that Soviet global strategy is sufficiently "militant" and that Moscow has not been pushed by Peiping any further than it wishes to go. Khrushchev clearly intends this speech to stand as the definitive interpretation of Soviet policy following the conference, complementing the short and formal resolution on the conference passed by the central committee on 18 January.

The Balance of Power. The Sino-Soviet dispute on strategy has centered on the assessment of the balance of power between the bloc and the West and the conclusions to be drawn therefrom. In reaffirming his rejection of Chinese positions, Khrushchev begins from the proposition that two facts must be recognized: that the bloc is becoming the "decisive factor" in world affairs, but also that the West still has "great strength." Under the circumstances the bloc cannot undertake the extremely militant revolutionary program which Peiping advocates, but it can continue to make steady and substantial gains.

Questions of War. Khrushchev reiterates his contention that the bloc's strength deters the West from general war and that it increasingly deters the West from local wars, such as Western military action against an anti-Western regime like Castro's. He rejects the argument which the Chinese reportedly have made that general war with the West will be necessary for a Communist global triumph. In this connection, he reaffirms his belief that long-term economic competition with the West will be "decisive," that the USSR will move ahead of the United States

21 Jan 61
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Page 1
