Brazilian President Pursues Noncommittal Foreign Policy

Quadros has previously indicated that he believes a moderate loosening of Brazil's traditionally close ties with the United States would help him increase his own and his country's international power position. Quadros is apparently pursuing this objective in expressing interest in meeting President Kennedy but unwillingness to visit the United States.

President Frondizi says he told Quadros during their meeting on 21-22 April that the Brazilian President could not continue his unpredictable foreign policy declarations without consulting friends. He said he told Quadros that such actions might win him some domestic political support for one or two years but would alienate the friends who had the resources to help him rebuild Brazil's economy. Quadros finally agreed, according to Frondizi. The joint communique affirmed their joint stand in "repelling the direct or indirect interference of extra-continental factors" in the western hemisphere.

Brazilian observers, including those who are close to Quadros' advisers, describe the joint declaration as strongly pro-Western and say that it reflects primarily the views of Frondizi, particularly on the Cuban question. In an apparent effort to maintain an equivocal position on Cuba, Quadros issued well-publicized instructions to the Brazilian UN delegation to vote for a pro-Castro Mexican resolution on the landings in Cuba and for a Brazilian addition calling for an investigation of their character and origin.

Uruguayan President Haedo has endorsed the Brazilian-Argentine suggestion for the meeting of the Inter-American Economic and Social Council and has expressed the hope that it can be postponed from its tentatively suggested June or July scheduling to coincide with the Uruguayan national holiday in August.
The Brazilian Embassy in Washington reported on 24 April that it had the impression that President Kennedy would like to attend the meeting personally but that he is "in favor of holding it in Rio de Janeiro."

28 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
