Nam Tha, and Sayaboury. Positions listed as occupied by Vientiane forces were as follows: Luang Prabang Province--Luang Prabang and Muong Sai (since captured); Nam Tha Province--four small towns; Sayaboury Province--four small towns. All remaining areas, including all of Phong Saly Province were claimed to be controlled by anti-Vientiane forces.

Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Pushkin on 25 April indicated the USSR's displeasure with the UK's announcement following the joint cease-fire appeal that it would not attend the conference without prior verification of an effective cease-fire. Pushkin's remarks apparently were designed to lay the groundwork for placing the blame on the West for any postponement or collapse of the Geneva conference scheduled to begin on 12 May. The Soviet official reiterated Moscow's position that only the Laotians themselves could work out cease-fire arrangements and that this was not the responsibility of either the UK or the Soviet Union.

Communist propaganda is already seeking to place on the US and Vientiane the onus for any failure to reach a truce in Laos. Hanoi on 27 April quoted a Pathet Lao radio charge that the Phoumi - Boun Oum forces have "launched new attacks" and that the Vientiane government does not really want a cease-fire. Hanoi also quoted Khamsouk Keola, acting premier of the Xieng Khouang "government," as warning that in the face of defeat the "US and its followers" have called for negotiations to gain time to "consolidate their forces and launch a new attack."

Enlarging on the Peiping government's statement of 26 April, a People's Daily editorial commented on the "aspects" involved in "bringing about" a cease-fire. The Chinese called for a "check" on assistance to Phoumi, the withdrawal by the US and its allies of all military personnel and equipment in Laos, and the expulsion of the Chinese Nationalist irregulars. Insisting that a cease-fire can "only" be achieved through negotiation between the "parties concerned," the Chinese indicated that the prospects for a cease-fire would depend on the attitude of the Vientiane authorities.

Although Chinese Communists did not label these "aspects" as explicit conditions for a cease-fire, they clearly regard them

28 Apr 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
