LATE ITEM

USSR: The USSR launched a vehicle, probably a Venus probe, from Tyura Tam about 0035 GMT, 12 February (1935 EST, 11 February). Moscow announced, about 18 hours after the launch that the Venus probe, called an "automatic interplanetary station," had been launched from a sputnik, that it weighed about 1420 pounds, and that communications are effected by command from the earth on a frequency of 922.8 megacycles.

Analysis indicates that the hour of the day this probe was launched was optimum insofar as guidance requirements were concerned, but the date was beyond the period, 13-27 January, during which maximum payloads could be delivered to Venus for a given propulsion system.

Calculations also indicate the probe transferred, by means of additional propulsion, from an earth orbit to its Venus trajectory about 81 minutes after launch while over the general area of Cyprus. At least two, possibly three, objects incidental to this phase of the operation remain in the original earth orbit. Their identity cannot be ascertained, other than that one is a spent booster stage.

(This object is a pulsating, "white, comet-like object" at a time and general location which correlate very well with the calculated time and location at which the transfer from an earth orbit to a Venus trajectory took place.)

This operation has many similarities to the 4 February launching of Sputnik VII, which was believed to be an earth satellite. However, the announced weight of Sputnik VII, about 14,300 pounds, is of a magnitude which could well contain both a 1420 pound Venus payload and the propulsion system and fuel needed to raise it from an earth orbit velocity to one high enough to get to Venus. It appears now, that Sputnik VII probably was an unsuccessful Venus probe, although a possibility exists that the last propulsion stage was deliberately not utilized to its full capability by the Soviets.

Less than 30 hours after the Venus probe launching, at about 0459 GMT 13 February (2359 EST 12 February), the USSR launched a test ICBM from Tyura Tam to the usual impact area on Kamchatka. This is the fourth launching from Tyura Tam within the last 12 days, and the fifth this year. Two of these were space program events. Thirty generally successful ICBM program launchings have been conducted to date.
