the most recent on 13 January. In the past, Rhee used the captured fishermen as hostages to extract concessions from Tokyo on issues other than fishing, but Seoul currently is in the process of releasing the last five Japanese fishermen it holds.

The Chang Myon government believes that the South Korean economy would benefit appreciably from the normalization of relations and it is committed to an early settlement of differences. Many Koreans, however, fear that a normalization of relations would eventually lead to Japanese economic and cultural domination of South Korea even though political independence is retained. Opposition political elements and business groups with a vested economic interest in preventing a normalization of trade relations with Japan are attempting to aggravate such public fears.

On 23 January Seoul called off the visit of a private Japanese business mission after police reports indicated that there would be public demonstrations and possible violence. Minor South Korean leftist parties have formed a "National Anti-Japanese Struggle Committee." Conservative opposition members spearheaded passage of a resolution in the House of Representatives on 3 February upholding the continued defense of the Rhee Line and opposing full normalization of relations until all "historical problems" had been settled, including the complex claims issue. The resolution also opposed the normalization of economic relations until after formal diplomatic relations were established.

Japan desires a settlement principally to remove the existing threat to its fishing operations and has proposed a conservation agreement which would restrict Japanese fishing within a broad area covered by the Rhee Line and prohibit it altogether in certain portions. In addition, trade and investment opportunities in South Korea hold considerable attraction. Tokyo, however, is limited in the concessions it feels able to make because of public outrage over the South Korean seizures and leftist arguments that Seoul's inability to speak for all of Korea exposes the Japanese to double jeopardy in the event North Korea presents claims of its

13 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
