[PAGE 01]
CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

7 December 1957

Copy No. 13S

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Dept., JCS reviews completed.

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. PARIS URGES INDEPENDENT EUROPEAN NUCLEAR
WEAPONS CAPABILITY

3. RENEWED FRENCH LABOR AGITATION THREATENS
GAILLARD GOVERNMENT

4. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

8. POLISH-WEST GERMAN RELATIONS

9. RESIGNATION OF PAKISTANI GOVERNMENT
INCREASINGLY LIKELY

10. SUSLOV CRITICIZES JAPANESE COMMUNISTS FOR
FAILURE TO DEVELOP MASS INFLUENCE
(page 12).

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 2

[PAGE 04]
1. PARIS URGES INDEPENDENT EUROPEAN NUCLEAR
WEAPONS CAPABILITY

France now favors a European nuclear
weapons program--independent of the
United States and if necessary of Brit-
ain--instead of the "NATO stockpile"
of nuclear weapons it had originally
proposed. Recent French overtures
to West Germany, Italy, and the Bene-
lux countries have called for closer
integration within the framework of the
Atlantic pact of their military effort,
particularly in the development and
production of modern weapons. The
decision to press such proposals prob-
ably resulted from French indignation
over the Anglo-American arms delivery
to Tunisia.

Paris is also laying the groundwork for
possible bilateral nuclear development programs, particular-
ly with West Germany, which seems interested in a joint ef-
fort. The French have little grounds for hope that Premier
Gaillard's recent request for a French-British accord on nu-
clear weapons production will be favorably received in Lon-
don.

Whether or not these efforts pay off,
France intends to push its own national nuclear weapons
program.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 3

[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
3. RENEWED FRENCH LABOR AGITATION THREATENS
GAILLARD GOVERNMENT

Worker dissatisfaction over wage-
price problems has precipitated a
split in the Gaillard cabinet, and an
increasing number of French union
leaders are predicting serious labor difficulties in the
coming months. If the government permits announced
price rises to stand, labor unrest may give the Commu-
nist-led General Labor Confederation a chance to re-
gain the initiative and reassert its influence among wage
earners.

The government had been successfully
pursuing a policy of granting modest wage increases to
various segments of the nationalized industries. This
policy may now break down, however, as the 4 December
price rises, particularly on food items, appear to labor
to nullify its modest wage gains. The Socialist Workers
Confederation has decided to abandon its moderate wage
policy and to join the Communist- and Catholic-led unions
in pressing for increases.

The wage-price squabble has developed
the strongest threat to date for the tenuous Gaillard coali-
tion. The Socialists are threatening to withdraw from the
government unless Premier Gaillard agrees to lower some
of the controlled price increases and to boost civil servant
wages substantially. If Gaillard gives in, he can adhere
to the projected anti-inflationary program only by further
tax increases, which the conservative ministers in the
cabinet insist they will not accept.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 5

[PAGE 07]
4. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

The anti-Dutch campaign in Indonesia
is continuing unabated, and the ex-
tremist elements in the government now
are in command. The West Irian Lib-
eration Committee under Information
Minister Sudibjo, rather than the cabi-
net, is directing the drive. The next
step will probably be a break in dip-
lomatic relations.

Although President Sukarno has made
no public statement since his brief
radio address of 1 December following
the attempt on his life, there is no reason to believe that
any of the actions taken to date do not have his full approval.
Moderate elements, including Premier Djuanda, have been
bypassed and their calls for moderation have been inef-
fectual.

The seizure of Dutch enterprises by
affiliates of SOBSI, the Communist-led labor federation,
apparently had been planned in advance by SOBSI, elements
of the military, and the semiofficial and Communist-per-
meated youth-military cooperative committee. The gov-
ernment has taken over the management of some of these
enterprises, and Sudibjo has stated that the government
will discuss compensation for seized Dutch property only
after the West Irian issue is settled.

It is increasingly questionable whether
the government will be able to maintain control of the forces
it has unleashed. Worsening economic conditions, especial-
ly spiraling rice prices, could provoke attacks against the
Dutch or other Western nationals and possibly fighting among
the Indonesians themselves in the already overcharged emo-
tional atmosphere.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 6

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
8. POLISH-WEST GERMAN RELATIONS

Poland, in its current trade talks with
West Germany, is only feigning an in-
terest in Bonn's suggestion that trade
missions with consular powers be ex-
changed.

Polish Foreign Minister
Rapacki has indicated that Poland has
no intention of agreeing to anything
less than the establishment of diplomatic relations.

Warsaw would consider establishment
of full-scale diplomatic relations with the Federal Republic
de facto recognition of the Oder-Neisse line. The West
Germans, however, are probably seeking a formula that
would satisfy the Poles without invalidating the Potsdam
provision for future settlement of Germany's boundary
and certainly would refuse any formula which implicitly
recognizes the permanence of the Oder-Neisse line. The
existing trade agreement has been extended to cover the
first three months of 1958, to permit further negotiation.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 10

[PAGE 10]
9. RESIGNATION OF PAKISTANI GOVERNMENT
INCREASINGLY LIKELY

Pakistan's seven-week-old government
coalition remains deeply divided, and
there is an increasing likelihood that a
test vote next week in the National As-
sembly will cause the government to resign. Former
Prime Minister Suhrawardy's chances of returning to pow-
er seem to be improving.

Despite the apparent agreement on 28
November between President Mirza's Republican party and
Prime Minister Chundrigar's Moslem League to support a
Moslem League bill restoring separate electorates, a sub-
stantial segment of Republican leaders is reasserting its
opposition to the legislation. The Republican executive
will meet on 9 December to decide the party's stand. It
now appears doubtful that enough members will support
the bill when the National Assembly reconvenes for a vote
on 11 December. Chundrigar has threatened to resign if
the Republicans do not honor their commitment to him.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 11

[PAGE 11]
10. SUSLOV CRITICIZES JAPANESE COMMUNISTS FOR
FAILURE TO DEVELOP MASS INFLUENCE

Soviet Party Secretary Suslov has
criticized the Japanese Communist
party for failure to increase its mem-
bership and for faulty implementation
of its tactics, which delayed peace-
ful expansion of Communist influence in the Japanese
labor movement. According to Mainichi, a Tokyo daily,
criticism was transmitted in an 18 November letter
from Yoshio Shiga, head of the Japanese delegation to
the Moscow 40th anniversary celebrations.

Moscow apparently feels that the Japa-
nese Communists' performance has not measured up to
the terms of the established world Communist tactical line,
reaffirmed in the Moscow Communist declaration of 21 No-
vember, which calls for Communist parties to rally all
classes and all forces, including socialists and neutralists,
for a struggle to defeat American policies and establish
Communist regimes in countries outside the bloc.

Suslov reportedly said that the party's
task, now that ultra-left tactics have been put aside, is
to win as many members and sympathizers as possible
through "practical struggles"; i.e., primarily political
forms of action rather than violence, using its influence
more discreetly and effectively in non-Communist organiza-
tions.

The Japanese Communist party is
plagued by factional struggles between members who fa-
vor Moscow's policy and those who advocate a national
party. A new "soft" line platform corresponding with
20th party congress directives is scheduled for adoption
at the long-delayed national convention which is antici-
pated to convene in February 1958.

7 Dec 57     Current Intelligence Bulletin     Page 12
