[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

26 September 1952

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Pacific "peace" conference postponed to 10 October (page 3).
3. Communists reportedly plan roads and airfields in Tibet (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Greek-Yugoslav military talks considered satisfactory (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Adenauer foresees opportunity to press France on EDC ratification (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

2. Pacific "peace" conference postponed to 10 October:

A Chinese Communist broadcast to the Viet Minh on 25 September stated that the opening of the Asian and Pacific Regions Peace Conference has been postponed to 10 October owing to the inability of many delegates to arrive by the planned opening date, 26 September.

Comment: Many of the 300 to 500 delegates to the "peace" conference have been unable to obtain visas or have encountered other obstacles. Similar Communist-sponsored conferences have often been postponed as a result of organizational problems.

By postponement, the Communists will avoid a conflict with Peiping's third anniversary ceremonies on 1 October and will have time to adjust to any new line developing from the Soviet Communist Party's 19th Congress on 5 October.

- 3 -
[PAGE 05]
3. Communists reportedly plan roads and airfields in Tibet:

Chinese officials arriving in India from Tibet reportedly stated that construction work on the road to Lhasa from the Indian border was progressing "very quickly," and the construction of a highway from China proper into Tibet was also planned. Airfields, they declared, were being constructed "in more than one place in Tibet."

- 4 -
[PAGE 06]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Greek-Yugoslav military talks considered satisfactory:

The Greek Minister of Defense has told Ambassador Peurifoy that the recent military conversations between Greece and Yugoslavia were quite satisfactory.

Yugoslavia has assured Greece that at least one third of the Yugoslav forces will be available to protect an area of common interest in northern Greece and southern Yugoslavia. Although no detailed defense planning has begun, a Greek delegation which will visit Belgrade shortly may consider more definite plans.

Comment: Nearly one third of Yugoslavia's forces are already garrisoned in this area. Progress has been made in the Greek-Yugoslav planning, but Greek reports on this subject have been over-optimistic in the past.

- 5 -
[PAGE 07]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. Adenauer foresees opportunity to press France on EDC ratification:

Chancellor Adenauer has confided to American officials in Bonn that Premier de Gasperi told him ratification of the EDC treaty would have "clear sailing" in the Italian Parliament, possibly in November, provided the new election law was passed without trouble. Such prompt Italian action, on top of American and British ratification of the contractual agreement and German acceptance of both treaties, would provide an opportunity for successful exertion of pressure on the French, the Chancellor emphasized.

In a conversation with American officials in Paris, West German "Defense Minister" Blank stated, however, that he was very pessimistic about French ratification.

Comment: Despite Foreign Minister Schuman's 24 September announcement that he would request the Assembly to act promptly on the EDC treaty when it reconvened on 7 October, there is still no evidence that the Pinay government as such is willing to give the treaty priority over domestic issues.

The American Embassy in Rome has reported that early Italian ratification of EDC would be difficult, especially in view of an expected Communist filibuster against the government's legislative program.

- 6 -
[PAGE 08]
