3. YUGOSLAVIA THREATENS TO STOP COMPLYING WITH
BATTLE ACT

Yugoslavia would renounce American
aid rather than continue to observe the
Battle Act, according to Yugoslav vice
president and economic chief Vukmanovic-
Tempo. Vukmanovic, who is heading an economic mission
to Moscow, told Ambassador Riddleberger, however, that
his government does not want to break the act hastily, but
that the act would have to be changed if it were to be a con-
dition for the continued economic aid and shipments of
agricultural surpluses which Belgrade wants.

Vukmanovic said that the Yugoslav gov-
ernment will require new long-term credits at low interest
in order to relieve its deteriorating foreign exchange posi-
tion. He protested the West's high interest rates and said
that the USSR is prepared to grant credits for raw mate-
rials at 2-percent interest, and gold loans at the same rate.
Although Vukmanovic would quote no amounts, Riddleberger
reports that the USSR is rumored to have offered loans
totaling $100,000,000 for a 10- to 12-year period.

Vukmanovic reiterated that Yugoslavia's
position is one of "independence," declaring that his gov-
ernment has no secret policies which are unknown to the
United States.

Comment This is the toughest attitude toward
American economic aid yet displayed
by Yugoslavia. Ever since the Soviet visit to Belgrade,
Yugoslav officials have denied any intention of contravening
the Battle Act, stating only that their policy might have to
be reconsidered in the future. Belgrade showed an interest
as late as 12 August in obtaining from the United States for
this fiscal year between $34,000,000 and $40,000,000 in
economic aid, in addition to 24,000 tons of cotton and 600,000
tons of wheat under the surplus commodity act.

Although Yugoslavia may be trying to pres-
sure the United States into more favorable economic treatment,
the departure of Vukmanovic with a high-level Yugoslav eco-
nomic delegation to Moscow on 20 August demonstrates Bel-
grade's hopes of a really substantial offer from the Soviet
Union. (Concurred in by ORR)

23 Aug 55 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
