independence of Vietnam before the latter will conclude a treaty of association within the French union, according to an official of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry. The Buu Loc government is firmly convinced that this procedure is needed to eradicate its stigma as a puppet and win the psychological battle against the Viet Minh.
Meanwhile, Commissioner Dejean's deputy points out that resistance by Bidault and President Coty, on legalistic grounds, to the Vietnamese position is the "worst possible psychological preparation for the Geneva conference."
Comment: In conferences over the past several years, the French have gradually yielded to Vietnamese demands. They have usually done so, however, in a manner which destroys the propaganda value of these concessions.
The French government's maneuverability on this question is limited by the National Assembly resolution on 9 March, which linked France's obligations to the Associated States with maintenance of the French Union as defined in the constitution.
3. Pessimism increases among Vietnamese in Tonkin:
Pessimism is greater in Tonkin than at any time since 1950. Many wealthy Vietnamese are liquidating their assets and preparing to move south. Viet Minh raids on Tonkin airfields and on Hanoi-Haiphong communications have had a profound psychological impact on the local population, who contrast the capabilities of the Viet Minh with the ineffectual attempts at "pacification" by the French-Vietnamese forces.
The key Hanoi-Haiphong highway is now so heavily mined by the Viet Minh each night that it is not opened to traffic until noon the following day.
Comment: A further worsening of the situation would facilitate Viet Minh recruiting within the delta, heighten the possibility of an uprising in Hanoi, and would make the French military position precarious.
The Viet Minh capture of the French posts along the northeast section of the Sino-Tonkin border in 1950 marked the lowest previous point of French-Vietnamese morale in the Indochina war.
