Approved For Release 2003/02/27 : CIA-RDP79T00975A004700490001-6

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Khrushchev Defers Action on Shah's Proposal

Premier Khrushchev, in a talk with Iranian Ambassador Masud-Ansari on 16 October, expressed interest in the Shah's proposal to give the USSR a written guarantee that Iran would not allow missile bases on its territory, but deferred giving a formal response, saying he wanted to take the matter up with "his government." According to several Iranian accounts of the talk--none of which came directly from Ansari--Khrushchev also criticized Prime Minister Eqbal for his "anti-Soviet" statements while attending the recent CENTO meeting in Washington.

The proposal, which was broached by the Shah to Soviet Ambassador Pegov in late September, is intended to restore Soviet-Iranian relations to the "normal" status which existed prior to the breakdown last February of talks for a nonaggression pact. Khrushchev's delay in responding to Ansari, who reiterated the offer, may reflect caution induced by the Shah's behavior in causing the failure of the talks in February and confidence that Moscow can draw further concessions from Tehran.

The Soviet premier probably regards the offer as evidence of the effectiveness of the prolonged Communist-bloc radio propaganda campaign against the Shah's regime. These radio attacks were temporarily relaxed in September concurrent with Pegov's return to his post after an extended absence. Iranian officials are less concerned now with the propaganda attacks, apparently because public interest in them has diminished.

The Shah, who discussed the Khrushchev-Ansari talk with Ambassador Wailes on 23 October, noted that Khrushchev had directed his fire against the American-Iranian defense agreement. The Iranian ruler said he interpreted Khrushchev's reaction as evidence that Soviet leaders look on the agreement as an obstacle to Soviet aggression against Iran, either directly or a "possible indirect attack by Afghanistan or Iraq with Soviet volunteers."

27 Oct 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 1

Approved For Release 2003/02/27 : CIA-RDP79T00975A004700490001-6
