II. ASIA-AFRICA

Situation in Laos

The US army attaché in Laos points out that the Laotian Army has not yet demonstrated any offensive strength and the initiative remains with the Communist forces. This enables present Communist forces, which are operating in small units and scattered groups, to build-up sufficient strength to take individual Laotian army posts.

The consensus of American officials in Vientiane is that if the Laotian Communists exert their full potential for revolution throughout the country, the Laotian Government would at best be able to hold only certain strong points. Large areas, including all of the territory contiguous to Communist China and North Vietnam, would pass under Communist control.

the morale of top-level Laotian officials is quite good. They are confident of handling the present situation and feel they can rely on international assistance in the event the situation becomes more serious. However, morale is extremely poor in some fighting units, and two Laotian companies are believed to have deserted. The poorly informed population in the provinces is highly susceptible to rumors and propaganda spread by Communist partisans. By mid-August, the people in several of the central and southern provinces had been shaken by rumors that the Communists were on the outskirts of the provincial capitals.

On 25 August, the North Vietnamese Foreign Ministry issued a public statement on the Laotian situation, repeating its accusations that the US and Laotian governments are solely to blame for the current crisis. The statement asserted that as a signatory of the Geneva agreements and a country neighboring on Laos, North Vietnam "cannot remain indifferent. . . to a situation which directly threatens the security of North Vietnam and peace in Indochina and Southeast Asia." Rejecting any thought of UN action, Hanoi again called for reactivation of the ICC and strict adherence to the Geneva agreements as the only solution to the present grave situation. Unlike pronouncements attributed to the NLHZ leadership, this statement did not include certain demands (e.g., for a coalition government) which would automatically result in giving former members of the Pathet Lao a privileged position in the Laotian community and therefore may represent minimum Communist objectives.

26 Aug 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2
