3. France agrees to repatriate Chinese Nationalist internees:

The French Government has agreed in principle to the repatriation of the Chinese Nationalist troops interned in Indochina. The Foreign Ministry has informed the Chinese Minister in Paris that the first step would be to repatriate "sick or invalid" internees, after a check by the International Red Cross on their health and on their choice of repatriation to Formosa or the Chinese mainland.

It was emphasized to the Chinese Minister that, if the repatriation process were publicized by the Taipei government, the whole plan would be dropped.

Comment: France has been reluctant to repatriate to Formosa the estimated 30,000 interned Nationalist troops because of fear of provoking the Chinese Communists. The French Government, however, has been anxious to reduce the financial burden of maintaining the internees, and may be attempting to induce the Chinese to reverse their recent decision to vote in favor of raising the Tunisian issue before the United Nations.

4. French officials question potential of Vietnamese army:

The American Consul in Hanoi comments that several French officials, including a ranking military officer, recently expressed doubts of the potential of the Vietnamese National Army. Among the reasons given were the shortage of officers, resentment at French control of the army, and absence of a nationalistic spirit among Vietnamese recruits.

These opinions, the Consul observes, merit consideration in the light of Letourneau's recent statement that France will begin to withdraw its troops from Indochina before the end of this year.

Comment: Although French military and political policy in Indochina is keyed to the creation of a Vietnamese National Army, French officials have long voiced doubts that an effective army can be developed.

5. Report of Thai army commander's death false:

The recent report that General Phin, Thai Army commander, died on 30 June has been denied. Rumors of his death in Bangkok official circles may have resulted from a recent operation undergone by Phin.

SOUTH ASIA

6. Comment on leftist influences which may affect Nehru's decisions on Korea and Kashmir:

The prospective presence in New Delhi of three leftist Indian officials may soon subject Prime Minister Nehru to strong pro-Communist and anti-American influences at a time when he is deciding policy on Korea and Kashmir.

K. M. Panikkar, retiring pro-Communist Indian Ambassador to China, has recently arrived in India. V. K. Krishna Menon, Indian High Commissioner in London, is returning to India by air to confer with Nehru. Menon is suspected Communist with violently anti-American views. He has implied that he wished to become the new Ambassador to Peiping, although Panikkar's successor has already been named. Kashmiri Premier Sheikh Abdullah, an opportunist surrounded by numerous leftist advisers, has said that he may also visit New Delhi in the near future. All three of these men exercise considerable influence over Nehru.

- 5 -
