Salvadoran Communists to Organize Peasant Committees

The Communist-dominated labor federation of El Salvador (CGTS) has announced it is proceeding with plans to organize peasant committees throughout the country. Should the junta, contrary to the practice of previous governments, permit the organization of the peasants, this would provide the Communists with a potent political weapon. Salvadoran peasants, a generally depressed group with real socio-economic grievances, can easily be manipulated politically. The organization of peasant committees could also be the first step by the Communists toward organizing a peasant militia with which to defy any attempt by the armed forces to dislodge the Communists from the provisional government, where they and their supporters have become entrenched at all levels.

The CGTS, which has operated virtually without government restrictions since the ouster of the Lemus regime last month, reportedly invited peasants to a meeting on 6 November, where they heard a Salvadoran Communist recently returned from Peiping and Cuba speak on methods used in disarming an army and in organizing a civilian militia. On 20 November peasants were brought from outlying towns to San Salvador where they participated in a mass meeting sponsored by the CGTS and pro-Communist and pro-Castro students. Dr. Roberto Carias Delgado, secretary general of the Communist-front April and May Revolutionary party, told the crowd, estimated at 7,000 to 10,000, that "a foreign country"--meaning the United States--"was using ships and planes" as a means of interfering with their fight to rid themselves of "dictators and oppressors."

The Communist tactic of organizing the peasants, more than any other development, would probably strengthen the resolve of anti-Communists, particularly among the military, who have been giving serious consideration to staging a countercoup. The army and the wealthy landowners have long feared that the large peasant population might revolt, as in 1932, when a Communist-led insurrection was suppressed by the army only after thousands had been killed.

29 Nov 60
Page 5
