Situation in Laos

Souvanna Phouma, now in Paris, has told reporters that he was "slightly disquieted" by President Kennedy's press statement on Laos. Souvanna said he hoped that the contacts he would be having with French and British officials would help to limit the conflict in Laos--a country already "transformed into a battlefield by foreign intervention." Souvanna reiterated his claim to have the support of 90 to 95 percent of the Laotian people.

In the discussions held with Ambassador Harriman in India recently, Souvanna was emphatic on the need for including the Pathet Lao in the government. Souvanna said that the original error was in attempting to suppress the rebellion by force of arms and that the Pathet Lao were so interspersed among the people that the government had no way to take direct action. He mentioned that only when he had taken the Pathet Lao into the government in 1957 did the Vientiane government regain control over Phong Saly and Sam Neua provinces.

Souvanna outlined to Harriman his solution for the Laotian problem: reconvene the ICC to establish a cease-fire and stop outside military assistance; convene a 14-nation conference; and, simultaneously, form a coalition government in Laos--by agreement among the Laotians themselves--to prepare general elections. Souvanna insisted he is still prime minister and justified his absence from the Laotian scene by the need to inform world leaders of the true situation in Laos. He said he planned after visiting London to go to Prague, Warsaw, Moscow, and Peiping.

French officials have indicated that although the French Government has no objections to the recent British démarche to the Soviet Union, Paris feels that a meeting between the "principals" involved in Laos--the US, USSR, France, and "possibly" the UK--must be the first step in any solution there. De Gaulle's diplomacy has consistently favored calm deliberations and big-power decisions on a global basis. Therefore, while Paris is not opposed to holding a 14-nation conference, recalling the ICC, or seeking a cease-fire in Laos, it believes that

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
