Situation in the Congo

One UN official in New York implied that if tensions lessen as a result of Kasavubu's current visit to the Lower Congo area, a military operation might not be necessary. However, civilians in the UN Command in Leopoldville continue to press local officials to permit a return to Matadi. The UN administrative officer said on 23 March that the command had had not information concerning the arrival of goods in the port since its officers were forced out early in March. As a result, it has issued no instructions for shipping goods inland. Officials of OTRACO, the company which operates the port facilities and the railroad to Leopoldville, apparently believe that the UN has deliberately refused to issue forwarding instructions, since to do so would weaken its claim that a UN presence in Matadi is necessary.

The heads of state of the twelve "Brazzaville powers"--the former French territories in tropical Africa with the exception of Guinea, Mali, and Togo--are to meet at Yaounde in Cameroun from 26 to 31 March. At this time they hope to develop a common policy on the Congo. The Ivory Coast's Felix Houphouet-Boigny, the prime mover of the Brazzaville grouping, stated recently that he plans to make a determined effort to persuade his associates to contribute contingents to the UN Command.

Cleophas Kamitatu, a former ally of Gizenga who has been cooperating with the Leopoldville government, reportedly is to leave the capital for Stanleyville on Saturday for negotiations with the Gizenga regime. Optimism is high in Leopoldville that a reconciliation can be reached; however, Gizenga's opposition to the central government and its supporters apparently has hardened. He has expelled the five Western consuls from Stanleyville and reportedly told a visiting journalist that there was "not the slightest possibility of reaching a compromise" between his regime and Leopoldville.

In preliminary talks with Hammarskjold's personal representative in Brussels, Belgian Foreign Ministry officials took the position that the only way to settle the question of withdrawing

25 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
