[PAGE 01]
19 September 1957
Copy No. 136

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. SYRIAN ASSISTANT CHIEF OF STAFF FEARS IMMINENT ATTACK (page 3).

2. KING SAUD TO VISIT DAMASCUS (page 4).

3. KING CALLS FOR NEW ELECTIONS IN THAILAND (page 5).

4. EGYPT MAY SEEK US-BLOCKED FUNDS THROUGH IMF (page 6).

5. YUGOSLAVS FAVOR RUMANIAN PROPOSAL FOR BALKAN STATES MEETING (page 7).

6. VIOLENCE LIKELY IN HAITI AS ELECTION NEARS (page 8).

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. SYRIAN ASSISTANT CHIEF OF STAFF FEARS IMMINENT ATTACK

Syrian Assistant Chief of Staff Nafuri "fears an immediate attack from abroad." Nafuri based his fear on reported Turkish and Israeli troop concentrations, an increase of RAF strength on Cyprus, and the movements of the United States Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean. He said he believes the United States is inciting the Israelis to attack Syria.

Comment
These fears are characteristic of Syrian thinking at this time. Syria seems anxious to avoid any appearance of provocation to its neighbors, and has neither mobilized nor declared a state of emergency in spite of Nafuri's professed fears.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. KING SAUD TO VISIT DAMASCUS

King Saud reportedly will pay a one-day visit to Damascus after a short stay of possibly four or five days in Switzerland beginning 19 September. From Damascus he will fly directly to Riyadh.

Saud is also reported to be planning a 12 October state visit to Lebanon, where he may confer with a number of Arab chiefs of state.

Comment
Saud has been urged by some of his advisers to visit Damascus in an attempt to mediate between Syria and the United States. Saud has indicated, however, that he deeply distrusts the present ruling clique in Syria, and his visit might be intended as a gesture of support for persons like President Quwatli, who Saud may feel still exercises a moderating influence.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. KING CALLS FOR NEW ELECTIONS IN THAILAND

Comment on:
Thailand's King Phumiphon has issued a royal decree dissolving the National Assembly and calling for new elections within 90 days. He has asked the army junta led by Marshal Sarit which overthrew the Phibun regime on 16 September to form a provisional government for the interim period.

Elections presumably will be held to replace only the 160 elected members of the outgoing assembly. The remaining 123 appointed members will probably be reshuffled to assure the Sarit army group effective control of the government. Elections for the entire membership of the assembly would very likely lead to a victory by Khuang Aphaiwong's Democratic party.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. EGYPT MAY SEEK US-BLOCKED FUNDS THROUGH IMF

Comment on:
Egypt may soon attempt to release its funds blocked by the United States during the Suez crisis. An unspecified plan mentioned in a recent Cairo newspaper article is the one devised by President Nasir last July. At that time Nasir reportedly said that in September he would request the International Monetary Fund to collect Egypt's $30,000,000 debt to the fund from the approximately $42,000,000 held in the United States.

Egyptian Finance Minister Kaysuni will attend the annual meeting of the IMF which will be held in Washington from 22 to 27 September. Kaysuni might use that occasion to present Nasir's request, although it is unlikely that Egypt could gain any significant support among members of the IMF for such a transaction. Nasir's intent is probably to harass the United States and continue to claim he is a victim of American economic warfare. Nasir has in the past considered the sequestration or nationalization of American business and oil interests in Egypt as an act of retaliation against the United States for blocking Egyptian funds.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. YUGOSLAVS FAVOR RUMANIAN PROPOSAL FOR BALKAN STATES MEETING

Comment on:
President Tito's prompt and unconditional acceptance of the Rumanian proposal of 10 September that top Balkan leaders meet to discuss economic and cultural cooperation and a nonaggression pact strongly suggests his intention to attend regardless of whether Greece and Turkey participate. Unofficially Athens and Ankara have indicated they will not participate.

Tito declared that "special attention must be paid right now... to eliminate the difficulties which still exist between some Balkan countries." Belgrade's willingness to participate is undoubtedly motivated at least in part by what it sees as an opportunity to implement its long-cherished hopes for leadership in the area.

Moscow has publicly supported the Rumanian initiative for a conference of all six Balkan states, but it is not yet clear whether it favors such a meeting without Greek and Turkish participation. It may support a four-power conference, however, despite the risk of its leading to the spread of Yugoslav influence in the Balkans, in order to obtain closer Yugoslav adherence to the bloc.

The proposed conference may have been discussed during the recent Tito-Khrushchev meeting in Rumania, and final plans were probably coordinated with Tito during the visit of Rumanian politburo member Bodnaras and Foreign Minister Maurer to Belgrade on 29 August.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7
[PAGE 09]
6. VIOLENCE LIKELY IN HAITI AS ELECTION NEARS

Serious disorders are likely at any moment in Haiti as the opposing political camps rapidly build up their forces for the presidential election of 22 September.

The forces of exiled former dictator Magloire, which now are backing Clement Jumelle for the presidency, are making every effort to instigate demonstrations sufficiently violent to prevent the election, since they realize Jumelle could not win.

The third leading presidential aspirant, Louis Dejoie, expects the election to be canceled or rigged in favor of Duvalier. He warned publicly on 17 September that if the Duvalier machine attempts to subvert a free election, "the people will smash it and we shall have a revolution."

Comment
Stability in Haiti, which has had seven governments in the past nine months, would probably be served by Duvalier's victory in a not too obviously rigged election. Duvalier, a moderate, is the only candidate acceptable to the army and his popular support is such that he might win even a free election. A Duvalier victory would probably not, however, be accepted without a violent reaction by Dejoie, who is strong in the south of Haiti and in the capital.

19 Sept 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
[PAGE 10]
