North - South Vietnam

the Communists were slow to react to the 11 November attempt against President Diem and still were not clear on some details nine days later, they indicate that the Communists now hope to capitalize on the post-coup situation.

North Vietnamese interpret the coup as symptomatic of the difficulties besetting Diem and the resulting situation as "very advantageous for us," call for political agitation to exploit dissension in the South, and repeat orders for political assassination of "cruel individuals." In addition help be given the escaping participants in the coup--some of whom may still be at large--in the hope that they might be useful in the Communist effort to create a united front of elements dedicated to ousting Diem.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

*Laos: A mixed force of troops under the control of Souvanna Phouma and the Pathet Lao, consisting of more than six companies, is reported to be advancing along routes leading to Luang Prabang. One column evidently departed from Muong Kassy on 23 November, followed by a larger force on 24 November. Luang Prabang is some 55 miles distant from Muong Kassy, over difficult country, and an unopposed route march might require three or four days.

On 22 November military headquarters in Savannakhet ordered the pro-Phoumi force in Luang Prabang to organize the perimeter defenses of the town, including guerrilla activity in the surrounding vicinity. Also Phoumi-controlled forces were ordered to commence pressure operations against Vientiane.

Souvanna Phouma, while denying to the American ambassador that he has actually given an order to attack Luang Prabang, has been active on other fronts. On 23 November he announced that within three or four days, the Soviet Union would begin airlifting food and gasoline to Vientiane via Hanoi. On the same day, his government made a formal request to the American ambassador in Vientiane that the United States immediately cease all aid to General Phoumi's Savannakhet regime.

24 Nov 60    DAILY BRIEF    ii
