[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. Comment on new Communist proposal in the Korean talks (page 3).

2. British views regarding UN appeal on Laos (page 3).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. De Gaulle's break with followers may delay Mayer's downfall (page 5).

* * * *

[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Comment on new Communist proposal in the Korean talks:

In their new proposal for settling the POW issue, the Communists, while moving toward a cease-fire, still appear determined not to accept any arrangement which would result in failure to repatriate a substantial number of prisoners.

The 7 May proposal offers certain compromises, but does not alter the Communist position on the critical point regarding the disposition of prisoners unwilling to return after Communist "explanations" to them. The Communists continue to propose that the fate of these prisoners be decided by a political conference.

Should the United Nations reject this proposal, the Communists eventually might accept as an alternative the disposition of the unwilling by the five-nation commission, which includes India.

2. British views regarding UN appeal on Laos:

The British Foreign Office believes that an appeal to the United Nations on Laos should be extended to embrace all Indochina and should specify Communist China as the supplier of war materials. Otherwise, the Communists are likely to claim that the struggle in Indochina is a civil war over which the United Nations has no jurisdiction.

[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. De Gaulle's break with followers may delay Mayer's downfall:

As a result of the break between General de Gaulle and his followers, a showdown in the French Parliament over Premier Mayer's program may be delayed while the non-Communist parties vie for the deputies just cut adrift.

The Embassy believes that no more than one third of the Gaullist deputies will remain in opposition. An important number may shift toward the Independents, and others are expected to join the Radical Socialists, the Popular Republicans, and the Socialists.

Comment: The dissolution of the Gaullist parliamentary group removes the strongest rallying point for non-Communist critics of close French cooperation with United States policy. While it makes more certain the support of some Gaullist deputies for the EDC, no great change in government policy on key issues can be expected before the national congresses expected next month.
