[PAGE 01]
18 December 1959

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
18 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR and bloc nations attempting to moderate UAR criticism of Qasim.
USSR delivers three motor torpedo boats to Iraq.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Yemen--Troops sent against dissident tribes complain pay is in arrears.
Israel--Ben-Gurion forms new government; offers Arabs nonaggression pacts.
Morocco--Uneasy relations between King and leftist government placed under new strain.
Brussels offers to accelerate progress toward self-government for Congo.
Nepal plans to establish diplomatic relations with Czechoslovakia.
South Korea may be planning seizure of Japanese fishing boats as reprisal for Japanese - North Korean repatriation.

III. THE WEST
Haitian cabinet resigns.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

UAR - Bloc Relations: The USSR and other bloc countries appear to be maintaining outwardly friendly relations with Cairo except for occasional exchanges of propaganda and ideological criticism, while apparently seeking to help Qasim weather his current difficulties. bloc officials have recently approached UAR diplomats with suggestions that Cairo ease its attacks on Qasim on the grounds that tension between the UAR and Iraq benefits only the "imperialists." Moscow probably calculates that the present trend in Iraq is in its favor, and may wish to avoid any upheaval which might jeopardize Iraqi Communist gains and the bloc's close ties with Baghdad. Nasir will probably be irritated by such approaches. (Page 1)

USSR-Iraq: Three Soviet motor torpedo boats have just been delivered to Iraq. With Iraqi-Iranian tension over control of navigation of the Shatt al-Arab at its highest point in recent years, the delivery is likely to prompt new Iranian requests for US naval equipment. Iraq plans to have 15 Soviet naval experts conduct training courses in torpedo boat operation.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Yemen: The Imam's failure to pay his troops and loyal tribesmen appears to be endangering his campaign against dissident tribal elements in northern Yemen. have made repeated requests for funds, including one suggesting the "army will pack up and go home" if money is not sent. Lack of funds appears to be inhibiting the ability of government forces to attract tribal support in the disaffected areas.

[PAGE 05]
Israel: Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, whose Mapai party increased its plurality in the 3 November election, has succeeded in organizing a broad coalition, on terms which increase his control over the cabinet. The same parties participated in the previous coalition, and no new policy trends appear likely. The new government's offer of nonaggression pacts to the Arab states and its proposal for regional disarmament are certain to be rejected by the Arabs. (Page 2)

Morocco: Strains between the royal palace and the leftists who dominate Morocco's cabinet have been brought to a head by the suspension earlier this week of the principal leftist newspaper and arrest of two of its editors for criticizing the police and persons close to King Mohamed V. Efforts will probably be made to avoid a showdown until after President Eisenhower's visit, but Premier Ibrahim, who presumably sanctioned the press campaign against the palace, has been placed in a difficult position. (Page 3)

Belgian Congo: Brussels' announced willingness to accelerate the formation of a federal Congolese government may provide the basis for a compromise with nationalist leaders who are currently boycotting local elections in the Congo. Local demands for "immediate" independence, however, have prompted a warning by one group that the lower Congo may attempt to secede from the colony on 1 January unless elections for a Congolese assembly are moved up from August to February 1960. Further negotiations will probably take place while King Baudouin is in the Congo. (Page 4)

Nepal-Czechoslovakia: Kathmandu intends to announce the establishment of diplomatic relations with Czechoslovakia within two weeks. Relations with Malaya will be announced at the same time. The move apparently reflects Prime Minister Koirala's policy of expanding Nepal's foreign relations and maintaining a balance between Western and bloc contacts. Until

18 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
relations with Poland were announced on 25 November, Nepal's only bloc ties were with Moscow and Peiping. Relations with Czechoslovakia will give the bloc an additional channel for further economic aid to Nepal.

South Korea: South Korea may be planning seizure of Japanese fishing vessels under the pretext of Rhee line violations in retaliation for repatriation of Koreans from Japan to North Korea. South Korean naval messages reflect South Korean Air Force reconnaissance for fishing boats, and indicate that a navy patrol frigate and several coast-guard ships now are engaged in a joint operation. The navy and air force are formally assigned to the UN Command; the coast guard is under the direct operational control of the Korean Government. There is no indication that South Korea is planning to intercept the second repatriation shipment scheduled to leave Japan on 21 December. The two ships involved, with 975 aboard, reached North Korea without incident on 16 December on their first trip, reportedly under Soviet destroyer escort. (Page 5)

III. THE WEST

*Haiti: The Haitian cabinet resigned on 17 December after a heated discussion over an internal jurisdictional problem. The resignations have been accepted by President Duvalier. This cabinet crisis is symptomatic of the problems facing the weak regime of dictator Duvalier. There is as yet no information on the composition of a new cabinet.

IV. INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
(Available during the preceding week)
Prospects for Iraq. SNIE 36.2-5-59. 15 Dec 59

18 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF iii

[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist Bloc Countries Urge Cairo to Ease Attacks on Iraq

Soviet and other bloc officials are urging the UAR to ease its propaganda attacks on Iraq and Prime Minister Qasim. Cairo informed its foreign posts of such approaches by representatives of the "socialist nations"; Soviet Ambassador Zaitsev had once again pointed out that tension between the UAR and Iraq only benefits the "imperialists." Cairo directed its diplomats, when so approached, to "explain in a positive manner" that the UAR has attempted "everything in our power" to improve relations with Qasim and that such suggestions from bloc diplomats "prompt us to believe that they are siding against us."

On the surface, bloc countries and the UAR have maintained friendly relations since last summer except for occasional, though sometimes sharp, propaganda exchanges. Moscow, Peiping, and other bloc capitals have replied to attacks by the Cairo press and radio and have criticized Nasir's anti-Communist moves but have generally avoided prolonging any polemics with Cairo. They have also provided forums for attacks on Nasir by Khalid Bakdash--exiled leader of the Syrian Communist party--but have not responded to Cairo's strong counterpropaganda against Bakdash's statements.

Developments in bloc-UAR relations in the immediate future probably will depend to a great extent on events in Iraq. Moscow probably calculates that the present trend in Iraq is in its favor and may wish to avoid any upheaval which might jeopardize Iraqi Communist gains and the bloc's close ties with Baghdad.

18 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Coalition Government Organized in Israel

The government coalition which Prime Minister Ben-Gurion has presented to the Israeli Knesset, following six weeks of negotiation, includes the five parties in the previous coalition. The left-wing Achdut Haavoda and Mapam parties were included at the last minute after they reached a compromise with the prime minister on the issue of collective cabinet responsibility.

Ben-Gurion has resented independent stands taken in the past by these left-wing partners, and last July he dissolved the coalition when Achdut Haavoda and Mapam members refused to resign after opposing the government's decision to sell arms to West Germany. As presented by Ben-Gurion on 16 December, the new coalition agreement stipulates that an opposing vote or an abstention on a government motion is tantamount to resignation.

This automatic procedure for dealing with defections, together with the coalition's broad base of support, increases the prime minister's control over the cabinet. His government would not necessarily fall even if both left-wing parties should oppose him on an issue. Together they command only 16 of the 86 Knesset members who support the coalition, while the total number of seats in the assembly is 120. Ben-Gurion's moderate Mapai (labor) party increased its plurality from 40 to 47 seats in the 3 November election.

No radical change in either domestic or foreign policy is likely. Israel has announced that it plans to propose regional disarmament and substitution of nonaggression treaties for the armistice agreements with its Arab neighbors. The Israeli proposals are certain to be rejected by the Arabs.

18 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
New Political Crisis May Be Imminent in Morocco

Strains between the royal palace and leftists in the Moroccan cabinet who are backed by the National Union of Popular Forces (UNFP) have been brought to a head by the arrest of the director and editor of the UNFP's daily newspaper At Tahrir for criticizing the police and persons close to King Mohamed V. The paper has been indefinitely suspended, but the UNFP--formed last September as a patriotic movement and not a political party--apparently is preparing to issue another Arabic-language daily under the name of Er Rai Alam.

The press campaign was part of the UNFP leaders' long-standing effort to have army and police forces subordinated to the appropriate ministries rather than to the palace, an issue underlying the fall of the rightist Balafrej cabinet last year. The campaign presumably was sanctioned by Premier Abdallah Ibrahim, who is strongly supported by the UNFP but whose connections with the organization are not yet clear.

UNFP leaders apparently were encouraged last fall when the King did not endorse recommendations of the crown prince, who is also army chief of staff, and other rightist groups that the army be used to suppress the leftists. Having created five battalions of elite troops, which he hopes to have equipped with American arms, the crown prince asked last week for a clandestine shipment of $600,000 worth of American arms to be distributed to loyal elements of the population. This plea was subsequently strongly endorsed by the King.

Efforts will probably be made to avoid a showdown until after President Eisenhower's visit to Casablanca on 22 December, but Ibrahim--whose government was installed a year ago as a stopgap measure--has been placed in a difficult position.

18 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 10]
New Moves in Belgian Congo Political Crisis

Brussels' announced willingness in principle to accelerate the formation of a federal Congo government may provide the basis for a compromise with nationalist leaders on a timetable for Congolese independence. In Leopoldville, however, a spokesman for the Abako party stated that unless the date of elections for a Congolese assembly is moved up to this coming February, the Abako-dominated Lower Congo area will attempt to secede from the Congo on 1 January.

While the threat may represent a bargaining position rather than an ultimatum, it underscores the gulf which remains between Brussels and the nationalists. Tension will continue high unless a compromise is reached, and further violence could result from local elections which are being held over nationalist opposition.

Belgium's Congo Minister de Schrijver--following recent consultations with Congolese leaders--announced on 16 December several significant shifts from Brussels' earlier declarations. He assured Congolese political leaders that they would be included, along with representatives of the Belgian parliament and other Congolese elements, in the round-table conference scheduled for mid-January. The purpose of the conference would be to achieve general agreement on institutional structure, powers of the institutions, and the electoral system at the provincial and national levels.

Meanwhile, Belgian concern over the Congo situation is also pointed up by King Baudouin's sudden departure for the Congo on 16 December. He was well received there during a tour in 1955, and Brussels apparently hopes that his presence there now will help ease the tension, at least for the remainder of the election period.

18 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 11]
Seoul May Step Up Seizures of Japanese Fishing Craft

South Korea may be planning an intensive effort to seize Japanese fishing vessels in retaliation for repatriation of Koreans from Japan to North Korea.

results of "air force reconnaissance for fishing boats," and a joint operation involving a navy patrol frigate and several coast guard vessels was under way. Presumably the navy's shipboard radar would be used to spot Japanese craft, while coast guard vessels would make the actual seizures. The navy and air force, but not the coast guard, are under the operational control of the UN Command.

Japan is alert to possible South Korean retaliatory actions; the Japanese Coast Guard flashed a warning to all fishing boats inside the Rhee line. Seizures would cause a political storm in Japan, and the Kishi government might submit this issue and the problems created by the Rhee line to the United Nations.

Seoul failed to carry out its threats to use force to stop the first two repatriation ships, which reached Chongjin, North Korea, with 975 Koreans on 16 December. The ships, provided by the Soviet Union, reportedly were escorted by Soviet destroyers. There is no indication that Seoul is planning to intercept future sailings, the next of which is expected on 21 December.

Recent cutbacks in American aid to South Korea as well as failure to force Japan into a settlement of outstanding issues on South Korean terms may be adding to President Rhee's frustrations. Under the circumstances, he may be pondering actions which would once again draw international attention to the Korean problem.

18 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
