A Comment: At Soviet program for training and reequipping Chinese Communist ground forces in Manchuria has been frequently reported, but nothing is reliably known of the scope of such a program.

4. De Lattre may be ready to relinquish his Indochina post:
General de Lattre himself is probably the source of the rumors predicting his resignation as High Commissioner in Indochina, according to a well-placed French official. It is quite likely that the general wants to leave Indochina while he is still at the height of his success, particularly since the fulfillment of French desires in that area is increasingly uncertain. It is also possible that he has political ambitions which could lead him into the Gaullist camp or into accepting an important diplomatic post.

Comment: The persistence of these rumors recently led the French Minister for the Associated States to deny that De Lattre's replacement is under consideration.

General de Lattre's health has been adversely affected by his service in Indochina and he might resign on this account. His departure would probably disrupt the military effort and thus increase parliamentary opposition to France's continued burden in Indochina.

5. Australian position on New Guinea moderated:
The US Embassy in Canberra comments that Australia, although not advocating Indonesian control of West New Guinea, has adopted a less rigid attitude than it held a year and a half ago. Australia feels that the Indonesian Government is not yet stable, however, and fears that unrest in West New Guinea might have repercussions in adjacent Australian territory.

Australia prefers that the issue remain dormant until Indonesia achieves political stability, after which a reasonable solution could be more easily reached. Should a crisis develop over New Guinea in the near future, however, Australia may still feel forced to support continued Dutch sovereignty.

Comment: Approximately a year and a half ago, when the Netherlands and Indonesia were preparing to discuss the disposition of West New Guinea, Australia made vigorous representations for continued Dutch sovereignty over the area. Australia argued that its interest in the question was equal to that of the Netherlands and Indonesia and that it should in effect be given a veto power over any proposed change of status.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
