Iran Moves for Closer Coordination With Pakistan, Israel

The chief of the Iranian intelligence agency, Major General Teimur Bakhtiar, who is close to the Shah, made secret visits to Pakistan 1-8 August and to Israel the preceding week, apparently seeking regional support for Iran's requests for increased American military and economic aid, as well as assistance which would make it easier for Iran to withstand the USSR's propaganda assault on Iran in general and the person of the Shah in particular.

In Pakistan, Bakhtiar and his delegation reportedly suggested the formation of a regional grouping consisting of Iran, Turkey, and Pakistan without any Western powers. President Ayub, who regards Iran as the weak link in the Baghdad Pact, instructed Pakistani officials to encourage the Iranians in discussion of such a regional grouping, which he reportedly regards as a useful vehicle for concerted action to obtain greater economic and military assistance from the US, Britain, or other states. Ayub probably believes such an entente, open to subsequent accession by other Middle Eastern nations, could strengthen the Baghdad Pact.

Turkey apparently has not yet been consulted, but might favor the new grouping, if the US were not opposed, as a means of shoring up Iran's wavering confidence in the Baghdad Pact. Tehran, however, dissatisfied with the benefits it has received from the present alliance, may be exploring reactions to the new proposal as a possible substitute for the pact.

Late in July, Bakhtiar reportedly discussed with high Israeli officials Iran's dissatisfaction with the level of US aid. Prime Minister Ben-Gurion on 8 August informed the American ambassador he had told Bakhtiar that Iran was clearly protected by the US, and commented to the ambassador on the importance of strengthening Iran. Israel this week is sending former Ambassador to Washington Abba Eban to Iran on a secret mission which probably concerns Israel's use of Iranian oil in the Eilat-Mediterranean pipeline. Eban may also intend to give expert advice on how to obtain more US aid and thereby hope to strengthen Israel's embryonic association of states on the periphery of the Arab world. This association includes Turkey, Ethiopia, and the Sudan, as well as Iran. The Israelis specifically are seeking to establish formal diplomatic relations with Iran, a step Tehran has been reluctant to take for fear of offending the Arabs.

13 Aug 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
