[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
3 April 1961
Copy No. C 79
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
3 April 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CONTENTS

2. Congo: Further contacts between Leopoldville and Stanleyville military leaders; Tshombé denounces airlift of Indian troops to Kamina.
(Page ii)

4. Indonesia: Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi's visit.
(Page ii)

5. France-Algeria: Rebels tone down their previous declaration canceling scheduled negotiations at Evian.
(Page iii)

6. Portugal: Salazar noncommittal on reforms urged by Defense Minister Moniz.
(Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
Republic of the Congo

INDIA 1711
SUDAN 400
TUNISIA 3,200
MALAYA 210
INDONESIA 850

MALAYA 150
Gemena

Lisala
Scattered
MOBUTU 3,400

Aketi
MOBUTU 800
Buta
Basoko

Stanleyville

ETHIOPIA 1,800
GIZENGA 7,000

Bukavu
Kindu

NIGERIA 500
Usumbura

Brazzaville
MOBUTU 7,200
LEOPOLDVILLE
Thysville

Banana
Matadi
Boma
Moanda

INDONESIA 300
Luanda
Atlantic
Ocean

Coquilhatville
Boende
Ikela
MALAYA 400

KALONJI 1,500

Ghana 1,600
Luluabourg
Bakwanga
LIBERIA 230

ETHIOPIA 600
Kamina

MOROCCO 188
IRELAND 655

INDIA arriving

Kongolo
Kabalo
Albertville
NIGERIA 1,300
Manono
Pwanga
Mitwaba

SWEDEN 650
TSHOMBE 7,000

Elisabethville

Approximate area nominally controlled by:
Kasavubu-Mobutu
Gizenga
Kalonji
Tshombe

United Nations Forces
Selected roads
Selected railroad
Selected airfield

STATUTE MILES 400
10403 2

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Map Page

[PAGE 06]
Congo: Congolese military leaders of both the Leopold-
ville and Stanleyville regimes met in the border area of Orien-
tale and Equateur provinces near Bumba on 30 March to hold
preliminary discussions concerning the Tananarive proposals
for creating a loose confederation of Congolese states. At
this meeting--probably planned by General Mobutu--it was
decided that senior officers representing the two factions
would meet separately in Leopoldville and Stanleyville on 6
April to arrive at a "general consensus," and that a joint
meeting would be held at Lisala in Equateur Province on 10
April. Mobutu apparently hopes to attract support for a strong
central government from among Gizenga's military leaders.
While Gizenga has also opposed the Tananarive proposals, his
military leaders are reportedly meeting with Mobutu's repre-
sentatives without Gizenga's approval and have told Mobutu's
representatives that they are dissatisfied with the civilian lead-
ership in Stanleyville.

Katanga's President Tshombé has denounced the airlifting
of 800 Indian troops from Leopoldville to Kamina as a deliber-
ate attempt by certain elements in the UN to prevent the for-
mation of a confederation of states in the Congo. A UN offi-
cial indicated that these troops would seek to interpose them-
selves between Tshombé's troops, which took Manono on 30
March, and Baluba tribesmen in northern Katanga who remain
loyal to the Stanleyville regime.
(Backup, Page 7) (Map)

Communist China - Indonesia: Chinese Communist For-
eign Minister Chen Yi's visit to Indonesia, which ended on 2

3 Apr 61  DAILY BRIEF  ii

[PAGE 07]
April, outwardly restored the cordial Sino- Indonesian relations
which existed before the outbreak in 1959 of the dispute over
the Overseas Chinese. Friendship and cultural agreements
were signed during the visit, and Chen expressed Peiping's
readiness to resume its economic aid program, suspended in
the summer of 1959. The difficulties between the two countries
over the treatment of Chinese living in Indonesia were eased
last December when Peiping agreed to a treaty under which it
renounced its previous claim that Chinese living in Indonesia
were still Chinese citizens. Under the treaty, local Chinese
were required to choose within two years either Indonesian or
Chinese citizenship.

France-Algeria: The announcement on 1 April by the
rebel provisional Algerian government (PAG) that it is still
ready to negotiate with the French, provided formal talks are
held only with its representatives, is an attempt to force fur-
ther concessions from Paris. The French are claiming that
negotiations will merely be postponed briefly. A top assist-
ant to French Minister for Algeria Joxe on 1 April labeled
the PAG's declarations a maneuver to get France to take a
position on the PAG's claim to be the exclusive representa-
tives of Algeria, and predicted that the rebels might try to
draw the French into further secret preliminary talks.

Portugal: On 28-29 March Minister of Defense Botelho
Moniz, in a second approach to Premier Salazar this month,
stressed again the urgency of reforms both in Portugal and in
Portuguese policies in Africa--reforms which the military
believe are essential.

3 Apr 61  DAILY BRIEF  iii

[PAGE 08]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
Situation in the Congo

The UN Command, which recently reinforced several
garrisons in northern Katanga, hopes to arrange a cease-fire
between the contending forces there. Clashes are reported
to have occurred recently between the Katanga gendarmerie
and Baluba tribesmen near Kabalo, about 100 miles north of
Manono. A UN official stated that UN troops will attempt to
prevent further advances by either side, but will use force
only as a last resort.

Tshombé is particularly incensed over UN intervention
in Katanga at this time; the presence of additional UN troops,
besides posing a threat to future operations by his forces,
might also adversely affect the already questionable loyalty
of some of the tribal chiefs in the area. Concerned that some
of these chiefs might be planning to withdraw from the Katanga
"state" and form separate provinces, Tshombé is said to be
planning a visit to the troubled areas in an attempt to dissuade
them from taking this action.

Mobutu apparently feels that if the Lisala meeting is suc-
cessful, he will be able to cope with any opposition to his plan.
He is said to believe that if he moves troops into northern Ka-
tanga, he could pressure Tshombé--his principal opponent--
into accepting a federal form of government. Mobutu report-
edly is convinced that the UN Command would welcome his aid
in "bringing Tshombé to heel" and that Tshombé's "Belgian
mercenaries" would not oppose a unified army. In addition to
the pressure Mobutu could exert on the Leopoldville politicians
with a unified army, he believes he can also count on the sup-
port of Foreign Minister Bomboko and Interior Minister Adoula,
who are known to share his opposition to a Congo confederacy.

Mobutu is less optimistic regarding a military arrangement
with the Stanleyville faction. Although willing to compromise
with General Lundula, Mobutu distrusts Gizenga, whom he con-
siders "more dangerous than Lumumba." Nevertheless, he be-
lieves a unified army can be realized by removing Gizenga from
power.

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 7

[PAGE 10]
Sino- Indonesian Relations Outwardly Improved by Chen Yi's
Visit

Peiping, which purports to be the protector of all Over-
seas Chinese, made strong representations on their behalf
after Djakarta in 1959 ordered the closing of all stores owned
by aliens (mostly Chinese) in rural areas. Chinese Commu-
nist Embassy personnel defied Indonesian restrictions by
traveling through the countryside inciting local Chinese to
resist Indonesian attempts to remove them.

Although it felt constrained to intervene in favor of the
Overseas Chinese, Communist China was probably disturbed
over the adverse effect its intransigent attitude toward Indo-
nesia had on its carefully developed pose as a good neighbor.
Peiping called off its propaganda attacks against Djakarta last
August, and relations have been gradually improving since
then.

Chinese economic assistance to Indonesia totaled $48,000,-
000 before relations became strained by the Overseas Chinese
issue. A $30,000,000 Chinese credit offered just before the
outbreak of the dispute was never accepted by Indonesia. The
planned visit of an Indonesian industrial mission to China later
this month will provide an opportunity to discuss economic aid.

The Indonesian press was generally cordial to Chen Yi
during his week's stay--apparently at the instigation of Presi-
dent Sukarno, who has been attempting to play down all other
sources of international friction in order to focus attention on
Indonesia's claim to Netherlands New Guinea. Nevertheless,
Chinese- Indonesian relations are unlikely to be significantly
affected. Foreign Minister Subandrio, still smarting from the
treatment he received in Peiping in 1959, deliberately refrained
from any welcoming remarks on Chen Yi's arrival at the Dja-
karta airport. The government restricted Chen's travels in

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 8

[PAGE 11]
Indonesia, and the length of his visit in the country was cut
by two days.

Although the treaty of friendship declared that the two
countries would "settle the issues in dispute through delibera-
tions in the spirit of real friendship and good will through dip-
lomatic channels and by other peaceful means," relations might
again become embittered if Djakarta renews its attempts to re-
move Chinese from rural areas.

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 9

[PAGE 12]
Portuguese Defense Minister Urges Premier Salazar to Re-
shuffle Cabinet

In addition to Moniz' two oral approaches to Salazar, a
letter drafted by Moniz and endorsed on 25 March by 17 key
generals--including the heads of the security police and the
Republican Guard--has been sent to the premier.

Moniz' letter pointed out Portugal's rapidly worsening position at
home and abroad and emphasized that nothing was being done
to halt this condition except an unproductive propaganda cam-
paign against the UN and against those nations which disagree
with Portuguese policy.

Moniz stressed that Portugal faced the possibility of re-
volt in all its African provinces and Timor, as well as Indian
"aggression" against Goa, and said the military felt they
could not cope with a situation of such magnitude. After as-
serting that sweeping internal changes would be necessary to
pave the way for essential constructive changes in foreign pol-
icy, the letter called on Salazar to revamp the cabinet com-
pletely and not just replace present ministers with "burned
out" former ministers.

The letter reportedly was sent to Salazar without any ul-
timatum that he follow its recommendations or step down. If
Salazar fails to act, however, the military would feel obliged
to consider further action. Army Chief of Staff Camara Pina
was the only participant in the 25 March meeting who failed to
give his endorsement. It is said to have been under discussion
by the military for some time, and was also approved by the
former President, Marshal Craveiro Lopes.

Another approach to Salazar was made early in March by
General Beleza Ferraz, chief of staff of the armed forces,
who is close to Moniz.

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 10

[PAGE 13]
the cabinet "remodeling"
expected during the week of 20 March had been postponed be-
cause of the departure of the overseas minister for Angola on
23 March and the scheduled visit of French Foreign Minister
Couve de Murville to Lisbon early in April.

3 Apr 61  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 11

[PAGE 14]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 15]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
