India Adopts Hands-Off Policy on UN Consideration of Tibet

Indian officials, in response to a request for guidance from the Dalai Lama on an appeal to the UN, informed his advisers on 22 August that India would neither support nor interfere with any action on the Tibetan question in the UN. The Tibetans were told that New Delhi could not advise the Dalai Lama on the public appeal he plans to make soon, since it conflicts with India's recognition of Tibet as part of Communist China. The Indian officials also suggested that the Dalai Lama in future make his decisions independently and act in his own interest without seeking clearance from New Delhi. This position, which is in sharp contrast to the Indian Government's earlier desire to restrict the Dalai Lama's political activities, was explained as being necessary to protect Indian interests but was interpreted by the Tibetans as tacit encouragement of their resort to UN action.

Prime Minister Nehru also indicated to the American chargé on 20 August that he planned no definite move to oppose UN consideration of the Tibet issue, but he reiterated his view that UN discussion could not lead to any useful action on the matter. Nehru, apparently disillusioned with Peiping, implied that his government would maintain a correct attitude toward the Chinese Communists at the international level, but would be less cooperative toward them than in the past.

Despite Nehru's unwillingness to support the Tibetans in the UN, the Dalai Lama has been invited to make an official visit to New Delhi and has been given travel clearance for several Tibetan delegations to travel abroad for publicity purposes. From 28 to 31 August, the Dalai Lama's brother and chief adviser will visit Manila, where he probably will explore the possibility of Philippine sponsorship of a request for UN discussion of Tibet. Talks with officials of South Vietnam, Nationalist China, and Australia are also planned. There is a possibility that some Latin American country may be willing to initiate such a request and to organize support among other UN members.
