[PAGE 01]
9 December 1959
Copy No. C 6

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 DECEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Peiping tells Japanese leader Communist China accepted outcome of Eisenhower-Khrushchev talks only after imposing "conditions" on Khrushchev.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan--Leftist students plan 10 December demonstration around Diet building against US-Japanese Security Treaty.

UAR asks Arab League emergency meeting to discuss possible measures against Israeli diversion of Jordan water.

Saudi Arabia--Prolonged dispute with Aramco and Tapline costs Saudis second place in Middle East oil production.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 December 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China - USSR - Japan: In talks during the re-
cent visit of Liberal-Democratic party adviser Matsumura,
Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi stated that
Peiping accepted the results of the Eisenhower-Khrushchev
talk "but only after giving Khrushchev certain conditions
which had to be met." Matsumura would not reveal these con-
ditions. Chen's bitter criticism of Japan for not supporting
Peiping's effort to enter the United Nations gave Matsumura
the impression that the Chinese leaders want UN membership
"as soon as possible."

Premier Chou En-lai in his talks with Matsumura called
the revised US-Japanese Security Treaty a "great threat to
China" and an even greater concern than Taiwan to Peiping.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Japan: Zengakuren, the militant Communist-dominated
Japanese university students' organization, plans to force an
entry to the Diet grounds during demonstrations scheduled
for 10 December throughout Japan against the US-Japanese
Security Treaty. The Socialist party has appealed to the "Peo-
ple's Council" sponsoring the campaign to exclude the student
organization, but the students have announced they will "go it
alone" if necessary, defying both the sponsoring Council and
the police. Violence is possible, as police plan to use barri-
cades and nightsticks to protect the Diet grounds. The govern-
ment appears able and determined to handle the immediate
situation; it continues to move cautiously in exploiting public
opinion which is building up in favor of curbing leftist extrem-
ism.

[PAGE 05]
Arab States - Israel: The UAR has requested an emer-
gency session of the Arab League Council to develop plans to
"foil" unilateral Israeli projects for utilization of Jordan River
waters. The Cairo press reports that the Arabs will protest
to the UN over "Israeli violation of UN resolutions and Arab
rights." These moves augment Nasir's formation of a technical
committee to study measures for preventing waters originat-
ing in Syria from becoming available to Israel. An Arab di-
version scheme might be technically feasible, since only 23
percent of the Jordan River's water originates in Israel, but
it would probably be uneconomical and encounter intra-Arab
political problems. (Page 2) (Map)

Saudi Arabia: The continuing dispute with Aramco and
Tapline over profit-sharing, by delaying production increases
has probably cost Saudi Arabia its position as second largest
oil producer in the Middle East. Saudi crude oil is moving
through Tapline to the Mediterranean at less than half of full
capacity, and over-all Saudi oil production has not increased
appreciably over 1956 levels. Production in adjoining states
has increased substantially, and Iran now holds second place
behind Kuwait. By spring Iraq also may surpass Saudi produc-
tion.

In Tapline's dispute with the UAR, which is linked to a
solution of Saudi claims, unless agreement is reached by 21
February when parliament meets, Nasir will be forced to take a
strong public position against the company.

9 Dec 59 DAILY BRIEF

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Chinese Communist Views on International Developments

Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi recently told
Japanese Liberal-Democratic party adviser Matsumura that
Peiping had "accepted the results" of the Eisenhower-Khrushchev
talks, "but only after giving Khrushchev certain conditions which
had to be met." Matsumura refused to reveal these conditions,
but their nature is reflected in Peiping's reluctance to moderate
its propaganda attacks against the US or to accept the apparent
Soviet view that the period of "peaceful coexistence" requires
a relative reduction of "struggle" tactics. The Chinese appar-
ently are willing to back Khrushchev's policies only on a few is-
sues. They accept the propaganda call for "complete disarma-
ment," they have dropped any mention of the use of force to "lib-
erate" Taiwan, and they feel that a meeting at the summit
cannot be avoided.

Premier Chou En-lai told Matsumura--who had suggested that
Communism and the free world "have many similarities and can
coexist"--that he sincerely believed "capitalism and Commu-
nism can never coexist."

On the matter of United Nations membership for the Peiping
regime, Chen Yi became "very agitated" and stated if Japan
would not make an effort to help China enter the UN, it should
"shut up and stop trying to prevent" Chinese Communist entry.
Chen's bitter criticism on this point gave Matsumura the impres-
sion that the Chinese leaders want UN membership "as soon as
possible."

The Chinese leaders indicated that they will make an all-
out effort to arouse opposition to Kishi or to force a change in
his "wait and see" policy toward China. They made it clear that
current efforts to isolate Kishi would be based on invitations to
all party members "except Kishi's group" and on a continuation
of the trade embargo until the Japanese prime minister "changes
his present attitude." The Chinese displayed considerable anxiety
over the revised US-Japanese Security Treaty. Chou En-lai
claimed that the treaty is a "great threat to China" and is an
even greater concern than Taiwan to Peiping.

[PAGE 07]
ISRAEL
LAKE TIBERIAS

LEBANON
SYRIA
JORDAN
EAST GHOR

TURKEY
SYRIA
IRAQ
SAUDI ARABIA
IRAN
USSR

—— Oil pipeline
— — — Armistice Line
Demilitarized Zone

UNCLASSIFIED

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Arab Concern Over Israeli Jordan River Projects

The equitable development and use of Jordan River wa-
ters, long a political problem in the Middle East, is again
becoming a prominent issue in Arab-Israeli relations. The
UAR has requested an emergency session of the Arab League
Council to discuss unilateral Israeli plans for diverting wa-
ters of the Jordan, and the Cairo press reports that Arab
countries will protest to the UN against "Israeli violation of
UN resolutions and Arab rights." Nasir has taken the initia-
tive in this matter probably in order to demonstrate anew
his leadership of the Arab cause against Israel. There are
no UN resolutions on the question of Jordan water rights.

Nasir has already formed a technical committee which
will study ways of utilizing Jordan waters before they leave
Arab territory, thereby depriving Israel of access to them.
The committee is to report by 15 December

An Arab diversion scheme, although likely to be uneconom-
ical, might be technically feasible. About 77 percent of the
river's waters originate in Israel's neighboring Arab states.
Israel's water supply could be reduced by 20 percent. However,
there probably would be diffi-
culty in obtaining agreement among riparian Arab states on
details of the project. Lebanon, the UAR (Syria), and Jordan
are the Arab states concerned, and Jordan itself is interested
in downstream utilization of the waters. Moreover, Jordan,
with US assistance, is going ahead with its East Ghor canal
irrigation project which will depend on water from the Yarmuk
River, the Jordan River's only tributary.

The 8-10 year Israeli scheme to which the Arabs object
would eventually divert Jordan River waters for irrigation of

9 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 09]
Israel's Negev Desert. "Stage One," now in progress and
scheduled for completion within five years, would enable
Israel to pump water out of Lake Tiberias, into which the
Jordan River flows, and convey it across the Galilean hills
to Israel's coastal plain.

9 Dec 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 11]
