[PAGE 01]
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

SOVIET UNION
1. Soviet mapping system extended to the Satellites (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
2. Increased Chinese aid for Viet Minh reported (page 3).
3. New governor of Tonkin sees coming year as crucial (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA
5. Disturbances in Nepal reported imminent (page 5).
6. Afghan Uzbeks reportedly seek "reunion" with Soviet fellow tribesmen (page 6).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
7. Persian Gulf tribal leaders reported "restive" under British control (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE
9. East German trade now oriented 75 percent toward Orbit (page 7).
10. Saar leaders see new elections in six months (page 8).

[PAGE 03]
SOVIET UNION

1. Soviet mapping system extended to the Satellites:
representatives from the USSR and all European Satellites except Albania attended a conference in Sofia from 22 June to 1 July. The conference decided that by 1959 all the countries involved must produce maps in accordance with the most recent Soviet techniques.

Comment: This is the first confirmation of reports that the Soviet Union is attempting to integrate all Satellite maps into its own system. This, with the tie into the US geodetic net which the Soviet Union planned in 1942, will represent a great advance in the Soviet program to place the northern hemisphere under a uniform system.

The completion of this mapping program will strengthen Soviet military control of the entire Satellite area.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Increased Chinese aid for Viet Minh reported:
Chinese Communist arms shipments to the Viet Minh have again reached large-scale proportions. Known shipments between 9 and 19 November consisted of more than 70 tons of munitions, plus some mines and medical supplies. However, the Viet Minh has a continuing shortage of gasoline.

[PAGE 04]
3. New governor of Tonkin sees coming year as crucial:
Citing the continued contraction of French-held territory in Tonkin since 1950, the newly-installed governor of Tonkin, Nguyen Huu Tri, sees the coming year as crucial. He argues that in the next campaign the Viet Minh will turn its full force on the Delta, which even now is only 20 percent under French-Vietnamese control at night.

Tri does not regard the situation as hopeless, but asserts that Bao Dai must soon present the French with a program on a "take-it-or-leave-it" basis, particularly regarding the Vietnamese Army. Tri agreed with Bao Dai's complaint that this force was now virtually nonexistent, consisting of little more than mercenaries under French command.

Comment: Tri's ability and integrity are unique among members of the Vietnamese Government and are recognized by the French.

[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

5. Disturbances in Nepal reported imminent:
anticipates disturbances, and possibly a Communist coup, in Nepal within two weeks. As evidence, he adduces information that the Indian army supply corps was ordered on 2 December to prepare a logistic plan for the support of Indian troops in Nepal. He also reports that Indian army, navy and air force commanders in chief held emergency meetings for an unknown purpose on 29 and 30 November.

Comment: To date, no political group in Nepal appears to have the strength to attempt a coup. The report that Indian logistic planning for action in Nepal was ordered only on 2 December suggests that immediate action is not anticipated. The meetings of Indian military commanders could have been connected with some of the other urgent problems which have arisen within the past week.

[PAGE 06]
6. Afghan Uzbeks reportedly seek "reunion" with Soviet fellow tribesmen:
This band, which reportedly has considerable strength in the northern part of the country, hopes to "reunite" Afghan Uzbeks with fellow tribesmen across the Soviet frontier. The Uzbeks have also tried to attract support from Hazara tribal leaders in northern Afghanistan.

Comment: This is the first credible report that such an organization actually exists. Previous information consisted mainly of rumors of Soviet subversion.

Economic and political discontent in northern Afghanistan would favor the activities of the Mogul Band, and the Afghan Government might deal carefully with it for fear of antagonizing the USSR.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Persian Gulf tribal leaders reported "restive" under British control:
Two members of the American Consulate at Dhahran, who recently visited some of the Persian Gulf sheikhdoms, noted "indications of restiveness" among Arab tribal leaders toward the British authorities. This sentiment supports the belief of the American Ambassador to Saudi Arabia that underlying the current Anglo-Saudi Arabian boundary dispute is the basic problem of the future status of the sheikhdoms with respect to Britain.

[PAGE 07]
The tribal leaders frequently expressed friendship for King Ibn Saud, which, with other incidents on the trip, made the officials feel that eventually Saudi Arabia will be increasingly successful in winning the allegiance of the tribes, both in the disputed areas and in the trucial sheikhdoms.

WESTERN EUROPE

9. East German trade now oriented 75 percent toward Orbit:
About 75 percent of East German exports in the first three quarters of 1952 went to the Soviet bloc.

[PAGE 08]
Forty percent of all exports went to the USSR, 15 percent to Poland, 7 percent to Czechoslovakia, 5 percent to Hungary and 5 percent to China. The West German Federal Republic ranked highest among Western countries, with only 2.5 percent.

Comment: These figures, compared with those of 1950, show a marked decline in East Germany's trade with West Germany, its principal trade partner outside of the Orbit.

10. Saar leaders see new elections in six months:
Saar political leaders now predict new Landtag elections in six months because they anticipate the resumption and successful conclusion of French-German negotiations on the Saar. The new elections would determine whether or not the Saar populace would accept the solution agreed on by the negotiators.

Since the 30 November election showed 66 percent of the Saarlanders in favor of Europeanization of the territory, American officials in both Strasbourg and Bonn observe that Chancellor Adenauer and Foreign Minister Schuman will now be in a better position to submerge national interests in any forthcoming negotiations.
