CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 March 1958

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet air activity: The lull in Soviet air activity which has been noted for the past nine days has ended with a broad resumption of operations on 4 March. Air activity is returning to normal in the Long Range air units, as well as in the Tactical and Air Defense Air Armies. Least affected during the stand-down were transports and aircraft deployed in the Arctic.

Korean airliner issue: North Korea has declared that the passengers of the hijacked South Korean airliner who wish to be returned will be delivered at Panmunjom on 6 March. Pyongyang seems intent on maintaining the facade of government-to-government arrangements and has proposed that representatives of the American and West German governments be present when the passengers are freed, although it has announced readiness to accept representatives of the South Korean Red Cross. This latest Communist initiative may reflect some anxiety to effect an early release of the passengers, whose kidnaping distracted attention from Peiping's recent promise to withdraw its troops from Korea.

Communist China - Ceylon: Communist China's $10,500,000 low-interest ten-year loan to Ceylon for flood rehabilitation follows closely the conclusion of a Soviet $30,000,000 long-term loan which also included relief funds. The Sino-Soviet bloc has given credits and grants worth $60,000,000 since it began its aid offensive in Ceylon last September.

Egypt-Jordan: The first violence stemming from Nasir's vehement propaganda campaign against the Jordanian Government occurred on 3 March, when a progovernment newspaper's presses were blown up in Jordanian Jerusalem. Further antigovernment violence in the West Jordan area is likely.

Rapacki plan--Norwegian view: A small inner security group of the Norwegian cabinet has informally approved a working paper which, while rejecting the substance of the Rapacki plan, recommends thinning out of forces on both sides of a demarcation line in Germany. Despite a report from a French Foreign Ministry source that the director of political affairs of the Polish Foreign Ministry had considerable success in persuading Norwegian officials toward a favorable view of the Rapacki proposals during his recent visit to Oslo, the initiative on this issue is primarily Norwegian.
