Situation in the Congo

According to a UN military official in New York, the 1,000-man Moroccan contingent in Katanga seems to have embarked on a systematic program of harassment and non-cooperation with the UN Command. Their morale is said to be completely broken, and they allegedly have "laid down their arms." Hammarskjold had hoped to send the group to Matadi in a show of force, but the troops reportedly stated that they would obey directives only from Rabat. Rabat has ordered this group--the only remaining part of a force which originally totaled 3,200--to withdraw from the Congo, but it has been delayed by transportation difficulties.

The Tananarive conference apparently has agreed that the existing central authority should be scrapped, along with the present provincial structure. In their place a group of new states, based largely on tribal lines, would be created, with an ill-defined "community of united nations" arrangement for a central authority, presumably in Leopoldville, which would become a "neutral city." The participants apparently are agreed that any solution reached at the conference will be an interim one and that any definitive reform must wait until the country is pacified. The absence--and presumably the nonconcurrence--of Gizenga will make implementation of these proposals difficult and will probably lead to opposition to them among his international supporters.

Tshombe seems to have been successful in his efforts to reach agreement on replacing the present structure with a loose confederacy. Except for Albert Kalonji of southern Kasai--who is largely dependent on Tshombe's patronage--the other participants have an interest in retaining some type of central authority--Kasavubu and Ileo by virtue of their positions in the present central government, and Leopoldville Provincial President Kamitatu because of his long association with Lumumba's ideals of a unitary state. However, local ties still have considerable importance for most of them, and none seems to be willing to face up to strong pressure.

11 Mar 61     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1
