1. SOVIET COUNTERMOVES TO THE NATO CONFERENCE

The speeches of Soviet party chief Khrushchev and Foreign Minister Gromyko before the Supreme Soviet emphasize the USSR's position that the West, to bring about any lessening of international tensions, must acknowledge the new "balance of forces" caused by Soviet technological advances. The Supreme Soviet "instructed" the government to "consider the question of a further reduction of the armed forces of the USSR," while maintaining the "remaining strength" of the Soviet armed forces at a "proper level" pending an international disarmament agreement. The United States, Britain, and France were called on to undertake similar reductions.

Khrushchev called on the United States to cast its "positions-of-strength" policy on "history's dust heap," and instead "recognize the existing situation." The Kremlin apparently believes that a general world settlement on the basis of the status quo would appeal to Western statesmen, who are faced with the economic demands necessary for Western defense efforts.

While Gromyko did not categorically reject the proposal made in the NATO communique for a foreign ministers' conference to discuss disarmament, he stated that the USSR would not agree to such a meeting if the basis of discussion were the resolution recently passed by the UN General Assembly endorsing the Western disarmament position. The Soviet foreign minister proposed that a special session of the UN General Assembly or a broadly representative conference be called. Both Gromyko and Khrushchev called for a "summit conference" of capitalist and Communist states; however, Khrushchev urged that bilateral negotiations be held first between the United States and the Soviet Union.

The USSR's countermoves to the NATO meeting are probably based on the calculation that their proposals will gain time for Soviet diplomacy to exploit the political impact of their technological gains and thus increase world pressure on the West to negotiate on Soviet terms of "equality."
