1. SOVIET OFFICIALS DISCUSS PRESIDENT'S BLUEPRINT PROPOSAL

An adviser to the Soviet representative
on the UN Disarmament Subcommittee
told American officials on 23 September
that the USSR did not reject President
Eisenhower's Geneva "blueprint" and
aerial flight proposals and said "our attitude is positive."
He used passages from Molotov's speech before the UN
General Assembly to illustrate that the USSR was still
earnestly studying the proposals, but indicated that the
USSR would like to have more details on how the plan would
operate.

The Soviet official also indicated that
while he could understand why the United States was reserving its position regarding the abolition of nuclear weapons, the USSR was disturbed by the American reservation
regarding conventional force levels. He insisted that the
United States intended to revise these upward.

Soviet officials present at the meeting
denied that the USSR was principally concerned with force
levels and bases and declared that establishing a "legal
basis" for the proscription of atomic weapons was still
the important thing. In arguing that adoption of the Soviet
10 May inspection plan was necessary to guard against
concentration of forces, one Soviet spokesman contended
that a surprise blow could never be decisive, either now
or in 100 years.

Comment  These remarks appear to indicate a more
favorable attitude toward some form of
President Eisenhower's proposals than Bulganin's letter, which
only stated that they were still under consideration. Bulganin's
strongest criticism of the President's proposals was that they
failed to meet the main problem of ending the arms race because they did not include reduction of either conventional
forces or atomic weapons.

The Soviet leaders have consistently defended their 10 May proposals regarding "control posts" by contending that modern war, including the necessary follow-up to any surprise blow, requires drawing into action armies
of many millions and enormous quantities of equipment.
