[PAGE 01]
31 October 1956

Copy No. 132

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

3. POLISH RADIO SAYS ROKOSSOWSKI PLANNED SWEEPING PURGE

5. SOVIET DECLARATION ON RELATIONS WITH THE SATELLITES

6. TITO URGES HUNGARIANS TO SUPPORT NAGY
(page 13)

7. WESTERN EUROPEAN COMMUNIST REACTION TO
HUNGARIAN REVOLT

9. GOVERNMENT PRESSES ITS ADVANTAGE IN SINGAPORE

10. SECRETARY GENERAL OF NORTH VIETNAM'S COMMU-
NIST PARTY OUSTED

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 2
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 5 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]

[PAGE 09]

[PAGE 10]
3. POLISH RADIO SAYS ROKOSSOWSKI PLANNED
SWEEPING PURGE

According to a Warsaw radio broadcast
on 26 October, a pro-Soviet group, led
by Marshal Rokossowski and several
politburo members, attempted to arrest
large numbers of liberal Communists
shortly before the recent central com-
mittee plenum. The broadcast quoted a
speaker at the meeting of the Gdansk
Provincial Committee of the Polish United Workers (Com-
munist) Party as stating that the pro-Soviet group issued
orders to the army to arrest 700 liberal Communist leaders
on 18 October, the day before Khrushchev arrived in Warsaw.
The move was unsuccessful because of the actions of "pro-
gressive elements" in the army, security policy, party, and
among the workers who alerted those scheduled to be arrested
and seized control of key positions in the city.

The speaker named Marshal Rokossowski,
Zenon Nowak, Klosiewicz, Berman, General Witaszewski,
Joswiak-Witold, and Zawadzki, as members of the group,
known as the "Natolin group."

Comment
This information probably has some founda-
tion in fact and provides an explanation for
for the unexpected arrival of Soviet leaders in Warsaw on 19 Oc-
tober and the coldness of their reception. In view of its publi-
cation, Rokossowski can hardly retain his posts as deputy premier

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 9
[PAGE 11]
and minister of national defense. He is now "on leave"
and reportedly has gone to the USSR with no date set for
his return. Most of the other listed members of the Natolin
group have already been removed from office, along with
eight provincial first secretaries, but Zenon Nowak still
holds the post of deputy premier, and Zawadzki retains his
posts as chief of state and politburo member.

The publicizing of the activities of the
Natolin group also suggests that some members of the group
may not only be deprived of their positions but may be sub-
jected to criminal prosecution as well.

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 10
[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]
5. SOVIET DECLARATION ON RELATIONS WITH
THE SATELLITES

The Soviet government's declaration of
30 October on relations with the Satellites
is an attempt to regain a position from
which the USSR can begin to exert control
over the too-rapid development of Satellite
independence without compromising its self-initiated "liberal-
ization" program. The declaration attempts to cancel out the
serious loss of prestige and leadership which the USSR has
suffered, both within and outside the bloc, because of events
in Hungary and Poland.

In a key paragraph, the declaration em-
phasizes that Soviet units are stationed in Hungary and Rumania
under the authority of the Warsaw pact, and carefully establishes
that Soviet troops in Poland are there on the basis of the Pots-
dam four-power agreement as well. East Germany and the
Soviet forces there are pointedly omitted from the statement,
a tacit reaffirmation of the Soviet position that withdrawal of
any of these troops is dependent on withdrawal of Western
forces from Germany, US forces from Europe, and a change
in the orientation of West Germany.

While the declaration holds out the promise
to the Satellites of greater internal independence in economic
affairs and withdrawal of Soviet advisers, it also places great
emphasis on the Warsaw pact as a unifying system necessary
to protect and maintain Communist control. In stating that it
"is ready to examine with other socialist countries" the sta-
tioning of Soviet troops on their territory, the declaration as-
serts that this should take place only with the agreement of the
state concerned as well as agreement between participants in
the pact. In its specific references to the Hungarian situation,
the statement also implies that withdrawal of Soviet troops is
subject to negotiations with "other participants of the Warsaw
treaty" as well as the local government.

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 12
[PAGE 14]
6. TITO URGES HUNGARIANS TO SUPPORT NAGY

Tito, in a letter of 29 October addressed
to the Hungarian Communist Party, calls
for the Hungarians to stop further blood-
shed. He says that the recent measures
taken by the Hungarian leadership show
that the policy of the Hungarian party and government and
the "genuine socialist aspirations of the Hungarian working
people have been merged into one."

Tito regrets the "wrong and harmful policy"
pursued by the past Hungarian regime which produced the
present crisis, but calls on the Hungarian workers to avoid
"undermining the faith of workingmen in socialism and the
essential development of socialist democracy"

The letter says the Yugoslav leadership
does not wish to interfere in the internal affairs of Hungary,
but out of a feeling of solidarity with the "progressive social-
ist aspirations" of the Hungarian people, appeals to the people
to make every effort to end the struggle, "which could have
unforeseeable consequences not only for Hungary but for the
international labor movement."

Comment
Tito's remarks closely parallel the line
now being pushed by the Nagy regime it-
self as well as a Polish statement to the Hungarians sent by
Gomulka and Cyrankiewicz.

The Yugoslavs are apparently worried lest
a continuation of the present Hungarian rebellion lead to either
a non-Communist government in Hungary or to Soviet imposi-
tion of a Stalinist-type regime.

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 13
[PAGE 15]
7. WESTERN EUROPEAN COMMUNIST REACTION TO
HUNGARIAN REVOLT

Communist reaction in major Western
European countries to the Hungarian
revolt ranges from rigid support of
Moscow by the French to an increas-
ingly anti-Soviet position in Italy.

The American embassy in Paris reports
that on 29 October the French Commu-
nist press surpassed itself in defending
the Soviet Union and gloating over the
"defeat" of the insurgents.

The London Daily Worker, on the other
hand, has walked a tight rope in both ab-
horring the "necessity" for the intervention of Soviet troops
against the counterrevolutionaries and in speaking of the
Hungarian workers' "just demands."

The official Italian Communist Party paper
Unita has abandoned its earlier support of the Soviet line blam-
ing counterrevolutionaries for the violence. On 29 October,
party leader Togliatti criticized Hungary for its failure to de-
velop its Communism on an adequate national base and to make
reforms quickly enough. The leadership of the Communist-
dominated labor organization and the fellow-traveling Il Paese
have condemned Soviet intervention in Hungary.

31 Oct 56    Current Intelligence Bulletin    Page 14
[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]

[PAGE 18]

[PAGE 19]
