Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland

The Federation, formed by Britain in 1953 of three dependent areas in differing stages of political evolution, is accorded the status of a self-governing territory handled by the Commonwealth Relations Office as is the keystone territory, Southern Rhodesia. Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland, on the other hand, are under the control of the Colonial Office. Negotiations concerning Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia have been in progress recently.

A meeting at Salisbury between Southern Rhodesian officials including African representatives and Commonwealth Relations Secretary Sandys has resulted in an agreement--subject to British parliamentary approval and a Southern Rhodesian referendum in June. The agreement calls for a bill of rights in the Southern Rhodesian constitution, a dual electoral roll system by which in essence 70,000 white voters will elect 50 representatives and some 50,000 Africans will elect 15 representatives, and a constitutional council to safeguard civil rights with the power to delay discriminatory legislation. In return for Rhodesian acceptance of these pro-African provisions, Britain is to surrender its reserve powers to veto legislation affecting native affairs--one of London's major powers over Southern Rhodesia.

The white segregationist Dominion party has refused to agree to the proposals and will probably wage a bitter campaign against such a settlement. To a lesser extent, there is some dissatisfaction in African circles over the limited gains, and the position of Joshua Nkomo, leader of the National Democratic party, may be weakened by the extremist faction.

The negotiations in London concerning Northern Rhodesia's constitutional reform are proceeding less satisfactorily because of differences over the extent of African participation in the legislature. The Africans demand a clear majority in both the Legislative and the Executive Council. In the Legislative Council they now have nine members out of 30; in the Executive Council, 2 out of 10. African delegates have warned that a failure to reach a satisfactory solution "must lead to unrest" in Northern Rhodesia. In preparation for the possibility of political and/or racial disorders when Britain's Colonial Secretary

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 6
