Adverse Effects of Burmese Army Shake-up

Two brigadiers and nine field-grade officers who were ousted from their commands on 3 February included Burma's most forceful advocates of an active army role in Burmese politics. With Brigadier Maung Maung as their spokesman, they comprised the pro-Western core of army leadership and had pressed General Ne Win for an extension of the American military aid program under way since 1958. Many officers remaining in the army share the views of those relieved, and some, in protest against Ne Win's actions, reportedly plan to avoid combat with Burma's various insurgent forces for three to four months, which would allow internal security to deteriorate seriously.

The American military aid program is in particular jeopardy at this time, both because it was the special project of Brigadier Maung Maung and because General Ne Win sees it as a potential source of embarrassment with the Chinese Communists. Ne Win is said to have argued that while he is neither pro- nor anti-American, "the government of Burma and the army cannot afford to be aligned too closely with any non-socialist ideal whether it be American or Communist."

A further factor affecting the stability of both the government and army in Burma is the marked disaffection of the ethnic minority elements who feel they are discriminated against by the Burman majority. Added to the long-standing Karen insurgency and the Shan dissidents, Chin army officers have been reported prepared to mutiny against their Burman superiors, and one Kachin unit has deserted. Karens, Chins, and Kachins are upset by Burmese plans to establish Buddhism as the state religion; Kachin civilians recently rioted and stoned a train in protest. Many Kachins in North Burma feel their elected leaders are incapable of supporting their interests against the Burmans. So strong is this feeling that one hereditary chieftain was disowned by his following and recently committed suicide.

14 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 5
