this move was probably taken with Soviet knowledge, it does not appear to represent a shift from the Soviet policy of avoiding a Berlin crisis at this time.
(Backup, Page 3)

Burma: The recent purge of senior Burmese Army officers favorably disposed toward the West has removed the principal proponents of army resistance to Prime Minister U Nu's policy of closer relations with Communist China. One effect of this may be decreased receptivity to United States materiel and training assistance. With the removal of some of the army's most able commanders, the government's anti-insurgent campaign may be adversely affected.
(Backup, Page 5)

Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland: The outcome of the current talks between Rhodesian and British officials concerning constitutional changes which would increase African influence in the British protectorate of Northern Rhodesia may determine whether the Federation breaks up. The Federation's prime minister reportedly has stated that white-controlled Southern Rhodesia will leave the Federation if London insists, as now seems likely, on an African majority in the legislature of Northern Rhodesia. The American consul general in Salisbury views the next weeks and months as critical.

*On 12 February the federal government called up Northern Rhodesian territorial reserves to be ready for possible disorders, which may arise when London announces the new constitution for Northern Rhodesia. Africans have held large rallies and are reportedly ready to engage in violence if their demands for franchise and representation are not met. (Backup, Page 6)

North Vietnam - Africa: North Vietnam is moving to expand further its international contacts, particularly with the new African states. A North Vietnamese government delegation was asking permission to visit Cairo on an African trip that will include stops in Morocco, Guinea, Mali, and Nigeria. Guinea and Mali--in addition to Cuba--recognized North Vietnam last year; Cairo is host to a permanent North Vietnamese trade delegation but does not formally recognize the Communist regime. In the past several months, North Vietnam also has sent trade and cultural delegations to promote closer ties in the Middle East and in Indonesia.
(Backup, Page 8)
