[PAGE 01]
DOS REVIEW
COMPLETED

8 September 1955
Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

2. PRESSURE GROWING FOR REDUCTION OF CHINA
TRADE CONTROLS (page 4).

3. CANADA FAVORS EARLY RECOGNITION OF CHINESE
COMMUNIST REGIME (page 5).

6. COMMENT ON ANTI-GREEK RIOTING IN TURKEY
(page 8).

THE FORMOSA STRAITS
(page 9)
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
2. PRESSURE GROWING FOR REDUCTION OF CHINA
TRADE CONTROLS

"Very few" COCOM members are
inclined to support retention of the
present strict controls over trade
with the Communist Far East, ac-
cording to the American COCOM
delegation in Paris. The French proposal to reduce
controls on trade with the Communist Far East to the
level of restrictions against the Soviet bloc is likely to
receive strong support from Japan, Denmark, and
Portugal. Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg,
Norway, and Italy would probably continue to favor re-
duction of controls.

Turkey, probably Greece, and possi-
bly Canada can be expected to follow the American lead
to maintain the status quo. Britain and West Germany
clearly favor reduction, but it is not clear how far they
will go in the face of American opposition.

Comment

Barring a Far Eastern crisis, it
appears likely that a strong initiative
to abolish or reduce the China differential will dominate
the COCOM Consultative Group meeting later this year.
One effect of such a reduction would be to vitiate the UN
resolution of May 1951 prohibiting strategic trade with
Communist China and North Korea. This resolution is
based directly on the UN resolution of February 1951 de-
claring Communist China an aggressor. The latter reso-
lution is a major obstacle to consideration of Peiping's
membership in the UN.

The British and French are already
pressing for re-examination of controls on trade with the
entire Sino-Soviet bloc as a matter of urgency and regard-
less of the outcome of any international conference.
(Concurred in by ORR)
[PAGE 06]
3. CANADA FAVORS EARLY RECOGNITION OF CHINESE
COMMUNIST REGIME

Canadian external affairs minister
Pearson has informed the United
States embassy in Ottawa that the
Canadian government strongly be-
lieves the Peiping regime should be recognized "sooner
rather than later," possibly in a year. He said the ac-
tion should be taken, if only to obtain first-hand infor-
mation from Peiping.

Canada has no intention of pressing
for the admission of Communist China to the UN now,
Pearson indicated, and will probably support the United
States' position at the forthcoming General Assembly
session. He said his own recent public statement favor-
ing admission of Peiping was a trial balloon.

Comment

Canada has tended to favor establish-
ment of relations with the Chinese
Communists since early 1953. Pearson's remarks sug-
gest that Canada finds no substantial reasons for further
delay but will be guided as to timing by the views of
Britain and other countries whose general attitude it
shares.

Canada has indicated that it would
support a Belgian proposal to establish a UN study com-
mission on the Chinese representation issue.
[PAGE 07]

[PAGE 08]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 09]
6. COMMENT ON ANTI-GREEK RIOTING IN TURKEY

The rioting in Istanbul and Izmir on
6 September indicates that the wide
breach which has developed in recent
months between Greece and Turkey at
the diplomatic level has spread to the
general public.

The riots were apparently spontaneous,
but the Ankara government is searching for evidence of
Communist involvement. According to observations by the
American consul general in Istanbul, the police stood idly
by or cheered the mob which was looting shops. Only later
did troops supported with tanks restore order.

Popular emotions now running high in
both Greece and Turkey will probably be sharply controlled
by the two governments. In relations between the countries,
however, antagonisms which have been created by the Cyprus
issue will increase mutual recriminations over other issues
and seriously reduce area defense co-operation.
[PAGE 10]
BIWEEKLY SUMMARY
(25 August-7 September 1955)

THE FORMOSA STRAITS

Report of the IAC Current Intelligence Group
for the Formosa Straits Problem

1. Military activity in the area was extremely quiet
apart from increased artillery shelling begun on 2 Septem-
ber by the Chinese Nationalists. The shelling rose to a
high on 4 September, when the Communists fired 253 rounds
and the Nationalists fired 1,358. The situation returned to
normal on 6 September. This activity is not believed to sig-
nify any impending attack by the Communists.

3. Another Chinese Communist railway engineer divi-
sion (the Fifth Railway Engineer Division) has been identi-
fied and located in Fukien Province. This makes a total of
six such divisions now accepted as engaged in construction
of the projected railway that will connect Amoy with the main
trunk line south of the Yangtze River.
[PAGE 11]
5. Peiping continued to devote only perfunctory at-
tention to the Formosa Strait question during the past two
weeks. However, the tone of Peiping propaganda dealing
with US policies in Asia became more critical than it had
been during the early weeks of the talks at Geneva between
US and Chinese Communist representatives.
[PAGE 12]
