[PAGE 01]
28 August 1951

Copy No. CI-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. French ready to approve Greek and Turkish admission to NATO (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Communists can support 46-division attack for 26 days (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. British and US officials advise against intervention in Saar issue (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

French ready to approve Greek and Turkish admission to NATO:

Unqualified French approval of NATO member-
ship for Greece and Turkey will probably be
forthcoming this week.
Although the cabinet had not
officially acted on the question, Foreign Minister Schuman had secured enough
support to insure approval.

NATO Standing Group reports some progress toward the acceptance of French
views on the distribution of command posts in the Mediterranean area.

Comment: The French have abandoned their con-
ditional approval of two weeks ago. France has been jealous of US and UK in-
fluence in the Eastern Mediterranean, but the Foreign Office probably now be-
lieves that the Standing Group will extend its control eastward and thus pro-
tect French interests in the area.

FAR EAST

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
3. Communists can support 46-division attack for 26 days:

The Far East Command estimates that enemy for-
ces have accumulated sufficient supplies to sup-
port the 28 Chinese Communist and 18 North
Korean divisions currently accepted south of the
39th parallel in a 26 day attack. This estimate is based on observation of over
35,000 vehicles moving southward in forward areas during the period from
23 June to 22 August and indicates the largest supply build-up during the Korean
war.

Although in all previous offensives the enemy had
successfully accumulated stockpiles in forward areas prior to opening the
attack, the enemy's inability to move supplies forward to exploit any successes
has been his outstanding deficiency. The Far East Command suggests that the
enemy may have attempted to remedy this shortcoming and that he may be able
to launch another offensive with a much improved supply capability immediately
behind the front.

- 4 -
[PAGE 05]

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

6. British and US officials advise against intervention in Saar issue:

Both the US Embassy in Paris and the British
Foreign Office advise against the injection of
the Saar issue into discussions with the French
in the near future, on the grounds that it might
create an atmosphere unfavorable to agreement
on more important problems.

The US Embassy in Paris also believes that even
an inquiry on the Saar question might be regarded by the French as fur-
ther US pressure for French concessions to Germany. Moreover, it would
probably lead the French to endeavor to "nail down US support" for their
proposed settlement that might be more "generously" formulated if addi-
tional time were allowed before definitive positions were taken.

Both the US Embassy in Paris and the British
Foreign Office comment that recent public statements by Schuman and
Adenauer justify optimism concerning an early solution of the issue.

Comment: The US High Commissioner in Bonn
previously commented that the 3 August reply of the Western Allies to
Chancellor Adenauer's 29 May protest against the Saar Government's pol-
icies settled little, and that the issue remained controversial.

- 6 -
[PAGE 07]
