[PAGE 01]
10 October 1951
Copy No. 47

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA and DOS review(s)
completed.

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Comment on murder of British High Commissioner in
Malaya (page 3).

NEAR EAST

3. Iranian Prime Minister desires to avoid Security Council
consideration of oil dispute (page 4).

EASTERN EUROPE

4. Yugoslavia attempts to circumscribe size and authority of US
military aid staff (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

5. French popular support of European Defense Forces confused by
East German "unity" proposals (page 6).

****
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Comment on murder of British High Commissioner in Malaya:

The US Consul General in Singapore
concludes that the murder of High Commissioner Gurney on 6 October
will probably convince the notoriously noncommittal Chinese population
of Malaya that cooperation with the British is a dangerous policy.

The US representative also transmits the
unofficial views of the office of the Commissioner General for
Southeast Asia that the incident will arouse the British Government to
a greater awareness of the serious Malayan situation, be a strong
boost to bandit morale, increase dissatisfaction with security operations,
and possibly call for substitution of stiffer measures.

[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST

3. Iranian Prime Minister desires to avoid Security Council
consideration of oil dispute:

Prime Minister Mossadeq prefers to settle
the British-Iranian oil dispute by prior
negotiations and to avoid Security Council
action. Mossadeq expressed this sentiment
in an interview with Assistant Secretary of
State McGhee and US United Nations delegates, and added that the
strong statement which he must make in the Security Council would
preclude successful negotiations. Therefore he suggested a delay of
six days during which an agreement could be sought.

Comment: There is no reason to assume
that Mossadeq is willing to negotiate on terms more favorable to the
British than those previously offered. Resumption of negotiations,
however, might avoid the dilemma of an Iranian refusal to comply with
a UN recommendation. The USSR would similarly not be given the
opportunity of posing in the UN as the champion of Iran.

[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE

4. Yugoslavia attempts to circumscribe size and authority of US military
aid staff:

The Yugoslav Government has requested
amendment of the US-Yugoslav bilateral
military aid agreement to specify that the
US military advisory group operate as
part of the office of the Military Attache, and not directly under the
control of the US Ambassador. It also insists that the US military staff
total not more than 15 or 16, and that US observation of the use of arms
supplied by the US be confined to Yugoslav proving grounds.

Comment: Although the draft of the bilateral
military aid agreement was handed to the Yugoslav Government on
5 September, Yugoslav efforts to circumscribe the size and authority of
the US military group have delayed its signature. The Yugoslav
Government has resisted a US compromise plan that the US military
supervisory group initially total 30 persons operating as part of the US
Embassy and responsible to the Ambassador.

Yugoslav military officials have also
attempted to limit the supervisory powers of the group. The Yugoslav
attitude can probably be explained in part as an attempt to avoid a
repetition of its experience with the Soviet military mission prior to
the Cominform break; it also reflects the regime's deep-rooted
suspicions of the West.

[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

5. French popular support of European Defense Forces confused by East
German "unity" proposals:

The US Embassy in Paris reports that the
East German "unity" proposals have
confused the current of French opinion
favorable to the European Defense Forces
plan, but have not reversed it. The virtual absence of non-Communist
opposition to any German military contribution whatsoever is considered
by the Embassy as "perhaps the most outstanding feature of public opinion
development."

Should the USSR demonstrate, however,
that it is prepared to make real concessions in its campaign for German
"unity," French public opinion "would be very profoundly affected."

Comment: US officials in Berlin recently
warned that the East German "unity" campaign might lead France to
reconsider its German policy. It is unlikely, therefore, that the
defense plan will be abandoned by the French Government under any
foreseeable international circumstances, inasmuch as this plan is an
essential phase of the integration of Europe. The French are in-
creasingly inclined to view such integration as essential.
