[PAGE 01]
26 November 1952
Copy No. 5
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
TOP SECRET SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. Bolivia reportedly selling strategic minerals to the USSR (page 3).
2. Burma to take stand against forced repatriation of Korean POW's (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
3. Iraqi soldiers cheered looting of US information office in Baghdad (page 4).
4. Prague population assumes charges in Communist trial are true (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE
7. Possibility of Austrian People's Party coalition with extreme rightists (page 6).
8. Danish Government to negotiate with US concerning NATO bases (page 6).
9. Spanish Communists ordered to create fifth column for war sabotage (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. Bolivia reportedly selling strategic minerals to the USSR:
In response to a Bolivian offer the Soviet Embassy in Buenos Aires signed a contract on 27 October for 1,000 tons of tin, 2,000 tons of lead and 2,000 tons of zinc concentrate.

The agreed price for the tin is substantially above world market levels and delivery of the tin and lead is reportedly to be made within 120 days to the free port of Antwerp.

Comment: This and a reported offer of 9 September to buy Bolivian tungsten, lead, and zinc are indications of the renewed Kremlin policy to expand trade with Latin American countries. The need for these imports to meet the Soviet Orbit's military and industrial requirements is indicated by premium prices paid.

Bolivia's attempt to sell tin to other than its traditional markets is also illustrated by an offer this month to West Germany.

2. Burma to take stand against forced repatriation of Korean POW's:
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

3. Iraqi soldiers cheered looting of US information office in Baghdad:
Iraqi soldiers cheered the mob as it looted the US Information Service premises in Baghdad on 23 November, according to Ambassador Berry.

The soldiers had been stationed there in three armored cars to protect the building.

The Ambassador had repeatedly protested to Iraqi authorities concerning the inadequate police protection given the building. The Chief of Police refused to fire on the people who were shooting at the firemen attempting to save the building.

The day after the rioting, Embassy employees visiting the USIS offices were hissed and booed and two of them received minor injuries.

Comment: The sympathy exhibited by police and army elements for the anti-American, anti-British rioting shows the growing strength of intemperate Iraqi nationalism.
[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE

6. Prague population assumes charges in Communist trial are true:
The American Embassy in Prague reports that popular reaction to the current Communist trial is based almost exclusively on the assumption that the charges against the defendants are true. The reaction of pro-Westerners and those who are disillusioned with the Communist regime is that the accused are "fools" since they were caught. The Embassy states that the trial is apparently succeeding to a considerable extent in rallying the support of waverers who are dissatisfied with material shortages and increased security measures.
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE

7. Possibility of Austrian People's Party coalition with extreme rightists:
Foreign Minister Gruber has warned American Embassy representatives in Vienna that if the Socialists receive more seats than the People's Party in February's parliamentary elections, the latter will feel obliged to form a coalition with the right-wing Union of Independents. This would, he stated, increase Soviet opposition to the government and might provoke Socialist cooperation with the Communists.

Comment: Austrian political leaders have renewed their "threat to the coalition" argument on several occasions recently in an effort to justify policies otherwise unacceptable to the United States. Whether or not any real threat to the People's Party's plurality exists is not yet clear; any serious loss of strength, however, would jeopardize its continued cooperation with the Socialists.

8. Danish Government to negotiate with US concerning NATO bases:
Foreign Minister Kraft has informed Ambassador Anderson that a resolution will be presented to parliament by 15 January authorizing the government to work out an agreement with the United States for the development and use of NATO airfields in Denmark. He anticipates no serious difficulty in securing approval.

Comment: To obtain American funds for the construction of airfields, Denmark must give some form of written assurance that the United States may use these fields at any time in accordance with NATO plans. The Danish Government wishes to proceed without undue publicity, and particularly without arousing suspicion of a secret agreement at home or abroad.
[PAGE 07]
9. Spanish Communists ordered to create fifth column for war sabotage:
Madrid police have uncovered "secret instructions from abroad" for the creation of a fifth column of dissatisfied Spanish groups that might be useful to the Communists in the event of war. The police have been alerted to ferret out any Communist cell members who may be attempting to carry out this program.

Comment: Reports of skirmishes between Communists and the civil guard have been increasing. A raid on a Madrid Communist cell in late October netted 30 prisoners and allegedly compromised communications from abroad.

Although overt Communist activity has been effectively suppressed throughout Spain, the hard core of party members has increased its intelligence collection activities while leftist labor groups, disillusioned with the strengthening of US-Spanish ties, are being urged to accept Communist leadership.
