NEAR EAST

6. Talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan continue:

The US Charge in Kabul reports that the informal talks in Kabul between Colonel Shah of Pakistan and Faiz Mohammad Khan of Afghanistan are about to be interrupted while Shah returns to Karachi for consultation. While the basic viewpoints of the two governments remained unchanged, Colonel Shah intimated to the US Charge that he feels something has been accomplished.

Comment: The US has been actively promoting a settlement of the frontier dispute involving Afghanistan and Pakistan. While the situation has looked nearly hopeless for many months, the present informal, but government-sponsored, talks are the first glimmer of hope. Since the basic positions of the two governments are almost diametrically opposed and since both governments have public opinion to reckon with, a solution to the dispute is still distant.

7. Iraqi Prime Minister interested in solution of Iranian oil problem:

Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Said has suggested to the UK and US Ambassadors in Baghdad that Iranian Foreign Minister Kazemi might be persuaded to exert a modifying influence on Prime Minister Mossadeq in the oil issue. Nuri suggested that he might be persuaded to do so through his many friends in Turkey.

Comment: The Iraqi Prime Minister and other Iraqi politicians are greatly interested in the present Iranian oil nationalization, for they see in it a wedge for increasing Iraq's share in the profits of the Iraq Petroleum Company. With this in view, Prime Minister Nuri requested the Saudi Minister in Baghdad in early April to secure certain date on the newly negotiated contract between Saudi Arabia and Arabian American Oil Company. Nuri's suggestion that Kazemi might be useful in the Iranian oil crisis is a somewhat dubious one. Kazemi, who has served as Iranian Ambassador to Iraq and Turkey, probably made friends in both countries during his tenure as Ambassador, but has been subsequently reported as persona non grata in both countries.
