Pakistan and Nepal Negotiating to Establish Diplomatic Relations

Nepalese Prime Minister Koirala's announcement on 12 September that his country and Pakistan are negotiating regarding the establishment of diplomatic relations is likely to cause irritation in New Delhi and may wipe out some of the good will created by Prime Minister Nehru's talks with Pakistani President Ayub on 1 September.

Despite the fact that Nepal is recognized as an independent country, India considers it and the other Himalayan border states of Sikkim and Bhutan to lie within its own special sphere of influence. New Delhi has therefore attempted to keep foreign activity in Nepal to a minimum. It is especially sensitive at the present time, when it is taking military precautions and negotiating with both Nepal and Bhutan to prevent further Chinese incursions from Tibet into the subcontinent. In fact, Foreign Secretary Dutt has warned the American Embassy in New Delhi that any US move to establish diplomatic relations with Bhutan would be regarded as a "definitely unfriendly act."

India would find it difficult effectively to protest the establishment of diplomatic relations between Pakistan and Nepal, in view of Nepal's recent expansion of relations with a number of other countries and the proximity of Pakistan as a close South Asian neighbor. However, the Indian Government may press Nepal at least to limit its diplomatic contacts to accrediting its ambassador in New Delhi to Pakistan and the Pakistani high commissioner in New Delhi to Katmandu. Pakistan's interest in developing relations with Nepal at this time presumably derives from its desire to foster defense cooperation on the Indian subcontinent against Chinese Communist expansionism. The Pakistani Government has already approached Nepalese representatives to discuss this matter.

Karachi's concern over Chinese Communist intentions along the Himalayan frontier is suggested by a reported move to strengthen its control over Pakistani territory bordering the Chinese province of Sinkiang. Five platoons of Northern Scouts have been sent to the border state of Hunza, which lies west of Ladakh on the Sinkiang border.

16 Sept 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 4
