[PAGE 01]
14 August 1951
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Central Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
2. US jet reconnaissance aircraft intercepted at 40,000 feet in darkness (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

NEAR EAST
5. Financial situation causing friction between Saudi Arabia and ARAMCO (page 5).

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Tito government not internally endangered (page 6).

LATIN AMERICA
7. Strike reported in world's second largest oil refinery (page 7).

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

[PAGE 04]
2. US jet reconnaissance aircraft intercepted at 40,000 feet in darkness:

Night interceptions of an RB-45 aircraft by a total of seven enemy jets at altitudes of 35,000 to 40,000 feet have recently been reported over the Korean theater.

Four enemy aircraft maintained formation for a period of 25 to 30 minutes while pursuing the RB-45, which was executing evasive maneuvers. At the same time, single interceptions were occurring, including a firing pass from 1,000 feet above while the RB-45 was at 40,000 feet, and a collision course interception by an aircraft that later altered course and pulled abreast of the RB-45. While being pursued, the RB-45 employed 100 percent power, giving a ground speed of approximately 470 knots.

Comment: These interceptions clearly demonstrate the Communists’ ability to accomplish a very difficult mission requiring excellent equipment, highly trained personnel and a high degree of coordination.

These operations described would require an aircraft with a minimum combat radius of approximately 350 nautical miles and a considerable speed advantage over the RB-45, which is the reconnaissance version of the B-45. These attacks could not have been accomplished with the MIG-15 or the Type-15 with the 33-gallon wing tanks currently known to be in use.

[PAGE 05]
It is accepted that trained Chinese crews may already be available to man several submarines, particularly of the small coastal class. Reports that Russian submarines have been transferred to the Chinese Communists have also been numerous and in part supported by sightings of submarines flying the Chinese Communist flag. The evidence, however, is regarded as inconclusive in view of the possibility that the flag may represent merely a Soviet courtesy while in a China port.

SOUTH ASIA

NEAR EAST
5. Financial situation causing friction between Saudi Arabia and ARAMCO:
King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia delivered a diatribe on his dissatisfaction over relations with the Arabian American Oil Company to the US Ambassador in Jidda on 10 August. The King

[PAGE 06]
feels that his honor has been violated by ridicule and insult on the part of ARAMCO officials. Although he refused to be mollified, the King left the matter in the ambassador's hands, stating that he had previously intended to demand the recall of ARAMCO officials.

Subsequently the Finance Minister requested a letter of guarantee on which he could draw up to 50 million dollars on the understanding that ARAMCO would assure payment when due. Such an arrangement, he said, would avert the current crisis with the King.

EASTERN EUROPE
6. Tito government not internally endangered:
US Ambassador Allen in Belgrade reports that although the unpopularity of the Yugoslav Communist regime remains undiminished, the available evidence points to its continued stability. There seems to be a sympathetic popular understanding of the government's military and foreign policies, as well as an unconscious dissociation of certain respected members of the regime, such as Tito, Kardelj and possibly Pijade, from the lower officials responsible for executing the regime's rigorous policies.

The ambassador agrees with the US Military Attache that the Yugoslav Army would fight loyally and, if its organization were disrupted, would resort to localized guerrilla tactics. He concludes that the widespread popular discontent is caused by the continued demand for popular sacrifices after the country's past tribulations.

[PAGE 07]
Comment: The shrewd appeal of the Tito regime to the strong nationalism of the Yugoslav people afforded it internal stability even during the crucial period of the 1950 drought. The Yugoslav Government, although beset with numerous internal difficulties, can effectively cope with the situation.

LATIN AMERICA
7. Strike reported in world's second largest oil refinery:
Workers in the Lago refinery in Aruba, Dutch West Indies, struck on 10 August and the refinery is now operating at reduced capacity on an emergency basis, according to the US Consul. The workers demanded a 20 percent wage increase, refused the company's counter-offer, and repudiated their bargaining committee which had accepted the offer. The Netherlands Government mediator is negotiating.

Comment: The Lago refinery, owned indirectly by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, is second only to Abadan in capacity, having a normal output of approximately 490,000 barrels daily. Labor dissatisfaction has been present for some time in both Aruba and Curacao, and has apparently been brought to a head by the workers' belief that the current international petroleum situation has put them in a strong bargaining position.
