WESTERN EUROPE

11. USSR again violates agreement by rejecting Berlin trade permits:
Soviet authorities in Berlin on 15 October once again rejected a block of over 2000 trade permits submitted to them by West Berlin firms. The head of the West German interzonal trade office views this action as a violation of the conditions agreed to by the East Germans at the time of the signing of the interzonal trade pact on 20 September. He has informed his superiors in the Federal Ministry of Economics that his office can no longer cope with the situation, and has requested further instructions from them.

Comment: Since the signing of the trade pact, the USSR had created a huge backlog of uncleared permits by failing to act on them. It had not, however, gone so far as to reject any permits outright, as it had been doing before the pact was signed, Although this new rejection of a large block of permits appears to be the most obvious violation of the oral agreement to cease harassing measures in Berlin, West German authorities are unlikely to take any strong counteraction unless prodded by Allied authorities. French and British officials have recently indicated a reluctance to adopt strong countermeasures at the present time.

12. Serious strike threat is posed in Belgium:
The Belgian Socialist Trade Union Federation has set 22 October as the date on which a strike will be called among mine, metallurgical and chemical workers, and possibly dockers, unless the Federation's demands for a 40-million-dollar bonus to labor and a low cost housing fund are met. The Christian Trade Union has been "embarrassed" into taking similar action.

High industrial profits for this year, and the increase in the price of bread touched off the Federation's dissatisfaction. Meetings between employers, the government and trade union officials are now taking place to stave off a crisis. The government may be forced into a compromise favorable to the Federation's demands.

Comment: Any curtailment at this time of Belgium's economic effort, especially of its coal production, could have a serious effect on defense production. Coal is in short supply, and the stockpiles, usually large at this time of the year because of summer production, are negligible.

This strike threat, supported by most of organized labor, may serve as a new tactic in the Socialist Party's campaign to force the fall of the present one-party Belgian Government and the calling of parliamentary elections.
