until their demands are met. There is no firm evidence to indicate a relationship between the two seemingly most powerful revolutionary units, the Revolutionary Military Council--recognized by Nagy--and the Transdanubian National Council. They both appear to include Communists and non-Communists. Both seem willing, if Nagy will accede to their basic demands, to recognize his government, at least until peace can be restored and free elections held.

The Transdanubian Council claims the support of the national councils of several West Hungarian counties and military units in the western part of the country, as well as the Hungarian army's 9th Division. It enunciated its demands in a special session on 31 October. These include: (1) the proclamation of Hungarian neutrality at the UN; (2) a free and general election, at the latest by the end of January 1957; (3) the naming of a national council for the interim period with the right to appoint ranking military officers; (4) changes in the national government to ensure adequate representation of "freedom fighters" in the government; and (5) guarantee of the freedom of speech, press, assembly and religion. This regional council, which is now apparently supported by the insurgents at Miskolc, also expressed the view that the rebel demands should be met by the government before individual parties are reconstituted, possibly in fear that the Nagy government would utilize the cover of a mock coalition to hold back on the granting of further demands.

Following Nagy's call for a multiparty system on 30 October, the Smallholders and Peasant Parties were reorganized. However, the Budapest radio reported on 31 October that Bela Kovacs, strongly anti-Communist Smallholder leader, informed a meeting of his party in Pecs that he had not accepted his appointment to the government as minister of agriculture; he now planned to go to Budapest to discuss the political situation with Premier Nagy. Meanwhile, the Social Democratic Party, which continues to refrain from joining the Nagy coalition, announced on the same day its reorganization and the election of Anna Kethely as president.

To maintain his leadership, Nagy continues to work feverishly for an accommodation with the rebels--a
