[PAGE 01]
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

5 November 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
5 NOVEMBER 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR seeking to improve its relations with Greece.
Intensified bloc activity in Ethiopia expected.
Peiping continues its pressure on Indonesia to modify measures against local Chinese.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Israeli intelligence officers express concern over Middle East situation; Ben-Gurion warns Nasir against intervention in Iraq.
UAR orders its agents in Baghdad to lie low for a while.

III. THE WEST
French Communist party reverses itself to line up with Khrushchev's cautious endorsement of De Gaulle's Algerian proposals.

LATE ITEM
Group of influential Saudi Arabians seeking to gain government control with Saud as figurehead.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
5 November 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-Greece: The Soviet Embassy in Athens made an indirect approach to the Greek Government for an invitation for Khrushchev to stop over in Athens before his visit with De Gaulle, according to Foreign Minister Averoff, who said the proposed visit was rejected as "not opportune." A Greek newspaperman was used to make the approach, presumably to avoid the risk of a formal refusal, but probably also to ensure publicity. Averoff on 3 November also stated that the Soviet ambassador has repeatedly urged that Averoff and Prime Minister Karamanlis visit Moscow, using the line that now that Khrushchev and President Eisenhower are exchanging visits, "What are you Greeks afraid of?" (Page 1)

Bloc-Ethiopia: In a survey of recent Ethiopian-bloc developments, Ambassador Bliss in Addis Ababa concludes that the bloc is moving rapidly to exploit the Emperor's visit to Moscow in July. The ambassador foresees an intensified Soviet cultural exchange offensive and an expanded information program. (Page 2)

Communist China - Indonesia: Communist China is exerting more pressure on Djakarta to modify its discriminatory measures against Chinese businessmen. Peiping reportedly has refused to exchange ratification instruments for the dual nationality treaty negotiated four years ago. The Indonesian Government has expressed its intent to carry out, with some qualifications, its decreed restrictions on Chinese, and has taken steps to this end in several areas. (Page 5)
[PAGE 05]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israel:
the possibility of an eruption in the Middle East is more serious now than it has been for some time, reportedly believe Israel should "watch and wait" and be prepared to occupy West Jordan. The Israelis apparently believe that UAR intervention in Iraq would result in chaos in the area, possibly leading to Nasir's domination of Jordan. In a press interview on 3 November, Prime Minister Ben-Gurion warned the UAR that any attempt to stage a coup in Iraq would compel Israel to "reserve freedom of action." Nasir has been concerned about Israel's attitude and has hinted at a desire for Western restraint of Israel in the event the UAR becomes involved in Iraq. (Page 3)

UAR-Iraq:
The Cairo authorities presumably fear that continued activity would provide the Iraqis with an excuse to expel additional UAR intelligence personnel operating under diplomatic cover.

Watch Committee Conclusions: Situations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet bloc action which would jeopardize US interests exist in Laos and in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq.

Laos: Dissident military activity has remained at a low level, but subversive activity continues at a high level. The dissidents continue to have the objective of establishing themselves in a strong position which they could use as the basis for political bargaining or for the expansion of military operations. Direct North Vietnamese military intervention is not likely in the immediate future.

Middle East: The situation in Iraq remains unstable, and the possibility of further assassination attempts or coups remains. In these circumstances, the UAR may become more deeply involved.

5 Nov 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 06]
III. THE WEST

France-USSR: The French Communist party's official admission that its previous denunciation of De Gaulle's proposals for self-determination in Algeria was in error follows Khrushchev's cautious endorsement in his 31 October speech. These developments appear responsive to Paris’ insistence, as a condition for French participation in a summit conference, that the USSR first demonstrate on a world-wide basis its desire for a genuine detente. Several French leaders have recently specified Algeria as the issue on which France expects concrete evidence of Soviet sincerity. (Page 4.)

LATE ITEM

Saudi Arabia: The former Saudi minister of commerce and a group of other influential Saudis outside the royal family hope to obtain real control of the Saudi government if Crown Prince Faysal's illness keeps him out of the country beyond the middle of November. Apparently hoping to capitalize on King Saud's desire to regain power from Faysal, they aim to persuade the King to reassert his authority on 16 November when the princes who sit on the council of ministers reassemble. According to their plan, the king will dissolve the council if it refuses to support him and will send key senior princes to ambassadorial posts abroad. The group plans to assume the important cabinet posts and apparently expects to use Saud as a figurehead, keeping him in line by means of control over Saudi finances.

5 NOV 59 DAILY BRIEF
[PAGE 07]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Continues Effort to Push Detente With Greece

Moscow is continuing to urge Greece, apparently regarded by Soviet leaders as a "soft spot" in the Western defense system, to take advantage of the current international "thaw" to improve relations with the USSR and other bloc countries. The Soviet Embassy in Athens has recently sought an invitation from the Greek Government for Premier Khrushchev to stop over for talks in Athens on his way to visit De Gaulle, according to Foreign Minister Averoff, who said that the proposed visit was rejected as "not opportune." A Greek newspaperman was used to make the approach, presumably to avoid the risk of a direct refusal but probably also to ensure publicity and provide an issue on which the left can criticize the government for failing to improve relations with Moscow.

Averoff stated on 3 November that he had also rejected a proposal by Soviet Ambassador Sergeyev that Averoff and Prime Minister Karamanlis visit Moscow. The Soviet official asked what "you Greeks are afraid of," now that Khrushchev and President Eisenhower are exchanging visits. Sergeyev has also used this line in requesting favorable Greek action on Soviet requests to increase cultural exchanges and to reroute Moscow's air service to Cairo through Athens instead of through Albania.

In recent months Rumania and Bulgaria have attempted to stimulate opposition in Greece to any strengthening of Greece's defense ties with the West, such as missile sites on Greek territory. Rumanian Deputy Premier Joja--the highest ranking Rumanian to visit Greece for several years--is talking with Averoff and other officials, presumably to take a new sounding of Athens’ attitude toward bloc schemes for closer Balkan collaboration. Recent developments suggest that bloc leaders are planning to renew their bid for a conference of Balkan-Adriatic countries to consider an atom-free zone in the area.
[PAGE 08]
Soviet Bloc Scoring Gains in Ethiopia

In a survey of recent Soviet bloc activities in Ethiopia, Ambassador Bliss in Addis Ababa concludes that the bloc is moving to exploit the Soviet "breakthrough" scored by agreements signed during the Emperor's visit to Moscow in July. The initial group of Soviet specialists, due to arrive shortly in Ethiopia to conduct economic studies related to the USSR's $100,000,000 aid agreement, will be followed by more or less permanent personnel. A 20-man Czech economic mission is expected by the end of the year to discuss utilization of the $20,000,000 credit which the Emperor subsequently negotiated in Prague.

The ambassador foresees an intensified Soviet cultural exchange offensive and an expanded information program--possibly including a cultural center--as a result of the Soviet-Ethiopian agreement in July to expand cultural contacts. He reports that Moscow appears to have attracted appreciable support from "fellow-travelers and neutralists."

Poland, seeking to exploit Ethiopia's increased receptivity to bloc overtures, is exerting considerable pressure to expand trade in the Horn of Africa. Warsaw plans to establish a legation in Addis Ababa by January. Bulgaria recently opened a legation in Ethiopia, and the first Ethiopian students to accept bloc scholarships are to receive technical training in Czechoslovakia.
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Israeli Intelligence Assesses Middle Eastern Situation

The American Embassy in Tel Aviv reports that Israeli intelligence estimates that the possibility of a general war in the area now is more serious than it has been for some time.

The outbreak of hostilities, according to the estimate, depends on developments in Iraq and on whether Nasir has enough confidence in the stability of Syria to undertake intervention in Iraq. An Israeli Foreign Ministry source believes UAR Field Marshal Amir's assignment in Syria is limited to efforts to stabilize affairs and reduce restiveness and does not imply preparations for an invasion of Iraq.

Israel should be prepared, if Nasir moves, to mobilize and occupy West Jordan as a defensive move. The Israelis apparently believe UAR intervention in Iraq would result in widespread chaos which could lead to Nasir's domination of Jordan. The Israeli estimate contends that Jordan's King Husayn, also disturbed over UAR intentions toward Iraq, has approached Qasim regarding some type of arrangement for mutual military support. It is extremely unlikely that such an approach has occurred.

Nasir, in his contingent planning vis-a-vis Iraq, has been concerned about Israel's attitude and has hinted at a desire for Western restraint of Israel in the event the UAR becomes involved in Iraq.

The apprehension in Israel and the UAR led on 4 November to an air clash along the Israeli-Egyptian border. Tel Aviv radio claims that four Egyptian MIG-17s entered Israeli air space but were driven off after a short fight. Cairo radio contends that six Israeli Mysteres violated Egyptian air space and that in the ensuing battle one Israeli plane was hit.
[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

French Communist Shift on Algeria Aligns Party With Recent Moscow Line

The admission by the French Communist party (PCF) central committee on 4 November that it had been in error in denouncing French President de Gaulle's 16 September proposals for self-determination in Algeria echoes Soviet Premier Khrushchev's cautious endorsement of the program before the Supreme Soviet on 31 October. Although the PCF shift was facilitated by the liberal turn De Gaulle has given Algerian policy, the timing of these developments suggests that the USSR wishes to appear responsive to the French cabinet communique of 16 October. This document, reportedly drafted personally by De Gaulle, called for evidence of relaxation of tension around the world as the major precondition for French participation in any East-West summit talks.

The French view that the Algerian issue provides an immediate test for the professed Soviet desire for a relaxation of tensions was publicly pointed up last week end in speeches by two leaders close to De Gaulle--French National Assembly President Jacques Chaban-Delmas and President of the Assembly Foreign Affairs Committee Maurice Schumann. Most Frenchmen appear convinced that their difficulties in Algeria would diminish considerably if the USSR were to cease its support of Arab-sponsored anti-French resolutions in the UN and its indirect backing of the rebels in the form of arms shipments from the satellites and material aid to the refugees.
[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 12]
