Comment: Chinese Communist aid to the Viet Minh has recently more than doubled in quantity and Chinese Communists for a long time have been providing advice on strategy. So far, however, there is no evidence that the present campaign is a prelude to a Chinese Communist invasion of Southeast Asia.

5. Thai political refugee reportedly organizing Thai government-in-exile:
Tiang Sirikhan, an influential leftist politician who fled from Thailand last December, is in Rangoon organizing a Thai "government-in-exile" consisting of supporters of exiled former Premier Pridi, in addition to maintaining liaison with leftist elements in Burma and Thailand, Tiang might be in contact with the new "Free Laos Government."

Comment: Tiang was arrested in 1948 on charges of fomenting a separatist movement in northeast Thailand, but was later released for lack of evidence. At the time of his disappearance, the Thai police announced that Tiang had fled to Burma, but later intimated that he may have gone to Indochina.

Tiang was a staunch supporter of Pridi, whose name has frequently been mentioned in connection with Communist plans to take over Thailand.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

6. Progress made toward settlement of Anglo-Saudi Arabian dispute:
Saudi Arabian acceptance of arbitration as a means of settling its dispute with Britain over the Buraimi oasis is a step forward, according to the US Consul General in Dhahran. The Saudis have not specifically referred to "arbitration," but clearly accept it in agreeing "to refer the dispute to a body of competent neutral and unbiased persons."

The Saudi acceptance is embodied in a draft statement agreed on by King Ibn Saud and the British Ambassador in Riyadh; it is still to be approved by London.

Comment: Saudi objection to arbitration and insistence on a plebiscite have been the main obstacles to settling this dispute involving the Trucial Sheikhdoms on the Persian Gulf.

The British Foreign Office is cautiously optimistic, even though not completely satisfied with the statement.

7. Egyptian Communists invite Wafd to join political united front:
Yusuf Hilmi, head of the Communist-front organization "Partisans of Peace," met on 24 April with Wafd leaders to discuss formation of a political united front of Wafdists, Communists and others opposed to the Nagib regime.

Comment: Egyptian Communists, numbering but a few thousand, have not exerted much influence in the past. They participated in anti-British guerrilla activity in 1951-52 in the Suez Canal Zone when they associated themselves with other extremists, including some Wafd adherents.

Their current effort will probably not result in an alliance, but it may bring about public demonstrations; and at this critical point in the Suez negotiations, Nagib and his associates are greatly concerned over public opinion and inclined to follow it.
