[PAGE 01]
9 November 1955
Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. TITO REAFFIRMS VIEWS ON WESTERN PROBLEMS
(page 3).

[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]2. ECUADOR REPORTEDLY RECEIVING CZECH ARMS
MISSION (page 4).

3. BURMA AND POLAND TO EXCHANGE DIPLOMATIC
REPRESENTATIVES[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 5).

4. INDIA INVITES PEIPING TO FORM BORDER COMMISSION
(page 6).

5. SUDAN CABINET MAY FACE CONFIDENCE VOTE
(page 7).

6. BRAZILIAN PRESIDENT TAKES LEAVE OF ABSENCE
(page 8).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 9)
[PAGE 04]
1. TITO REAFFIRMS VIEWS ON WESTERN PROBLEMS

Yugoslavia's President Tito told
Secretary Dulles at Brioni on 6
November that he has no doubt the
USSR fears a revived militaristic
and expansionist Germany. Tito believes the danger
of German as well as Soviet aggression must be con-
stantly kept in mind, since consideration of only one
promotes the other.

He said Germany must be independent,
with the right of limited rearmament, and both Germanies
must take part in the reunification process, which he felt
would be slow and very gradual. Tito thought there was
no danger of East Germany "swallowing" West Germany.
He suggested that a solution to the question of European
security would facilitate the settlement of the German
problem.

Commenting on the Middle Eastern
situation, which he saw as a real danger, Tito said the
West should stress to the Arabs that Israel "has become
a fact of life and must be recognized by them." He added
that he would particularly stress this to Nasr when he
visits Egypt in December. He commented that the great
powers should assist the Arabs economically in solving
the problem of the Arab refugees, which is poisoning
relations with Israel.

Tito characterized as untrue reports
that Yugoslavia wants to eliminate the military provisions
of the Balkan pact and claimed they require less emphasis
because of the improved world situation. Tito said he felt
that the pact's usefulness would increase despite Turkish
actions against the Greeks.
[PAGE 05]
2. ECUADOR REPORTEDLY RECEIVING CZECH ARMS
MISSION

Comment Ecuador's motivation in seeking arms,
even from the Soviet bloc, is its long-
standing boundary dispute with Peru, which caused it to
bring charges of impending Peruvian aggression before
the Organization of American States in early September.
Ecuador has been unable to obtain the arms it desires
from other western hemisphere sources.

There has been no prior evidence that
Czechoslovakia intended to send a mission to Ecuador.
an Ecuadoran arms
purchasing mission was en route to Czechoslovakia and
Poland in early October. Czechoslovakia first displayed
interest in selling arms to Ecuador last January, after
numerous previous approaches by Ecuador. Since then,
considerable negotiations have taken place but no deal is
known to have been consummated.
[PAGE 06]
3. BURMA AND POLAND TO EXCHANGE DIPLOMATIC REPRESENTATIVES

Rangoon to announce on 10 Novem-
ber that Burma and Poland had
agreed to exchange diplomatic rep-
resentatives at the legation level in
the interest of promoting friendship and normal inter-
national relations.

Comment This announcement is designed to
coincide with U Nu's visit to Warsaw.
It also follows close on the conclusion of a three-year
trade agreement between Burma and Poland involving
the annual exchange of 50,000 to 60,000 tons of Burmese
rice for Polish manufactured goods. This raises to 25-30
percent the amount of Burma's rice exports being shipped
to the Orbit.

The establishment of a Polish legation
will bring to four the number of Communist diplomatic
posts in Rangoon.
[PAGE 07]
4. INDIA INVITES PEIPING TO FORM BORDER COMMISSION

Comment on:

The crossing of the Tibet-India border
by Chinese Communist troops near Hoti
into an area which India claims has led
New Delhi to propose to Peiping crea-
tion of a joint commission to settle the ownership of the
territory, according to press reports from New Delhi. In-
dian army forces reportedly have been moved into position
and are now facing the Chinese troops "within shouting dis-
tance." However, an Indian spokesman is quoted as saying
that violence in the area is "quite unlikely."

The Indian gov-
ernment probably has
publicized the inci-
dent to show its dis-
pleasure and to bring
pressure of interna-
tional opinion to bear
on the Peiping rei-
gime to withdraw its
troops. Communist
China has thus far
made no statement
on the matter. In
previous border con-
tacts Chinese forces
have withdrawn.
[PAGE 08]
5. SUDAN CABINET MAY FACE CONFIDENCE VOTE

Sudanese opposition parties--impor-
tant elements of which are subsidized
by the Egyptian government--plan to
raise a parliamentary motion of no
confidence in Prime Minister Azhari's
cabinet and expect to have enough votes to oust it, accord-
ing to the American liaison officer in Khartoum. The
motion is expected to come up between 10 and 16 Novem-
ber.

The US liaison officer believes the vote
will be close, with the odds slightly in favor of Azhari, who
has declared himself in favor of independence rather than
union with Egypt. If the Azhari cabinet is defeated, it
would probably be replaced by a coalition in which the pres-
ent leader of the parliamentary opposition might become
prime minister, since no other group appears strong enough
to govern alone.

Azhari's past record suggests that he
may be able to head off or defeat such a move against him.
While a new Sudanese cabinet might include persons amen-
able to Egyptian influence, the Sudan's basic movement
toward independence would probably be unchanged.
[PAGE 09]
6. BRAZILIAN PRESIDENT TAKES LEAVE OF ABSENCE

Comment on:

President Joao Café Filho of Brazil
has taken indefinite leave of absence
for medical reasons, according to an
official announcement of 8 November.
He has been hospitalized since 3 November, following a
heart attack.

Carlos Luz, president of the Chamber
of Deputies, has become acting president. If Café had
resigned, the Brazilian Congress would have been consti-
tutionally required to elect a new president within 30 days.
Under present circumstances, however, Luz apparently
will serve until Cafe chooses to resume office or until his
term expires on 31 January 1956. In any event, the gov-
ernment is unlikely to initiate any major policy changes
in its few remaining months.

Tension is already high in Brazil be-
cause of reported military plotting to prevent president-
elect Juscelino Kubitschek and vice president-elect Joao
Goulart from taking office at the close of Café's term.
The present changeover injects an additional element of
confusion into the situation.
[PAGE 10]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 8 November)

A clash between
Israeli and Egyptian
forces in the area of
Eilat, Israel's port on
the Gulf of Aqaba, oc-
curred on 8 November.
This is the first fight-
ing in this area since
1949. Egypt and Is-
rael have both threat-
ened action around
Eilat. Nasr once im-
plied that Egypt would
strike back here
rather than in the
north, and Israeli
prime minister Ben-
Gurion has repeatedly
said Israel would act
forcibly to break the
blockade which Egypt
has established at the
mouth of the gulf.
Neither state is be-
lieved to have forces
larger than company
size in the immedi-
ate area. Extensive
fighting around Eilat
would probably also
involve Jordan, whose
territory is only a few
miles distant at this
point. A British
force of one armored
squadron has been
stationed for some
time at Aqaba, Jor-
dan's port within
sight of Eilat.
[PAGE 11]
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]lessened
tension within Israel, with requisitioned buses released
on 6 November and leave granted some Israeli army
personnel over the week end[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]].

Israel's fear that Egypt would counter
the Israeli attack of 4 November by using Fedayeen (fa-
natic Moslem) terrorists appears to have been supported
by two incidents of terrorism on the night of 6 November.

Israel has announced that Foreign
Minister Sharett will leave for the United States on 9
November in an attempt to obtain American arms aid.
(Press)

Communist economic deals with Egypt
may have gone a step forward with a reported offer of over
$21,000,000 worth of wheat from Communist China. Pei-
ping would have some difficulty, however, in supplying a
large quantity, as wheat is not a normal Chinese export
and China's 1955 wheat harvest was only fair.
