South Korea

The cool reception given recent announcements that President Rhee will withdraw from partisan politics and turn the reins of government over to a coalition cabinet suggests that this alone is not enough to rally popular support for the government. Students and professors of Seoul universities predict that unless the government meets basic student demands for new national elections and punishment of police responsible for repressive acts, new disturbances are inevitable when the army leaves the cities. Martial law commander Lt. Gen. Song Yo-chan has warned Rhee that martial law cannot be maintained indefinitely, and that when the time comes for the army to withdraw, the people will once again rise up against the police, who again will be incapable of handling the situation.

Meanwhile, Ho Chong, a highly competent politician and former prime minister, has announced that Rhee has asked him to form a caretaker cabinet until the constitution can be amended to establish a parliamentary form of government in "two or three" months. Ho is one of a number of former lieutenants that Rhee has consulted on the current crisis. Of the group, Ho probably has the greatest personal integrity and possibly commands considerable popular respect, at least in Seoul, where recently as mayor he refused to be a puppet of Rhee's Liberal party.

There is considerable evidence that the amendments planned by Rhee would allow him to retain control by leaving him the power to appoint and dismiss cabinet members. Furthermore, under the proposed amendments the controversial office of vice president would be eliminated and the line of succession altered so that the premier and after him the Speaker of the National Assembly would succeed to the presidency upon Rhee's death. Both offices would likely be filled by men loyal to the regime, in view of the administration's large majority in the legislature.

Home Minister Hong Chin-ki has admitted that the presidential elections on 15 March were rigged to
