[PAGE 01]
12 August 1951

Copy No. C1-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Army and State Department review(s) completed.

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. General Eisenhower would serve as "European Defense Minister" to speed integration (page 3).

5. Ceylon's government fears internal repercussions over rubber shipments to China (page 6).

NEAR EAST

6. Arab states continue intrigue against integrity of Jordan (page 6).

WESTERN EUROPE

9. French pose condition to acceptance of Greece and Turkey in NATO (page 8).
10. Need for Berlin airlift appears to have been exaggerated (page 9).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. General Eisenhower would serve as "European Defense Minister" to speed integration:

US Minister Julius Holmes in London reports a conversation with General Eisenhower as follows:

"He said that no time should be lost in concluding arrangements which would allow a start on German forces. He felt that the European army presented the only feasible means of bringing them into Western defense. He believes that the greatest element of delay will be the agreements and arrangements necessary for a European Defense Minister to function. He is prepared, if he can get satisfactory commitments from the five governments involved, principally France and Germany, to undertake on a temporary basis the functions of European Defense Minister in order to get the practical business of the recruiting, training and formation of the force started.

"He made it clear that he would do this on a personal basis and not as Supreme Allied Commander Europe and that it would naturally have to be for a limited period."

Comment: The concept of a "European Defense Minister," member of no government, arose during the Paris talks on creation of a European army.
[PAGE 04]

[PAGE 05]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
5. Ceylon's government fears internal repercussions over rubber shipments to China:

The Prime Minister of Ceylon has told US Embassy officials that his United National Party, which controls the present government, cannot risk "political suicide" by preventing shipments of rubber from Ceylon to China. He has stated repeatedly that increasingly successful Communist efforts to develop trade in rubber with Ceylon are unfortunate, but nothing now can be done about it. The implication is that Ceylon will not certify under the Kem amendment nor request that an exception be made in its case, despite the foreknowledge that this failure might prejudice the granting of Point IV and other assistance.

Comment: There is a possibility that the United National Party would lose control of the government if it reversed its widely publicized policy of permitting rubber exports to all destinations. There is also a possibility, however, that by conveying the impression that they cannot reverse this stand, the Ceylonese are hoping to obtain a US contract for a large part of Ceylon's annual rubber output.

NEAR EAST

6. Arab states continue intrigue against integrity of Jordan:

The Iraqi Minister is flagrantly continuing the campaign for a union of Jordan and Iraq which was renewed by the Iraqi Prime Minister and the Regent at the time of Abdullah's funeral. It is widely rumored that the Egyptian Legation is agitating for the independence of the western part of Jordan (formerly Arab Palestine) under a mandate of the Arab League. The Saudi Arabian Legation is believed to favor partitioning the country in cooperation with Syria.
[PAGE 08]
The US Minister feels that although there is no evidence of Jordanian acceptance of these maneuvers, they cannot but disturb the internal political situation and the precarious equilibrium that has existed in the Near East since 1948.

Comment: The desires of Iraq in this matter are well known. Egypt, which continues to be interested in the Arab Palestine Government of the former Mufti would presumably wish to create an independent Arab Palestine.

The possible role of Ibn Saud is less clear. Recently, he stated in a note to the US Government that "any attempt to change the present situation in the Middle East will not be agreeable to him" and that it is "unjust" to deprive 'Abdullah's sons of their rights.
[PAGE 09]
WESTERN EUROPE

9. French pose condition to acceptance of Greece and Turkey in NATO:

France will oppose full NATO membership for Greece and Turkey unless they are directly subordinated to the three-power NATO Standing Group. The French reject the idea of a separate command body composed of the present Standing Group members and Turkey.

The US Nato Deputy suspects that the French have long wanted to extend the Standing Group's authority beyond the NATO area. In his view, the French fear that a further diminution of France's authority within the Standing Group would relegate France to a minor European role while UK and US interests would be predominant in the Middle Eastern theater as well as in Europe.
[PAGE 10]
Comment: France has consistently pushed the alternate idea of a regional Mediterranean pact embracing Greece and Turkey. The French have been reluctant to include Greece and Turkey in NATO, partly because they felt that growing Western European integration would be hindered, but even more because they have been increasingly jealous of American and British influence in the Eastern Mediterranean.

The three-power Standing Group is the executive arm of the NATO military committee, and as such has direct control of all NATO forces. The French fear that any change which detracted from the authority of the Standing Group might prejudice their efforts to obtain a greater voice in Eastern Mediterranean matters.

10. Need for Berlin airlift appears to have been exaggerated:

In a sharply worded letter to Mayor Reuter, the Allied Commandants protest that, although they acceded to West Berlin's appeal for aircraft to move goods held up by new Soviet export restrictions, it now appears that the volume of the backlogged shipments has been overestimated and the need for an airlift exaggerated.

The airlift has been arranged on the basis of information that 10,000 to 12,000 tons of goods were backlogged. However, in a 3 August meeting between Allied and West Berlin authorities to consider expanding the airlift capacity, it developed that the West Berlin Senate was having difficulty finding sufficient backlogged cargo to fill the limited number of aircraft being used, and that in fact only 300 tons were available for loading within the next three days.
