Communist China Extends New Economic Assistance
To North Korea

Peiping on 13 October demonstrated its intention to strengthen its political position among the Asian satellites by granting North Korea a loan of $105,000,000. This loan covers equipment and technical aid to build industrial plants for the manufacture of rubber tires, radios, and telecommunications equipment. China will also assist enterprises producing consumer goods and will provide cotton-textile equipment.

A sizable loan from Moscow to North Korea also will probably be forthcoming. Peiping's $50,000,000 loan to Mongolia last May was followed by a Soviet offer of more than $150,000,000. Mongolia has embarked on a Five-Year Plan, and North Korea is beginning an ambitious seven-year program of economic development. Both countries have probably approached Moscow and Peiping for assistance.

North Korea has received large-scale economic assistance from the Sino-Soviet bloc during the past ten years, initially in support of the war effort but since 1953 to sustain rehabilitation efforts and to expand industrial capacity. Excluding military deliveries during the Korean war, the total amount of bloc economic aid is estimated at about $1.2 billion--most of which was in the form of outright grants prior to 1957. The USSR has provided about $500,000,000, while Peiping's contribution has risen with the new loan to some $400,000,000. The terms of the new Chinese credit indicate that Peiping intends to play a more active role in North Korean industrialization, including supplying complete plants, which heretofore have been installed chiefly under the Soviet aid program.

At a party plenum last August Pyongyang pledged "full support" for Moscow's foreign policy line in the current Sino-Soviet dispute on Communist strategy. Since that time, however, North Korean commentary on the subject has indicated reluctance to criticize Peiping. Pyongyang has attacked both "revisionism" and "dogmatism" as "un-Marxist tendencies." In a speech on 10 October, Pak Kum-chol, a leading party spokesman, was especially critical of "revisionism," assailing the "Tito clique and other international revisionists."
