Cambodian Internal Outlook Following Chou En-lai Visit

The visit to Cambodia by Chinese Communist Premier Chou En-lai from 5 to 9 May, coming at a time of serious Cambodian - South Vietnamese friction, may have a far-reaching effect on Cambodia's international outlook, in the opinion of American Ambassador Trimble. While it made relatively little impact on the general public, except for the enthusiastic Overseas Chinese community, Chou made a deep and favorable impression on Cambodian leader Sihanouk, the royal family, and Cambodian officialdom.

The Chinese leader, who came to Cambodia to deepen Sihanouk's preference for a neutral foreign policy and to counterbalance American influence there, apparently was determined to achieve a maximum impact without making any formal commitment to protect Cambodia's borders. Chou En-lai on 8 May made no commitment beyond stating that it was "moral and political" support China was offering and cautiously added that any "other" kind would depend on the needs of Cambodia, the possibilities at Peiping's disposal, and conditions prevailing at the time.

Despite the innocuous joint communique ending the visit, Sihanouk probably looks upon Chou's oft-repeated public pledges of Communist China's support for Cambodia as a guarantee of Cambodian national integrity. Sihanouk, in his personal press organ, The Nationalist, commented on 7 May that the Cambodian people are convinced that Cambodia's escape from the "murder prepared by its neighbors!" is due to the attitude of Communist China.

Sihanouk probably intends to use the threat of Chinese Communist support in disputes with South Vietnam and Thailand, and will be more inflexible than ever. In connection with current difficulties with South Vietnam over several offshore islands in the Gulf of Siam, Sihanouk's hand has been strengthened by Chou's tour of the area in a Cambodian gunboat and his flat statement that they belong to Cambodia.

Whether Sihanouk abandons his policy of strict neutrality will depend largely on future South Vietnamese and Thai policy toward Cambodia. He has repeatedly warned that continued efforts by these countries to undermine him could push him "into the arms of the Chinese Communists."
