Indian Communists Fail to Resolve Party Split

Indian Communist leaders have again failed to resolve the deep division in their party between proponents of a moderate line and those favoring more radical tactics. The showdown expected during the national council's meeting from 6 to 12 May in Calcutta now has been put off until a full-scale party congress is held in January 1961. The council, recognizing its inability to reconcile the differences, has appointed a committee, representing both the moderates and the hard-line extremists, to "study" the problem further and formulate another draft resolution for discussion in January. The party meanwhile is to be guided by the moderate "Amritsar thesis" adopted in 1958, which emphasized a peaceful, parliamentary approach to power.

Several executive meetings held since the party's setbacks resulting from the Sino-Indian border dispute and the Communist electoral defeat in Kerala State have ended in a deadlock over future party policy. The more aggressive "leftist" faction has gained some ground in party circles recently, although the moderates so far have foiled efforts by the extremists to gain control and switch party tactics. The dispute, which began over theory, now seems to be focused on the degree of cooperation which Indian Communists should extend to Prime Minister Nehru and certain "progressive" policies of the Congress party.

Moderate General Secretary Ajoy Ghosh has been granted sick leave for three months, and E. M. S. Namboodiripad, former chief minister of Kerala, will act as party leader during this period. Namboodiripad has long been identified with the faction favoring parliamentary tactics, although he reportedly sided with the radical group in recent intraparty maneuvering.

Ideological confusion among the Indian Communists has been compounded by recent indications of similar differences between Peiping and Moscow. Extremist leaders—representing the "internationalist" viewpoint—have seized on Peiping's Red Flag articles to bolster their advocacy of a harder line, but the moderate faction enjoys the stronger advantage of support from the Soviet party.
