Impasse Developing Over Question of Soviet Trade Representation
In Singapore

the local government's insistence on granting a six-month visa to a Soviet trade official, I. S. Gazov, had developed into a crisis which could affect many aspects of the British position on this island as well as Singapore-Federation relations. An impasse developed between Singapore and the Federation of Malaya at the 19 May meeting of the Singapore Internal Security Council (SISC), the regulatory body responsible for internal security decisions in Singapore. Singapore's Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew refused to back down on the visa question, despite adamant Malayan opposition and implied threats against Singapore.

The UK representatives at the SISC failed in their efforts to reach a compromise under which Gazov would be permitted to stay for six months without a staff or privileged communications and Singapore would agree henceforth not to issue visas to bloc nationals for more than two weeks without SISC approval. Malaya reserved its position until the next meeting of the council, scheduled for 30 May, but since the meeting, Malaya has told British officials that if Singapore persists in its position, the Federation will quit the SISC and close the causeway connecting Singapore with the mainland. Closing the causeway would result in increased customs controls on all commodities and require passports and visas for all travel from Singapore.

The British reportedly are inclined to support the Federation and inform Singapore that the UK is prepared to make the decision stick and to use emergency security measures to cope with any rioting which might break out. In this connection, plans for military action in the event of an emergency are being reviewed.

Under the Singapore constitution, Malaya's withdrawal from the SISC would reduce it to a consultative body. In this event, London could not use it to solve touchy security problems and would be forced to impose its decisions unilaterally and possibly to amend or revoke the constitution in case of serious disagreement. The British would be reluctant to take these steps, in view of their belief that the present government is the best that can be obtained under present conditions in Singapore.

27 May 60 Page 5
