[PAGE 01]
State Department review completed

10 April 1957

Copy No. 134

CURRENT
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

3. TENSION IN GREECE AND TURKEY OVER MAKARIOS

4. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

[PAGE 04]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
3. TENSION IN GREECE AND TURKEY OVER MAKARIOS

Official and popular feeling in Greece and Turkey is becoming increasingly explosive in anticipation of the arrival of Archbishop Makarios in Athens. Ambassador Allen says the Greek government is in a state of extreme irritation and indecision over future Cyprus policy. Allen expects Makarios to be greeted with "tremendous demonstrations" and surrounded immediately by the most extreme proponents of the union of Greece and Cyprus.

Allen and Ambassador Warren in Ankara agree that Makarios' visit to Athens will further damage Greek-Turkish relations for a long time to come. Secretary General Birgi of the Turkish Foreign Ministry told Warren on 6 April that the situation is growing more and more tense and that public opinion toward Britain is "rapidly becoming unpleasant" as a result of the release of Makarios. The Turkish position regarding Cyprus has hardened noticeably since his release, and deputies are now questioning whether the Turkish Cypriots had been wise in refraining from terrorist tactics on Cyprus. American officials in Ankara believe the Turks may use more forceful means than heretofore. Birgi told Ambassador Warren that Turkey would fight if necessary.

Developments following Makarios' arrival at Athens will depend particularly on whether he chooses to arouse Greek emotions against Britain, Turkey or the Karamanlis government. Since his release from detention Makarios has made repeated public statements indicating that he plans to renew his campaign for union of Greece and Cyprus.

[PAGE 06]
4. SITUATION IN INDONESIA

President Sukarno's "extraparliamentary" cabinet will probably undertake as its first project the establishment of a national advisory council, with Communist participation, in accordance with his concept of "guided democracy." Another major point on the cabinet program, as prescribed by Sukarno, is the restoration of the central government's authority throughout the islands.

Moslem dissatisfaction with the cabinet is already evident. Masjumi chairman Natsir has denounced Sukarno's action as unconstitutional and the party has expelled the only member who accepted a cabinet post. The Nahdatul Ulama (NU), which has four representatives in the cabinet, is reported to be divided on the issue of cabinet support. This opposition, however, is unlikely to deter Sukarno and his cabinet will probably operate with reasonable effectiveness---in Java, at least---as long as it retains the support of the army. In addition, Sukarno can be expected to maintain heavy pressure on his opponents, as is indicated by the smear campaign now being conducted by certain Djakarta newspapers against former vice president Hatta.

In Central Sumatra, officials reportedly have stated that if Sukarno persists in pushing his "personal" government, they will continue to ignore Djakarta. "Regional" army officers are expected to continue their support of local political and economic autonomy.
