[PAGE 01]
27 March 1956

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. USSR OFFERS AID AND FRIENDSHIP TO PAKISTAN (page 3).

2. PHILIPPINE PRESIDENT REPORTED CONSIDERING TRADE APPROACH TO THE USSR (page 4).

3. EFFECT OF NEW ANTI-STALIN LINE IN ITALY (page 5).

4. COUP AGAINST BOLIVIAN GOVERNMENT REPORTED PLANNED BY EXILES IN ARGENTINA (page 6).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (page 7)

[PAGE 04]
1. USSR OFFERS AID AND FRIENDSHIP TO PAKISTAN

Comment on:

Soviet first deputy premier Anastas I. Mikoyan, visiting in Karachi, has suggested that Pakistan replace its membership in the Baghdad pact and SEATO with adherence to the "five principles," but indicated this was not a condition for Soviet aid or friendship.

Mikoyan has had at least one long meeting with the Pakistani minister of foreign affairs and the minister of commerce. Additional Soviet trade specialists are to arrive in Karachi next week. The Soviet press and radio have repeated Premier Bulganin's 6 February offer of Soviet assistance in developing atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and Foreign Minister Molotov has hinted that the USSR might be willing to construct a steel mill for Pakistan.

Mikoyan reportedly indicated that if invited, Bulganin and Khrushchev would be pleased to come to Pakistan.

Mikoyan has made a good impression on the Pakistanis. They are reported to have accepted his invitation to send a parliamentary delegation to the USSR. President Mirza has reiterated that Pakistan is not going to compromise its ties with the West. He commented, however, that "a change" has come over the Russians during the past two months--"They used to be very cold. Now they are very warm."

[PAGE 05]
2. PHILIPPINE PRESIDENT REPORTED CONSIDERING TRADE APPROACH TO THE USSR

President Magsaysay has recently mentioned the possibility of approaching the USSR regarding trade.

Magsaysay observed that if the United States "is taking us for granted, it is easy for us to get aid also from the Communists," and said he would send Mike Elizalde, a former ambassador to the United States, to Russia.

Elizalde is said to have stated that he had a visa for Moscow and that serious thought was being given to the possibility of selling surplus sugar and hemp to the USSR.

Comment

Magsaysay is being subjected to heavy pressure by Philippine sugar and tobacco interests to demonstrate the economic benefits of his strong pro-American policies. Pressure from these groups has been accompanied by extensive publicizing of Philippine "grievances" regarding American military bases and the regulation of the wages of Filipino laborers on Guam. Philippine congressmen have lately become much more vocal in criticizing American policies.

It is possible that these various pressures are having an effect on Magsaysay's own thinking.

[PAGE 06]
3. EFFECT OF NEW ANTI-STALIN LINE IN ITALY

Comment on:

Secretary General Palmiro Togliatti's presentation of the new anti-Stalin line to the Italian Communist Party (PCI) is reported to have caused widespread confusion in the party. Under sharp attack at a 22 March meeting of the PCI parliamentary group for having previously concealed information, he admitted having been aware of Stalin's "erroneous position" for many years, but said he did not tell his own party because premature revelation would have resulted in crises for all the Communist movements in the world.

Togliatti in the past has been successful in smoothing over intraparty differences, and it is unlikely that any serious split will develop at this time or that Togliatti's leadership will be seriously challenged.

Pietro Nenni, head of the pro-Communist Italian Socialist Party (PSI), has publicly taken the line that the attack on Stalin should not have been launched without proper historical discussion and that the really positive result of the Soviet Communist Party congress was the acceptance of the principle of "many roads to Socialism."

The American embassy in Rome believes that Nenni's adoption of a different line was probably concerted with Togliatti and that the PSI will succeed in absorbing most of the present discontent and confusion and prevent defections from the extreme left in Italy.

In the nationwide local elections to be held in late spring, the previously apparent trend toward the Nenni Socialists will probably be accelerated by these developments.

[PAGE 07]
4. COUP AGAINST BOLIVIAN GOVERNMENT REPORTED PLANNED BY EXILES IN ARGENTINA

A group of Bolivian exiles in Argentina is planning an attempt to overthrow the Bolivian government of President Paz Estenssoro.

With the exception of the Communists, virtually all anti-Paz groups inside and outside the country, including those in Chile, are said to support the revolutionary attempt.

Comment

Such a revolutionary movement would probably be spearheaded by the Coalition of Anti-Communist Parties, organized in Chile in March 1954, for the purpose of overthrowing the present Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR) government in Bolivia. The coalition has termed the MNR "tyrannical" and "Communist." The dominant group in the coalition is the extreme rightist Bolivian Socialist Falange.

The MNR, despite the Marxist orientation of many of its leaders, always has claimed to be anti-Communist. As its position in Bolivia became more secure, it increased its anti-Communist activities. The Bolivian government is aware of the plotting and appears to be capable of containing any revolutionary attempt launched by the coalition in its present poorly organized state, even if Bolivia's two Communist parties--one Trotskyite--were to co-operate with the coalition.

[PAGE 08]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 26 March)

The Israelis are planning to lower the level of Lake Huleh, above Banat Yacov, by one half.

He says such drainage would involve dynamiting in the demilitarized zone. The British speculate that this action might be an attempt by the Israelis to undermine the UN secretary general's proposed trip. There has been great bitterness between Syria and Israel over the Israeli plan to drain the Huleh swamps, on which work began in the spring of 1951. Despite a UN Security Council resolution of 18 May 1951, the dispute has never been settled. Any work done in the demilitarized zone by Israel will provoke strong Syrian protests.

Two shiploads of troops and equipment, previously reported as being shipped from Jidda to Haqual on the Gulf of Aqaba, were headed for Tebuk, east of the gulf and south of Jordan.

Unloading at Haqual, including jeeps and trucks, was then in process.

Saudi Arabia, with Egyptian co-operation, was planning to improve the Saudi airfield at Tebuk and to construct barracks there.

In line with the continuing Saudi and Egyptian build-up in the Gulf of Aqaba area, the landing field at Sharm el Shaikh is being improved.

29 officers and 138 non-commissioned officers would arrive in Belgrade "about the 22nd" from Warsaw on their way back to Cairo. These officers and men have been receiving naval training under Soviet supervision at the

[PAGE 09]
Polish port of Gdynia.

The Soviet bloc has agreed to supply Egypt with two destroyers and two submarines. At least 12 motor torpedo boats and several small landing craft have already been delivered. Egypt will also receive two destroyers from Britain.
