[PAGE 01]
2 June 1959
Copy No. C 52

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
2 JUNE 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
USSR seeks to use West German Socialists to discredit Bonn's position at Geneva.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Sudan--Leaders of abortive 22 May coup arrested.
Kuwait agrees to weapons stockpile for emergency use by British troops.
Jordanian attache offers to work with UAR against Amman government.

III. THE WEST
Nicaragua--Unity of opposition elements prompts Somoza to declare state of siege.

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
2 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR- Geneva: Soviet officials are urging the West German Social Democrats (SPD) to push their plan for reunifica-
tion and disengagement more actively as a means of "getting
the conference off dead center." Foreign Minister Gromyko
has endorsed the idea of an all- German committee, a feature
of the SPD plan which calls for East-West parity in such a
committee, as well as a neutral Central European zone, in-
cluding Germany, free of foreign troops and nuclear weapons.
Gromyko probably believes the plan can be exploited to em-
barrass the Bonn government and bring further pressure on
the Western position. SPD party chiefs have instructed their
representatives at Geneva to press the plan in discussions
with the various delegations.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA- AFRICA

Sudan: Brigadiers Shannan and Abdullah, the two senior
army officers who forced their way into the Supreme Council
in March and were the leading personalities behind the abor-
tive coup on 22 May, have been arrested along with a number
of junior officers. This action would appear to in-
dicate that General Abboud and his supporters are more deter-
mined and more confident of their strength than before the
army commanders' conference held late last week. Clashes
between loyal and dissident troops are still possible, however,
(Page 3)

[PAGE 05]
Kuwait-UK: Kuwait
will permit Britain to stockpile tanks as well as other mili-
tary equipment for use by British troops who would be brought
in during an emergency. This arrangement is intended to as-
sure timely and effective assistance against any possible mili-
tary threat from Iraq.

Jordan: Colonel Salih Shara, Jordanian military attaché
in West Germany and brother of Jordan's recently arrested
army chief of staff, has approached UAR representatives in
Bonn with proposals for political action against the Jordanian
Government, according to a UAR message on 22 May. None
of the proposals is urgent, the message said. Colonel Shara
was "exiled" to Bonn last winter because of implication in an
antiregime conspiracy uncovered in June 1958. (TOP SE-
CRET EIDER) (Page 4)

III. THE WEST

Nicaragua: President Somoza's imposition on 30 May of
a modified state of siege is designed to cope with current in-
vasion attempts and with a general strike threatened, in an
unusual show of unity, by opposition groups ranging from Com-
munists to wealthy landowners.

A Costa Rican airliner, said to be carrying 50 to 60 revolu-
tionaries to Nicaragua, was shot down by the Nicaraguan air force
on 1 June. The Costa Rican Government reportedly has seized the
airlines employed for this flight in an effort to put an end to air
incursions into Nicaragua from Costa Rica.
(Page 5)

2 June 59 DAILY BRIEF ii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR Seeks to Capitalize on West German Social Democratic
Unification Plan

Soviet and East German officials are urging the West Ger-
man Social Democrats (SPD) to push their plan for reunification
and disengagement more actively as a means of breaking the
deadlock at Geneva. In meetings on 20 and 24 May Soviet Am-
bassador to West Germany Smirnov expressed the belief that
the plan could serve as a means of getting the conference "off
dead center" and declared that the SPD press should be mo-
bilized to give the plan international publicity.

Soviet leaders probably believe that the idea of an all-Ger-
man committee with equal representation as well as other ele-
ments of the SPD plan--prohibition of nuclear weapons and with-
drawal of foreign troops from a zone in Central Europe includ-
ing Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary and with-
drawal of these states from NATO and the Warsaw Pact--can
be exploited to embarrass the Bonn government and bring fur-
ther pressure on the Western position.

Foreign Minister Gromyko on 18 May endorsed the idea of
an all-German committee and on 25 May suggested a four-power
declaration favoring talks by the two German states on reunifica-
tion.

An East German party (SED) propaganda directive of 26
May called for popularization of Gromyko's proposal of the pre-
ceding day for all-German negotiations on reunification and in-
dicated that the party will seek to get the SPD to expound and
publicize its plan at Geneva.

Since the plan was first formulated in March, the SPD has
consistently rejected joint activity with the SED in promoting it.
The SPD appears, however, to have sounded out East German
reactions through intermediaries in Geneva. Prior to the con-
ference Deputy Chairman Wehner, who drafted the plan, instructed

2 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1

[PAGE 07]
SPD press representatives in Geneva to develop contacts with
bloc delegations. A Free Democratic party representative in
Geneva held talks with the East Germans during the week of
11-15 May and informed Wehner of the results. Wehner may
be attempting to establish the SPD plan as the basis for future
all-German discussions hoping to force Bonn into discussing a
peace treaty and military disengagement prior to unification.

2 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2

[PAGE 08]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Sudanese Internal Situation

The Abboud government, after a period of investigation
and cautious maneuvering, has undertaken strong measures
against the perpetrators of the 22 May coup attempt. Former
Supreme Council member Brigadier Erwa, whom Abboud
sent to investigate the dissident movement in the Eastern Com-
mand, returned to Khartoum with his report on 28 May. On
29 May a meeting of army commanders and Supreme Council
members took place in Khartoum.

Nine officers of the Eastern Command had been
arrested, including the two in charge of the movement of
troops toward Khartoum on 22 May. Several leaders of the
junior officers' movement in the Northern Command and in
the Khartoum area had previously been placed in custody. The
government has announced that these officers--15 in all--are
shortly to be sent to detention camps in the southern Sudan.

Brigadiers Shannan and Abdullah, members of the Supreme
Military Council and the leading personalities behind the coup
attempt, are known to have been placed under arrest early
in the morning of 1 June. Thus, while there is still some pos-
sibility of a clash between dissident and loyal military units,
it appears that Abboud and his supporters have successfully
reasserted their authority.

This period of military jousting has not prevented the Ab-
boud government from forceful action against Sudanese Commu-
nists, who apparently tried to take advantage of the situation to
step up their activities. At least 24 prominent Communists and
Communist-front leaders have been arrested and sent to a de-
tention camp in the southern Sudan.

2 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3

[PAGE 09]
Developments in Jordan

The Jordanian military attaché in West Germany, Colonel
Salih Shara, who is a brother of Jordan's recently arrested army
chief of staff, has approached UAR representatives in Bonn with
proposals for political action against the Jordanian Government,
according to a UAR message from Bonn on 22 May. The Egyptians
instructed Shara to submit his proposals, none of which required
urgent implementation, in writing.

Colonel Shara was implicated in the antiregime conspiracy
uncovered in June 1958, but Jordanian authorities were hesitant
to take action against him because of the favor his brother enjoyed
with Premier Rifai. The problem was finally met by dispatching
Colonel Shara to Bonn last winter. Now that the Bedouin officer
faction has succeeded in bringing about the resignation of Premier
Rifai and the arrest of Major General Sadiq Shara, Colonel Shara's
position has probably become untenable. His approach to UAR
authorities may well be preliminary to defection to join the other
antimonarchical Jordanian officers and officials in exile in the UAR.

Following the installation of the Majalli cabinet in Jordan,
Cairo advised Damascus on 9 May that "it had been decided not to
carry out any action in Jordan at present." The UAR presumably
remains interested, however, in supporting potential opposition
groups in Jordan.

Rumors continue in Amman, meanwhile, of further retire-
ments of army officers including some Christians who are not ac-
ceptable to the Bedouin officer clique. On the other hand, a new
chief of staff has not yet been appointed, and it is possible that
the most notorious Bedouin intriguer, Colonel Abdulla Majalli,
may be neutralized by appointment as military attaché in London.
Plans to transfer all political intelligence functions to the police
may be an indication that the government is seeking to prevent
complete domination by the army.

2 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4

[PAGE 10]
III. THE WEST

Opposition to Somoza Government is Widespread

Efforts by Nicaraguan President Luis Somoza to pro-
vide a transition period of increasing political freedom fol-
lowing his father's long dictatorship have not satisfied the
many groups which oppose him and his brother, National
Guard commandant General Anastasio Somoza, Jr. A recent-
ly formed civic action association representing widely disparate
economic and political groups inside the country threatened on
29 May to call a general strike to press demands for concessions
by the government. Revolutionary action was reportedly being
planned at the same time by non-Communist groups,

Communist-dominated Nicaraguan revolutionary groups in
Cuba and Central America say they have been excluded from the
Conservative plans, which they fear will succeed before they are
ready to act, leaving them with no stake in the revolution. How-
ever, the leading non-Communist revolutionary leader, Enrique
Lacayo Farfan, is said recently to have urged unity with the Com-
munist exiles, and several Communists are influential in the civic
action association, which has the support of the opposition polit-
ical union led by the Conservative party.

President Somoza is evidently bitter over the repudiation
of his policies and says he now realizes the truth of his father's
frequent warning that "you can't feed too much meat to a baby."
His decision to declare a state of siege and to arrest numerous
opposition leaders was taken at the urging of military and other
advisers who have feared that Luis' moderation posed a threat
to their control over the government.

2 June 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 12]
