[PAGE 01]
7 January 1953

Copy No.
58

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DOS review(s) completed.
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. France reported favorable to Yugoslav and Spanish association in OEEC (page 3).

SOVIET UNION

FAR EAST

3. Communist penetration of South Korean Government reported (page 4).

SOUTH ASIA

4. Pakistan faces another food deficit in 1953-1954 (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. France reported favorable to Yugoslav and Spanish association in OEEC:

In response to a query from the American Embassy, a French Foreign Ministry official has "informally" stated that France has no objection in principle to limited Yugoslav or Spanish association with the Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC).

Pointing out that the by-laws would have to be modified to permit Yugoslav or Spanish association with any of the OEEC technical committees, the official then noted the marked evolution of French opinion with regard to Spain in the past year and said he was sure there would be no objection to Spanish membership from any OEEC member. However, Italy would probably exercise its veto right to exclude Yugoslavia.

Comment: Both Yugoslavia and Spain have been invited to attend an OEEC transport conference in Paris on 18 March. Since this is an ad hoc affair, attendance does not involve any question of membership.

SOVIET UNION
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Communist penetration of South Korean Government reported:

Communist penetration of the government may well constitute a real threat to American objectives in South Korea, according to Ambassador Briggs. He reports that infiltration has been accomplished through influential Assemblyman Yang U-chong, his associate Chong Kuk-un, and possibly other agents in important governmental positions. The situation is complicated by President Rhee's complete trust in Yang.

Briggs is also concerned over the ineffective economic relief measures now being taken in Korea, which he believes are playing into the hands of the Communists.

Comment: Reports have alleged that Chong, Yang's "political secretary," is a Communist, agent and that a number of former Communists are maintaining contact with government officials.

Yang, publisher of South Korea's leading pro-government newspaper and a ranking figure in Rhee's Liberal Party, has greatly increased his influence in party affairs during the past few months.
[PAGE 05]
SOUTH ASIA

4. Pakistan faces another food deficit in 1953-1954:

Preliminary estimates by the American Embassy in Karachi indicate that Pakistan may have a food grain deficit of 800,000 to 1,000,000 tons in 1953-54. Total acreage of wheat planted by 21 December was less than 80 percent of the past five-year average, and crop forecasts suggest no improvement over 1952's harvest yields.

The Pakistani Government is now giving high priority consideration to the country's food situation.

Comment: Facing its second successive major crop failure and the third in six years, Pakistan appears to be approaching the chronic food-deficit status of India and Ceylon. Until 1952 the Pakistanis generally regarded their country as self-sufficient in foodstuffs.

WESTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 06]
