[PAGE 01]
18 October 1953

Copy No. 67

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

DOCUMENT NO. 72
NO CHANGE IN CLASS.
DECLASSIFIED
CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS S C
NEXT REVIEW DATE: 2009
AUTH: HR 70-2
DATE: 20/12/79, REVIEWER:

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL
1. USSR orders substantial fuel shipments to Korea (page 3).

FAR EAST
2. Chinese people being told Korean truce is temporary (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA
3. Indonesian Moslem leader sees crisis approaching (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA
4. Iranian Communists reportedly receiving arms from Soviet Union (page 4).
5. Developments in the Israeli-Jordanian dispute (page 5).
6. Israel pushes Jordan River diversion project (page 5).

****
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. USSR orders substantial fuel shipments to Korea:

Comment: The amount of jet fuel would provide for up to 8,000 hours of jet fighter flying time. The North Korean air force is currently estimated to have 170 MIG-15's and 40 jet light bombers.

FAR EAST

2. Chinese people being told Korean truce is temporary:

Communist officials there are stating in public that the Korean truce is only temporary, as it will "inevitably be broken by Americans."

The American consul general in Hong Kong notes that according to the North Korean pilot who defected to the West recently, military units in North Korea are being told that the truce is merely a breathing spell. The consul general believes that such statements may indicate a Communist intention to break the truce, but that they are more probably intended to keep the troops alert and to get the populace to perform tasks set by the state.

Comment: Communist internal propaganda throughout the period of the truce talks followed a similar line.
[PAGE 04]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

3. Indonesian Moslem leader sees crisis approaching:

Mohamed Natsir, chairman of the opposition Masjumi Party, anticipates increasing arrests of his party's members and expects a serious crisis to develop in Indonesia in about a month. Natsir reportedly stated that there would be Moslem revolts throughout Indonesia if an attempt were made to arrest him.

Comment: Natsir's prediction of an early crisis is well founded. The division between the Communist-influenced government and the conservative opposition headed by the Masjumi has widened considerably in the past several weeks and security conditions have deteriorated seriously through the islands.

Meanwhile the leftist defense minister is reported to have appointed four Communists as his chief advisers and to have convinced the premier of the necessity of arresting Masjumi and Socialist leaders.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Iranian Communists reportedly receiving arms from Soviet Union:

The weapons allegedly have been distributed to Tudeh members who plan to cut all communications and then assassinate anti-Communist officers.
[PAGE 05]
Comment:
There is no indication that the Tudeh is heavily armed. Iranian security forces are alert to the Tudeh threat and any action by the party will probably be confined to sporadic sabotage attempts such as the recent relatively unsuccessful attacks on aircraft and navy installations.

5. Developments in the Israeli-Jordanian dispute:

The Israeli government apparently has been both surprised and disturbed by the sudden violence of Jordanian reaction and the international condemnation of the 14 October attack by its forces on a Jordanian village.

In an effort to avoid direct responsibility for last week's incident, the Israeli delegate on the UN Mixed Armistice Commission in Jerusalem offered on 15 October to vote for the resolution charging Israel with the attack if there was no mention of "Israeli regular army" involvement. Initial public reactions of the Israeli government suggest that it will seek to divert the current international focus from the specific incident to Arab-Israeli disputes in general.

There is still no evidence that the incident will lead to a breakdown of the Arab-Israeli armistice.

6. Israel pushes Jordan River diversion project:

Israeli work on the diversion of the upper Jordan River in the demilitarized zone between Israel and Syria is continuing on a three-shift basis in an atmosphere of "feverish activity," according to an American official who visited the site on 15 October.
[PAGE 06]
Military police are reportedly constructing defense installations at the scene.

Comment: On 23 September General Bennike, chief of staff of the UN Truce Supervision Organization, requested Israel to suspend work on diversion of the river.
