Burmese Army to Extend Its Anti-Insurgent Campaign

Insurgency in Burma stems primarily from the dislike and distrust of the ethnic minorities in the Burmese highlands for the Burman-dominated government. These groups joined the Burmese Union reluctantly when the British granted independence in 1948, and the largest minority elements, the Shans, Karens, Kayahs, and Kachins, insisted on separate states drawn along ethnic lines as the price of participation. Since then Rangoon's "Burmanization" policies and the arbitrary actions of army personnel in the hill country have built up the minority peoples' distaste for the Burmans. In addition to Shan and Karen demands for independence, the non-insurgent Chin and Arakanese communities--and even the Mons, who are almost entirely absorbed into other ethnic groups--are demanding statehood for themselves, and the combined minority communities, under the leadership of Burma's former President Sao Shwe Thaike (a Shan prince), are proposing a looser federal structure for the Union government.

Except among the Shans and Karens, antigovernment military action has been largely brought under control. The Communist forces which revolted in 1947 and 1948 have been reduced to the status of bandits. The evacuation to Taiwan of over 4,000 Chinese irregulars in April has left a relatively small force of about 1,200 in the country along the Burmese-Thai border. Many of these, although they still reject Burmese authority, appear anxious to merge quietly with the local populace. However, as of early April the Burmese Foreign Office reported that some 500 irregulars had joined the Karen National Defense Organization, and since that time press reports of army skirmishes have suggested that Chinese irregulars are collaborating with the insurgents?

Following General Ne Win's retirement from the prime ministership in April 1960, military pressure against the insurgents slackened appreciably. Troops were diverted to the China border area on survey and demarcation missions and, later, to the joint campaign with the Chinese Communists against the Chinese Nationalist irregulars. Many of the army's senior

23 May 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 5
