a nationalist military coup. the army cannot launch a movement before Qasim's assassination.
a Baath representative had been sent to the Syrian border to take delivery of six Czech machine guns.
It is quite possible that Qasim is aware of these plans. (Page 3)

Laos: Regent Prince Savang, blaming the poor security situation on the "weakness" of Interior Minister Katay and the director of police, is pushing for their prompt removal. He has suggested that Army Commander General Ouane take charge of the police. Savang is a strong advocate of military ascendancy in the government, but in the past has deferred to Premier Phoui who opposes ousting Katay on the ground that it would cause a governmental crisis. (Page 4)

Ambassador Whitney in London reports that the British Foreign Office plans an early approach to the United States to stress the desirability of a political solution in Laos, on the assumption that this holds the only hope for peace in that country. The British envisage a UN Security Council invitation to Laos and North Vietnam to comment on the ultimate report of the UN subcommittee in Laos, and then perhaps negotiate a new settlement.

Ceylon: Wijeyananda Dahanayake, who was named prime minister on 26 September within a few hours after the death from gunshot wounds of Prime Minister Bandaranaike, is one of the moderate leaders of Bandaranaike's own political party. As a member of this party, which retains the largest representation in parliament though not an absolute majority, Dahanayake will probably be expected to run a caretaker government until new national elections can be arranged. Both moderate and leftist elements in Ceylon may cooperate with Dahanayake if elections are scheduled for the near future. There is a possibility, however, that popular disturbances will occur as a result of a general scramble for position if Dahanayake fails to put together a working majority in parliament or if a call for general elections is delayed.

26 Sept 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
