Mossadeq's references to his two-year struggle with the British indicate that allegations of foreign influence in Iran may become a major part of his defense, although his full argument on this point will not appear until the competency of the court has been established. The charge of foreign influence will arouse popular sentiment and make it more difficult for Prime Minister Zahedi to reopen diplomatic relations with Britain or to settle the oil dispute.

Mossadeq's apparent desire to make sure that he is remembered as a national hero and his allegations that the court had prejudged him highlight the government's dilemma in the case. Mossadeq probably will be found guilty of treason, but there is as yet no indication as to whether a death penalty would be carried out.

5. Comment on the death of King Ibn Saud:

The death of King Ibn Saud and the succession to the throne of Crown Prince Saud offer no immediate prospect of change either in the central government's authority or in the present position of American oil and military interests in Saudi Arabia. Saud, who long acted for his father, was appointed commander in chief of the armed forces last August and became the country's first prime minister in mid-October. there is no evidence that Ibn Saud's death will occasion an immediate struggle for power.

Since the new king previously was supported by the authority of his father, however, he has yet to prove his ability in handling his brother Faisal, now designated crown prince, and also such influential officials as Finance Minister Sulaiman and Deputy Foreign Minister Yassin. His adroitness in holding the kingdom together will also be tested in dealings with powerful tribal sheikhs. He faces additional problems from the new labor unrest in the oil industry.

Saud has been reservedly friendly toward Americans, but there is no indication that he will be easier to deal with than his father on either oil matters or arrangements for the air base at Dhahran. There is no indication that he will be more willing to compromise with Britain on the Buraimi dispute.

- 5 -

10 Nov 53
