Saharan Nuclear Test Intensifies Anti-French Feeling in Africa

France's nuclear test in the Sahara on 13 February has given new impetus to anti-French feeling latent in varying degrees in most independent African states. Intergovernmental talks on possible joint retaliatory measures have apparently already been held in Accra and may soon take place at the United Nations as well.

Ghana, which has long exploited the test issue as part of its campaign for leadership of the African bloc, announced on 13 February that, "as a first step," it was freezing the assets of French companies operating in Ghana--unofficially valued at approximately $14,000,000--until the effects of the French testing program on Ghana's population become known. Prime Minister Nkrumah's action followed shortly after the UAR ambassador in Accra was observed visiting the Ghanaian Foreign Ministry and may have been patterned after Cairo's similar move at the time of the Suez Canal crisis in 1956. In addition, Accra has reportedly pressed Liberia and Guinea, at tripartite talks now going on in Accra, to agree to a coordinated move to break diplomatic relations with France. The American ambassador in Accra believes Nkrumah may at some point take such action regardless of the attitude of Monrovia and Conakry.

The UAR, meanwhile, is reported to have instructed its delegation in New York to seek "unified action" in the UN by the African bloc, which last fall successfully promoted a General Assembly resolution calling on France to forego the Saharan tests. Appeals for a severance of relations with France being disseminated by Nasir's Afro-Asian "solidarity" organization suggest that Cairo may also be paralleling Nkrumah's efforts along this line.

Morocco--which lays claim to a large portion of the Sahara west of the French test site--and Tunisia can be expected to attempt to use unfavorable domestic and international reaction to the French test in their respective campaigns for the early evacuation of French forces. The Moroccan cabinet announced on 13 February, after a special meeting over which King Mohamed presided, that "a certain number of steps" had been decided on. Morocco's Istiqlal party sponsored a four-hour protest strike on 15 February.

16 Feb 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
