[PAGE 01]
30 November 1955
Copy No. 100

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. FRENCH CABINET CRISIS (page 3).

2. NEHRU REBUKES BULGANIN AND KHRUSHCHEV (page 4).

3. TAIPEI THREATENED WITH UN OUSTER IF IT VETOES
OUTER MONGOLIA (page 5).

4. CHOU EN-LAI TELLS FRENCH SOCIALIST NO FORCE
WILL BE USED AGAINST TAIWAN (page 6).

5. RESIGNATION OF AFGHAN DEFENSE MINISTER (page 7).

* * * *

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 8)
[PAGE 04]
1. FRENCH CABINET CRISIS

French premier Faure’s overthrow by
an absolute majority makes possible
the dissolution of the National Assembly
by the cabinet. Cabinet ministers, how-
ever, may be reluctant to approve disso-
lution until after an effort has been made
to find another premier in the present
assembly.

No top political figure is believed to be
anxious for the premiership so close to the elections. The
Mendes-France forces would like to campaign against a
rightist-controlled cabinet, but at the same time they want
to be in a position to exploit the current economic well-being
and to take advantage of the radio and press facilities avail-
able to the government.

A compromise candidate frequently men-
tioned is Henri Queuille, who was premier of the caretaker
government formed to set up the system for the 1951 elections.
There has been some talk of investing a senator, who would be
relatively remote from assembly bickering. Jean Berthoin,
who has been identified with Mendes-France and who is on rec-
ord in favor of cutting military expenditures, is the senator
most frequently mentioned.

If, however, dissolution is decided on,
elections must be held within 20 to 30 days, and the system
used in the 1951 national elections would apply. This calls
for party lists in each department rather than single-member
constituencies, and permits parties to affiliate so that their
votes would be counted as a unit. Any party slate or affiliated
group getting a majority of the total vote gets all the seats
for the department. Failing a majority, the seats are divided
by proportional representation.

While this system was developed to cut
Communist representation in 1951, it is expected to favor the
Communist Party now. Some Socialists will affiliate with the
Communists and dissension among the center parties will
probably reduce the number of departments in which non-Com-
munists can agree on an electoral affiliation.
[PAGE 05]
2. NEHRU REBUKES BULGANIN AND KHRUSHCHEV

Frequent unfavorable comparisons
between East and West by Bulganin
and Khrushchev on their Indian trip
have provoked a public rebuke from Prime Minister
Nehru. Following Khrushchev’s speech in Bangalore on
26 November, which combined criticism of the West with
announcement of the latest Soviet thermonuclear explo-
sion, Nehru chided the Soviet leader by stating publicly
on 29 November that comparisons between one country
and another were not good and that, in any case, the com-
parisons should not be made in a hostile spirit. He said
the challenge and menace of the atom bomb could not be
met by another atom bomb.

On the same day, the Hindustan Times,
spokesman for Nehru’s Congress Party, also challenged
Khrushchev by saying that "no more impressive testimony
to the Soviet professions of peace. . . could be produced than
a courageous and statesmanly decision. . . to lead the way by
destroying all stocks of atomic weapons and declaring a total
ban on them in the future. . . . Even bomb tests are not
without dire peril to the world." The paper added that the
welcome accorded the Soviet leaders does not indicate India’s
endorsement of Communist ideology. "On the contrary, the
visit of Soviet leaders to foreign countries may. . . have its
effects on Soviet thinking, which has hitherto been condi-
tioned by narrow isolationism."
[PAGE 06]
3. TAIPEI THREATENED WITH UN OUSTER IF IT VETOES
OUTER MONGOLIA

The Brazilian UN delegate told Ambas-
sador Lodge on 27 November he would
move to expel Nationalist China from the
UN if Taipei vetoes the admission of
Outer Mongolia. He said he had informed
the Nationalist delegate of his intentions.

Colombia’s chief UN delegate also pre-
dicted to Lodge on 28 November that a Chinese veto on Outer
Mongolia would result in the ouster of Nationalist China from
the UN.

Lodge comments that this attitude seems
fairly typical of General Assembly sentiment.

Comment
By blocking solution of the UN member-
ship impasse, Taipei’s use of the veto
would arouse the antagonism of a majority of the UN mem-
bers. Britain’s chief delegate estimated on 28 November
that the primary Soviet objective on the membership prob-
lem was to get Taipei to veto the admission of Outer Mongo-
lia.
[PAGE 07]
4. CHOU EN-LAI TELLS FRENCH SOCIALIST NO FORCE
WILL BE USED AGAINST TAIWAN

No force will be used in the "liberation"
of Taiwan, according to statements made
by Premier Chou En-lai and other Chi-
nese Communist officials to Daniel Mayer,
a French Socialist leader and chairman
of the foreign affairs committee in the National Assembly.
Mayer discussed with Ambassador Dillon in Paris his visit
to China in late October and early November as part of a par-
liamentary delegation.

The Chinese Communists told Mayer that
while they considered Taiwan to be an "internal problem" they
recognized that events had in fact made it an international
question, and in practice they would not use force to settle
the issue. They stated that Taiwan will be restored to China
peacefully in the "not-too-distant future," and are prepared
to treat generously any Chinese officials on Taiwan who may
help them gain control.

Comment
The Chinese Communists have sought to
convince all foreign visitors of their peace-
ful intentions. Peiping’s propaganda has repeatedly stated
that Taiwan will be "liberated" by peaceful means "if possi-
ble," but that in any case it will be restored to China.
[PAGE 08]
5. RESIGNATION OF AFGHAN DEFENSE MINISTER

The announced resignation of Afghan
minister of national defense General
Arif will enable Prime Minister Daud
to increase his control over the army.
Daud is now in a better position to ob-
tain more Soviet bloc military aid and to intensify pressure
on the Pakistani border.

General Arif was a protégé of King
Zahir Shah, who reportedly in the past supported him in
disputes with Daud. Arif’s resignation was apparently
forced by Daud, who temporarily takes over the Defense
Ministry. Changes in the top army command will probably
follow. No army opposition to the change has been reported,
and in view of Daud’s high personal prestige at the present,
it is unlikely any effective opposition will develop.

Daud’s manipulation of the recent Grand
Assembly of Tribes, his apparent ability to carry other mem-
bers of the royal family with him in times of crisis, and his
removal of Arif indicate he now dominates the government.
[PAGE 09]
THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 29 November)

No significant military activity has been
reported. However, some action is reported on the Syrian
frontier, which has been quiet in recent days. A Syrian
spokesman charged on 29 November that an Israeli patrol
had fired on the village of Tawafiq in the Syrian-Israeli
demilitarized zone. In Damascus and in other Syrian cities,
anti-Israeli and anti-Western demonstrations occurred.
(Press)

a Soviet merchant vessel arrived at Alexandria
on 25 November. The ship was the freighter Krasnodar,
which passed Istanbul with large crates on deck on 22 Novem-
ber, declaring Albania as its destination. It actually pro-
ceeded directly toward Egypt and on 25 November reported
its position as "approaching Alexandria."

On 22 October the Krasnodar delivered
the first shipload of military equipment to Alexandria under
the Soviet bloc-Egyptian arms deal.
