THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION
(Information as of 1700, 17 January)

Egyptian forces at Sharm el Sheikh had fired with light antiaircraft guns on a twin-engined plane and believed they had damaged it. On the basis of a Radio Israel broadcast, they believed it was an Israeli passenger plane. Cairo said in early November it had notified airlines that planes flying over the straits of Tiran, at the mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba, would be shot down without warning.

A four-point preparedness program has been drawn up by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion for presentation to the Knesset. The program calls for the removal of all luxuries from Israel's economy, an extensive civil defense program, mobilization of manpower for farm work, and a defense tax to finance a new advisory national defense council. The announcement of this program coincides with the publication of an emergency committee report alerting the country to the possibility of war. Aside from placing Israel on a near-wartime austerity footing and thus also endeavoring to stabilize the country's shaky economic position, the program may also counter opposition charges that the government has delayed in putting the nation and the economy on a full war footing. The government has been accused of "criminal negligence" in not briefing the population on air raid precautions and taking steps to erect shelters.

The Soviet freighter Alexander Nevsky arrived at Alexandria on 12 January with an unusually heavy load, including a deck cargo of double-tiered, large wooden crates. It berthed at a pier outside the regular cargo security area but was immediately placed under heavy guard. This precaution, together with reports that a Soviet ammunition ship was expected at Alexandria, suggests that the Nevsky may have carried some ammunition. The Nevsky's arrival brings to six the number of arms cargoes delivered by Soviet freighters from Black Sea ports to Alexandria since 1 January and to 13 the total number of such arms cargoes since deliveries began on 22 October.
