[PAGE 01]
11 September 1951

TOP SECRET

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DIA review(s) completed.
DOS REVIEW COMPLETED

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

3. UK seeks to forestall Burmese appeal to UN over Chinese Nationalists in Burma (page 4).
4. Burmese Ambassador to Peiping implies US supporting Chinese Nationalist troops in Burma (page 4).
5. Opposition to treaty ratification poses threat to Indonesian cabinet (page 5).

SOUTH ASIA

6. War tension in Pakistan appears to have slackened (page 5).

****
- 2 -
[PAGE 03]

[PAGE 04]
3. UK seeks to forestall Burmese appeal to UN over Chinese Nationalists in Burma:

US Ambassador Key in Rangoon reports that his British colleague, acting under instructions from the UK Government, is attempting to dissuade the Burmese Government from making a complaint to the United Nations about the continued presence of Chinese Nationalist troops in northeast Burma.

Comment: The Burmese had originally intended to present the problem to the UN on 6 September, but postponed action to avoid conflicting with the San Francisco conference. Ambassador Key had been assured by the Burmese that he will be notified before any such action is taken.

The UK no longer exercises sufficient influence over Burma for its representations to be effective in this matter.

4. Burmese Ambassador to Peiping implies US supporting Chinese Nationalist troops in Burma:

According to a French Press Agency report from Hong Kong, the new Burmese Ambassador to Communist China stated that the Chinese Nationalist forces under General Li Mi which were recently driven out of Yunnan into Burma were controlled by the Nationalist Embassy in Bangkok. He also asserted that it was possible the US was supporting these forces, as they carried arms and equipment of the latest US manufacture.
[PAGE 05]
5. Opposition to treaty ratification poses threat to Indonesian cabinet:

Although the Indonesian cabinet authorized signature of the Japanese peace treaty, it did so after a split vote - with the National Party, Indonesia's second largest party, in opposition. The National, the Socialist and the Christian parties, and all leftist groups, have subsequently stated that they definitely oppose ratification of the treaty. The National Party has intimated that it will withdraw from the cabinet if the treaty is ratified.

Comment: Even without the support of the National Party and other opposing groups, the government has sufficient parliamentary support on this issue to obtain ratification of the treaty. However, the cabinet is primarily a National Party-Moslem coalition, and if the former carries out its threat to withdraw from the cabinet if the treaty is ratified, the government will fall.

SOUTH ASIA

6. War tension in Pakistan appears to have slackened:

A considerable relaxation of tension in Pakistani public feeling regarding Indian-Pakistani relations is reported by the US Military Attache in Karachi. Both India and Pakistan have reinstated military leaves. The US Consul General in Lahore, who toured the frontier areas at the end of August, has also reported that the populace is much calmer than it was several weeks ago.

Comment: The somewhat relaxed atmosphere may represent a natural let-down after almost two months of excitement and anxiety. Floods and the current monsoon would seriously hamper any major military operations. However, until there are sizeable troop withdrawals from the frontiers, the threat of war continues.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
