[PAGE 01]
US OFFICIALS ONLY

4 May 1952

Copy No. 52

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

GENERAL

1. French Foreign Office sees "technical motives" behind Soviet airliner attack (page 3).

FAR EAST

3. Tokyo May Day riot may cause repression of Japanese labor (page 4).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iranian security officer fears attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Mossadeq (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French threaten to suspend Defense Community negotiations (page 6).
[PAGE 03]
GENERAL

1. French Foreign Office sees "technical motives" behind Soviet airliner attack:

The American Embassy in Paris reports that the French Foreign Office, which first believed that the recent Soviet attack on a French airliner was made for political reasons, now agrees with the US High Commissioner's office in Berlin that the attack, though deliberate, had "technical motives."

When the Foreign Office spokesman read its protest note aloud to the Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Paris in the absence of the Ambassador, the Counselor was apparently fearful of accepting the responsibility, and refused the note as "reflecting on the honor of the Red Army."
[PAGE 04]
FAR EAST

3. Tokyo May Day riot may cause repression of Japanese labor:

Ambassador Murphy in Tokyo reports that while the hard core of Tokyo's May Day rioters was obviously Communist, he is concerned because the incident may serve as a pretext for repressive actions threatening the healthy development of the labor movement.

Non-Communist labor leaders have disclaimed responsibility for the riot, according to CNCFE. They fear that unless they clearly disassociate themselves from the Communists, they may become victims of the growing anti-Communist mood of the population.

Comment: The combined opposition of non-Communist labor, the press, and Yoshida's political opposition has until now prevented Diet passage of the Subversive Activities Bill, by which the Communist Party may be curbed or even outlawed. The various groups opposing the bill have seen in it the eventual means of their own suppression.
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

5. Iranian security officer fears attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Mossadeq:

The Iranian official charged with security of the Majlis says that he "has been given clearly to understand" that the terroristic Fedayan Islam is planning to assassinate Prime Minister Mossadeq and other National Front leaders. The security official is reportedly seeking a transfer, fearing that such an attempt might occur in his jurisdiction.
[PAGE 06]
Comment: Mossadeq did not attend the opening of the seventeenth Majlis on 27 April, presumably because of his earlier expressed fears of an assassination attempt. The Fedayan Islam boasts of its record of assassinations. Mossadeq, along with other National Front leaders, has long been threatened by the organization.

WESTERN EUROPE

7. French threaten to suspend Defense Community negotiations:

A new French-German impasse has arisen in the European Defense Community conference, creating a situation which the chief of the French delegation has declared is "of the utmost seriousness" and forces his country to insist that initialing of the treaty
[PAGE 07]
be postponed. The head of the German delegation has suddenly refused to accept a limitation of 18 months on the transitional period during which each of the Defense Community's territorial military organizations will cover the area of a member country and be under the command of a national of that country.

While members of the German delegation have told American Embassy officials in Paris that their chief is prepared to modify his position, the Embassy advises that, should the French not be satisfied, "there is no predicting" what drastic action they might take to allay parliamentary fears of a revived German general staff.

Comment: The German Government is seeking additional treaty concessions in order to overcome the Bundestag's growing opposition to restrictions of German sovereignty in the nearly completed texts on contractual relations with the Allies.
