[PAGE 01]
5 September 1955

Copy No. 99

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


[PAGE 02]
CONTENTS

1. USSR AGREES TO GIVE NUCLEAR AID TO EGYPT
(page 3).

3. THAI PREMIER REDUCING PHAO'S CHANCE OF
COMEBACK (page 5).

4. SAAR OFFICIAL SEES UNSTABLE GOVERNMENT
AFTER PLEBISCITE (page 6).

5. COMMENT ON EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI SITUATION
(page 7).


[PAGE 03]
1. USSR AGREES TO GIVE NUCLEAR AID TO EGYPT

assistance would not be tied to any price or condition, but
would be based on the commercial treaty in force between
the two countries.

Comment
The USSR undoubtedly intends to make
additional offers of this type, especially
to underdeveloped countries where it hopes to encourage
neutralist and anti-Western sentiment and propagandize
the USSR's advances in nuclear development. Soviet UN
delegate Sobolev reminded Western delegates to the dis-
armament talks on 29 August that particular attention
should be paid to aiding underdeveloped countries in the
peaceful uses of atomic energy. (Concurred in by OSI)


[PAGE 04]


[PAGE 05]
3. THAI PREMIER REDUCING PHAO'S CHANCE
OF COMEBACK

Premier Phibun's recent moves
suggest that his objective is to re-
duce the role of the formerly power-
ful Police Director General Phao to
that of a functionary rather than merely to redress
the internal balance of power, according to the Ameri-
can embassy in Bangkok.

The embassy speculates that Phao
might attempt to organize a coup to regain his position,
but notes that his capability to carry one out is rapidly
diminishing. A more likely course would be for Phao
to try to beat Phibun at his own game by seeking to de-
velop wide popular and parliamentary backing while
working behind the scenes to regain his position.

Comment
At a press conference on 2 September,
Phibun told reporters the question of
Phao's removal from his police post had not been con-
sidered "at present," but he made it clear that the powers
of the police chief had been drastically reduced.

A number of recent reports have
claimed that Phao will be ousted as police director general
in the near future. Phao's followers have reportedly been
stunned by recent events and plan to advise their chief to
avoid any drastic measures for the present.

has re-
ported that he saw General Phao arrive at the Bangkok
airport on 4 September.


[PAGE 06]
4. SAAR OFFICIAL SEES UNSTABLE GOVERNMENT
AFTER PLEBISCITE

The chief of the Saar Bureau of
Foreign Affairs told American
officials on 31 August that he be-
lieves the vote either for or against
the Saar Statute will be so close that orderly govern-
ment in the future will be impossible. He sees no
prospects for co-operation between Prime Minister
Hoffmann's party, which favors the statute, and any
of the pro-German parties after the plebiscite.

The Saarlanders, he thinks, are
demonstrating in the plebiscite campaign a long-pent-
up hatred for Saar minister of interior Hector, who
is identified with a completely pro-French policy.
Hoffmann's popularity is being undermined because
of his long association with Hector.

Comment
This is the first indication from a
Saar official that the future of the
Saar government may be at stake in the 23 October
plebiscite on the Saar Statute. President of the Saar
Plebiscite Commission Dehousse reportedly feels
that many Saarlanders look on both Hoffmann and
Hector as French quislings and questions whether
any improvement in the Saar situation could result
from Hector's removal from the government.


[PAGE 07]
5. COMMENT ON EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI SITUATION

Both Egypt and Israel now appear
willing to maintain in practice the
cease-fire to which each has agreed.
Ambassador Byroade reported from
Cairo on 4 September that Prime
Minister Nasr still planned to go on
vacation the next day, and that the
prime minister had given the em-
bassy the "good news" that all Egyptian commandos were
out of Israeli territory.

Israel's present attitude is illustrated
by its unprecedented apology for the action of an Israeli
patrol which entered Egyptian-held territory during the
night of 4 September. Prime Minister Sharett also as-
sured UN truce chief Burns on 4 September that Israeli
forces had strict orders and that "no action whatsoever
will be taken... which may exacerbate the situation."
Officials in Tel Aviv were still reported to be apprehensive
of Nasr's intentions, however, and Israeli army mobili-
zation was continuing.


[PAGE 08]
