[PAGE 01]
13 April 1954

Copy No. 76

DOS & DIA REVIEWS
COMPLETED

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. South Korea places embargo on Japanese products (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Dien Bien Phu position retaken by French will be difficult to hold (page 3).

3.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Monnet's tenure as CSC president seen threatened (page 5).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. South Korea places embargo on Japanese products:

South Korea, apparently on direct orders from President Rhee, has imposed a virtually complete embargo on imports from Japan, according to Ambassador Briggs. Korean officials assert that the primary reason is the need for freeing the nation from economic dependence on Japan, but Briggs believes that Rhee is also motivated by a belief that Japan is attempting to influence the elections on 20 May.

Restrictions were progressively applied to expenditure of South Korea's own foreign exchange holdings during March, and have now been extended to the use of American FOA funds to pay for imports of Japanese cotton cloth.

Comment: Rhee may be testing the American reaction to a South Korean attempt to control the source of supply of goods purchased with American funds.

Rhee's unilateral action violates basic American legislation requiring that aid funds be spent in markets where goods can be purchased most advantageously. It is further contrary to an American-South Korean agreement providing for joint consultation on use of South Korean foreign exchange holdings.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Dien Bien Phu position retaken by French will be difficult to hold:

Dien Bien Phu position Eliane 1, which the French retook on 10 April, has been the object of sharp attacks and counterattacks during the past two days (see map, p. 4). At 1700 on 12 April, the French still held the position, but the American army attaché in Saigon believes it will be difficult to hold indefinitely. Eliane 1 affords a close-in view of most of the northern defense positions, but is dominated by Dominique 2, which is held by the Viet Minh.

- 3 -
[PAGE 04]
DIEN BIEN PHU

HUGUETTE
LILIE
CLAUDINE incl. French CP
Air Strip
BÉATRICE
ELIANE 12
DOMINIQUE
ELIANE 4
316
ELIANE 10
TUTU

Ban Loi
B. Ten
B. Nong Nhai
B. Nhu Lai

Air Strip

ISABELLE

12 APRIL 1954

kilometers
1:25,000 scale

X Overrun by Viet Minh
[PAGE 05]
indications that the Chinese Communists are planning to supply the Viet Minh with 105mm recoilless rifles and with rocket launchers for use at Dien Bien Phu.

WESTERN EUROPE

4. Monnet's tenure as CSC president seen threatened:

Jean Monnet is "on his way out," as president of the High Authority of the European Coal-Steel Community

told an American embassy official in Rome on 7 April that Monnet is "completely opposed" by the French government, and his capabilities are now being questioned by West Germans. He added that Monnet has lost his former drive.

- 5 -
[PAGE 06]
Comment: The High Authority president is selected by the six CSC member governments for a two-year term. Although opposition to Monnet's policies has increased somewhat in recent months, his chances for re-election this summer still appear good.

Monnet, who has in large part been personally responsible for the achievements of the CSC thus far, is currently in Washington negotiating for a substantial loan to the community.

- 6 -
