[PAGE 01]
30 March 1951
Copy No. C1-9

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. US Attache in Manila reports possible change in Huk policy towards Americans (page 4).

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Chancellor Adenauer seeks integrated economic policy for West Germany (page 4).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST
[PAGE 04]
2. US Attache in Manila reports possible change in Huk policy towards Americans:

Commenting on the 26 March Huk raid on an American-managed chrome mining property, the senior US Military Attache in Manila states that US citizens in isolated Philippine areas are in acute danger and that the Philippine Armed Forces are incapable of providing security. He comments that the mine incident, in addition to three previous affairs, strongly suggests that the Huks have changed their policy of non-violence toward Americans.

Comment: The recent attacks cited by the Military Attache do not in themselves definitely justify a conclusion that the Huks have changed their policy of non-violence toward Americans. Americans have in the past been subject to violence in the course of Huk attacks against weakly defended targets.

WESTERN EUROPE

3. Chancellor Adenauer seeks integrated economic policy for West Germany:

Amid a rising tide of dissatisfaction with economic conditions and heavy criticism of Economics Minister Erhard's laissez faire policy, Chancellor Adenauer has been attempting to organize a special cabinet committee responsible for providing integrated leadership in economic affairs. He is also trying to have Dr. Friedrich Ernst, head of the Berliner Central Bank, appointed his personal representative on the new Committee. The dominant Christian Democratic Party has given Erhard "one more chance," on condition that he submit an anti-cartel law, introduce controls on raw materials and imports, and provide for the stabilization of domestic prices, especially of basic foodstuffs.

Comment: Adenauer realizes that to hold the recently-acquired good will of labor, he must take action in the face of rising prices. Economics Minister Erhard has been
[PAGE 05]
widely criticized for his unwillingness to impose controls, but Adenauer has been reluctant to remove him for fear of "rocking the boat." Adenauer's attempt to by-pass Erhard by bringing Ernst into the government in a position of authority was defeated, at least temporarily, by the Cabinet on 20 March.
