[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
25 December 1951
Copy No. 47
CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY
FAR EAST
NEAR EAST
EASTERN EUROPE
WESTERN EUROPE
6. French and British still reluctant to halt German interzonal trade (page 6).
7. French Government faces new crisis on Tunisian policy (page 6).
8. Luxembourg hesitates to cut steel exports to Soviet bloc (page 7).
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST
[PAGE 04]
NEAR EAST
[PAGE 05]
EASTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 06]
WESTERN EUROPE
6. French and British still reluctant to halt German interzonal trade:
The French and British High Commissioners in Germany have suggested that HICOM permit the West Germans certain new exports to East Germany under the partially suspended interzonal trade pact, asserting that some trade must be maintained as a bargaining point in influencing the USSR to halt restrictions on West Berlin trade. The suggestion was shelved after McCloy refused to agree to any such concessions, emphasizing that the US was alarmed over the moderation of the Allied stand on East-West trade.

7. French Government faces new crisis on Tunisian policy:
The French Government is in a precarious position with regard to its Tunisian policy. Rightist parties are attacking Foreign Minister Schuman for being too liberal toward the Tunisian demands, while the Socialists and independent leftists are harassing the government for not making more rapid progress toward liberalizing the Tunisian regime.

Comment: Faced with such hostile extremes, the government might find it difficult to survive a serious incident in Tunisia.
[PAGE 07]
8. Luxembourg hesitates to cut steel exports to Soviet bloc:
A Luxembourg Foreign Office official has stated that, because his country probably will not receive any US economic or military assistance, there is some question of the extent to which needed imports of Russian manganese and Czech malt in exchange for Luxembourg steel should be sacrificed. He added that failure to obtain Soviet manganese would reduce Luxembourg's steel industry's contribution to the defense program. Furthermore, Orbit payments are made in advance and in dollars.

Comment: Luxembourg is slated to receive US military assistance on a limited scale.

It is believed that important quantities of steel will continue to be shipped illegally to eastern Europe in view of the long-established relationship between Luxembourg producers and their steady customers in Satellite countries. Considerable amounts of these exports are licensed to the US and deflected to the Soviet bloc.
