[PAGE 01]
29 July 1954

Copy No.
80

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

STATE review completed
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

1.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Vietnamese reported to believe United States abandoning them (page 3).

3.

WESTERN EUROPE

4.

5. French likely to propose formula for delayed implementation of EDC (page 5).
6. France preparing new basic program for Tunisia (page 6).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Vietnamese reported to believe United States abandoning them:

According to Ambassador Heath in Saigon, there is an "almost nationwide" belief that the United States is "abandoning" Vietnam. This feeling, he reports, is adversely affecting the government's program for evacuating anti-Communist refugees from the north.

29 July 54    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3
[PAGE 04]
Comment: The French have estimated the total number of persons that might move to the southern zone at about 150,000. Vietnamese estimates have been considerably higher.

General Ely observed recently that a dramatic propaganda campaign by the Diem government might persuade a million or more persons to go south. He said that in such an event, Diem would win the eventual elections.

3.

29 July 54    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4
[PAGE 05]
WESTERN EUROPE

4.

5. French likely to propose formula for delayed implementation of EDC:

A French embassy official in Rome is quoted by the Italian Foreign Ministry as stating Paris desires an informal understanding

29 July 54    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5
[PAGE 06]
among the six EDC powers that full implementation of the EDC treaty will take place over a longer period than presently specified. The French also allegedly want to soft-pedal the supranational character of EDC and to adopt a unanimity rule for all voting in the EDC Council.

The Italian Foreign Ministry sees no great difficulty for an informal understanding on the points raised by the French, but admits that the unanimity proposal "will present problems."

Premier Mendes-France told Ambassador Dillon in Paris on 26 July that delayed implementation of the treaty would be one of the most necessary changes.

Comment: Delayed implementation need not require renegotiation of the treaty, but a unanimity rule would require changes in the text of the treaty. Acceptance by the EDC powers at the proposed Brussels meeting on 10 August of an informal understanding to delay implementation of the treaty could provide Mendes-France the formula he considers necessary to obtain ratification.

6. France preparing new basic program for Tunisia:

The French government is readying a program for Tunisia which the American embassy in Paris believes will substantially meet the nationalists' demands for an all-Tunisian government responsible to an all-Tunisian assembly, for an all-Tunisian civil service, and for an eventual French-Tunisian association to replace the present protectorate relationship.

A spokesman for the Ministry for Tunisia and Morocco told Ambassador Dillon on 27 July that France will retain control over foreign affairs, defense, and finances. He added that the rights and status of Frenchmen in the protectorate will have to be protected.

29 July 54    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 6
[PAGE 07]
The embassy believes that the cabinet will consider Tunisian policy on 31 July and that it does not plan to hold assembly debate.

Comment: This program will antagonize French settlers in Tunisia and their conservative supporters in the French cabinet and assembly. Avoidance of an early debate might permit the government to rally much needed support.

29 July 54    CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7
