the Pathet Lao must be included in any negotiations on the future of Laos. "If we compromise now," the official said, "we are accepting the strength of imperialism. We will be doing injustice to the progressive forces in Southeast Asia."

Cabinet discussions on the Laotian crisis were resumed on 29 March with the return of King Savang and General Phoumi to Vientiane after a visit of several days to southern Laos. Country team speculation is that broadening of the government may be a primary topic under discussion. Former Premier Phoui Sananikone, meanwhile, is working behind the scenes for a replacement of the present government, which he feels is "dictatorial" and only antagonizing the majority of the population. Phoui proposes that the King should persuade Boun Oum and Phoumi to step down, and then take personal charge of a transitional government pending a general election. There is considerable support for this proposal among other conservative Laotian politicians, and Savang reportedly has taken it under serious advisement.

With the possible exception of two flights, all scheduled airlift activity into Laos for 27 March was canceled, probably because of adverse weather conditions. On 28 March at least 14 flights into Laos were detected, some of which were to the Nam Bac area north of Luang Prabang. Periodic flights of AN-12 turboprop heavy transports from North Vietnam in support of these operations continue.

A prisoner who was recently captured near Vang Vieng claims to be an artilleryman from the 925th Frontier Security Battalion of the North Vietnamese Army. He alleges that his unit entered Laos near Nong Het in mid-January and that later in February he and about 45 other artillery specialists and infantrymen were assigned to the Pathet Lao 6th Battalion. Another prisoner captured on 23 March claims that a group of infantry specialists arrived at the Plaine des Jarres from Hanoi on 5 February. The prisoner alleges that he and some of the others were from the North Vietnamese 246th Independent Regiment, which has its headquarters in north-central

30 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
