The Situation in Laos

Khrushchev expressed some of the same views that Gromyko voiced during his meeting with President Kennedy the same day. The Soviet premier termed the British proposals of 23 March on Laos "constructive" and said they would make it possible to bring about a cease-fire and a settlement. He indicated that the Soviet reply would be forthcoming in a couple of days. As in earlier talks with Ambassador Thompson on 21 January and 9 March, Khrushchev minimized the importance of Laos, saying it would not change the East-West balance of power and that the Laotians would choose neutrality if left to themselves. Khrushchev also repeated earlier charges that Boun Oum is a drunkard and urged again that agreement be reached on a new government headed by Souvanna Phouma.

In remarks clearly calculated to impress the Indian Government with the urgency of getting negotiations started, Khrushchev warned that movements by American military and naval forces were not helpful and said the USSR never gave way in the face of threats. He added that if the US wanted another Korea, it could have it, but this would be a "really bloody one."

The favorable references to the British proposals made by Khrushchev and Gromyko, together with the generally moderate and positive tone of the Pravda article of 27 March, appear to reflect the Soviet leaders' awareness that recent military and diplomatic moves by the US and Britain have brought the contest over Laos to a new and more critical phase. Their cautious and generally positive response probably was intended primarily to forestall any decision by the SEATO conference which might raise the possibility of expanded military action in Laos. Moscow's response also suggests that the Soviet leaders are concerned that Western moves have deprived the bloc of the diplomatic initiative and put the bloc governments on the defensive. This concern was evident in the Pravda article's effort to demonstrate that the USSR was the earliest and most consistent proponent of negotiations and to portray the British proposals as acceptance of Moscow's position on convening an international conference and reactivating the ICC.

30 Mar 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
