[PAGE 01]
9 February 1960
Copy No. C

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
9 FEBRUARY 1960

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Algerian rebels request Libya to "facilitate" movement of Libyan volunteers to join rebel forces in Algeria.
India--Khrushchev may offer to assist India in constructing nuclear power station

III. THE WEST
French nuclear test shot to take place at end of this week; arrangements made to handle publicity, particularly in African capitals.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
9 February 1960

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algeria: The Algerian rebels have formally requested Libya to "facilitate" the movement of Libyan volunteers to the rebel forces in Algeria.

This rebel action, which followed a public appeal for volunteers at the All-African People's Conference in Tunis, appears designed to identify the rebel cause with North African and Arab nationalism to the greatest extent possible, as well as to dramatize the rebels' willingness to continue the war.

While rebel forces in Algeria have a continuing need for military technicians, their recent difficulties have stemmed more from shortages of supplies than of manpower.

India- USSR: Recent reports in the Indian press suggest that the USSR may soon make a firm offer of aid in constructing India's first nuclear-powered electric generating station, a 250,000-kilowatt plant reportedly planned for the Ahmedabad area in Bombay State. These reports may have been given publicity by Indian officials in the hope of inducing the West to make equally firm offers of aid in this field. The USSR's top atomic energy expert is expected to arrive in India shortly, and Khrushchev's visit to India, scheduled to begin on 11 February may provide the occasion for an announcement of atomic aid.
[PAGE 05]
III. THE WEST

France:
the first French nuclear test shot will take place about the end of this week. The actual date of the explosion will depend on weather conditions. A special CEA representative has been sent to New York to handle the anticipated announcement to the American press. Statements have also been prepared for publication in the capitals of the independent African states, where there has been strong opposition to the tests.
[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Algerian Rebels Soliciting Arab "Volunteers"

The Algerian rebels have formally requested Libya to "facilitate" the movement of Libyan volunteers to the rebel forces in Algeria,

nations represented at the recent All-African People's Conference at Tunis, which approved a Moroccan-Algerian proposal for "the formation of a corps of African volunteers" for the Algerian war.

The appeal for volunteers appears designed to identify the rebel cause with North African and Arab nationalism to the greatest extent possible, as well as to dramatize the rebels' willingness to continue the war. At a recent meeting in Tripoli of the Algerian provisional government, several rebel extremists who favored closer ties with the Sino-Soviet bloc were removed from positions of authority. The emphasis on "African" volunteers--"above all from Arab North Africa"--may be regarded by the rebels as a means of "internationalizing" the rebellion without creating opportunities for Communist penetration.

While rebel forces in Algeria have a continuing need for military technicians, their recent difficulties have stemmed more from shortages of supplies than of manpower. The Arab League foreign ministers, now meeting in Cairo, are expected to discuss the Algerian proposal, and will probably support it in principle. It is doubtful, however, whether a major drive for "volunteers" will be implemented, or that more than token groups will be sent.

9 Feb 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 1
[PAGE 07]
USSR May Offer to Assist Construction of Atomic Power Plant in India

Recent press reports in India state that the Indian Government is considering a Soviet offer to provide "technical and financial assistance" for the construction of India's first nuclear-power electric generating station, a 250,000-kilowatt plant reportedly planned for the Ahmedabad area in Bombay State. To date there has been no confirmation that any firm offer of aid has been made, and the US Embassy in New Delhi has suggested that these reports may have been circulated by India's AEC chairman in the hope of inducing the West to make firm offers for such construction.

The British, who are concerned over the possible consequences to the West if the USSR should make a more attractive bid, have shown a keen desire in conversations thus far to assist the Indians in the atomic field. The Indian Government has given indications that it would prefer this first plant to be built under Western aegis, although it might be willing to accept Soviet assistance for a second or third plant.

Notwithstanding this reported Indian preference, the expected arrival in India during early February of the USSR's top expert on nonmilitary uses of atomic energy suggests that the press reports have some substance. The Khrushchev visit to India, scheduled to begin 11 February, may provide the USSR with an occasion to announce a firm offer of nuclear aid to India.

9 Feb 60  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  Page 2
[PAGE 08]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific

The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce

Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

National Security Agency
The Director

National Indications Center
The Director
[PAGE 09]
