Comment: Although Prime Minister Nehru may change his mind at the last minute, the current prospect is for the Indians to end their custody of the prisoners on or before 23 January with only minor disorders.

The Communists may refuse to accept their prisoners in line with their contention that they are observing the 8 June agreement while the United Nations Command is not.

5. Communists seen unwilling to withdraw charge of American "perfidy":

An Indian official informed American representative Young of his impression, after talking with Chinese Communist delegate Huang Hua in Panmunjom on 17 January, that the Communists are "not interested" in the current American proposal that they withdraw their "perfidy" charge. The Indian inferred that they wish to preserve this charge for use in connection with the anticipated release of prisoners this week.

Comment: The Communists can be expected to respond to the prisoner release as they did to South Korea's unilateral release of 27,000 prisoners last June -- that is, to accuse the United States of collusion in an act of perfidy but to refrain from taking any military action on the issue.

Another reason for the Communists' lack of interest in current American proposals at Panmunjom is their apparent decision to avoid serious negotiations for a Korean political conference pending developments in the United Nations and at the Berlin four-power conference.

SOUTH ASIA

6. American ambassador forecasts reaction to reduced US aid to India:

Ambassador Allen believes that a substantial reduction in American aid to India for 1954-55 would be taken as a diminution in American interest in India's economic stability, and that, alternatively, cessation of such aid would convince Indian officials and the public that the ruling motive of American policy is purely military. By 1956, however, Allen feels that US aid could begin to be phased out without serious political repercussions.

The embassy estimates that India can utilize properly $100,000,000 to $110,000,000 financial aid in 1955, but there is little chance that India could absorb large quantities of American surplus agricultural products.

Comment: The possibility of American military assistance to Pakistan has heightened India's sensitivity toward changes in American foreign aid policies. American aid to India has totaled $186,700,000 since 1951, not including the $190,000,000 wheat loan that year.

The Indian finance minister has estimated that $500,000,000 in outside assistance will be needed by 1956 to complete India's current five-year plan.
