[PAGE 01]
3 June 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
3 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

USSR-UAR: Soviet-UAR cooperation in international front organizations such as the Afro-Asian "solidarity movement" appears to be steadily deteriorating as a result of Nasir's attacks on Communists and the bloc.
Cairo has apparent-
ly decided not to send a UAR delegation to the Communist World Youth Festival in Vienna this summer,

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia: The Constituent Assembly's failure on final read-
ing to adopt President Sukarno's proposal for a return to the 1945 constitution creates a political stalemate in Indonesia. While some compromise might yet be worked out, Sukarno and the army may impose the 1945 constitution, which gives the executive greater political power. Already army chief Nasution, in what may be a preliminary step, has banned "all political activity in Indonesia."

i

[PAGE 04]
III. THE WEST

Nicaragua: President Somoza's public admission that revolu-
tionaries have landed may encourage additional labor and other un-
committed groups to join the general strike, which has already at-
tracted considerable support and should reach its peak on 3 June.
Despite the imposition of martial law and the arrest of opposition leaders, the government faces serious domestic defiance for the first time in its 25 years. While several external threats re-
main, the Costa Rican Government has acted swiftly to prevent further attacks from its territory by Nicaraguan revolutionaries.

IV. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions are to be used in context with SNIE 100-2-59 (24 February 1959) and with the review of that estimate in SNIE 100-2/1-59 (17 March 1959):

1. There is no indication of any change in the basic Soviet position at Geneva, but Khrushchev in Tirana appeared to introduce a harder line by categorically rejecting all parts of the Western package plan for Berlin.

3 June 59     DAILY BRIEF     ii

[PAGE 05]
2. So long as the USSR estimates that nego-
tiations at Geneva are promising or that the pros-
pects for a summit meeting are good, it will prob-
ably not go so far as to turn over access controls to
the GDR. However, negotiations may be reaching a
stage where the USSR might consider it to be advanta-
geous to increase the threats of such action. The actual
physical transfer of controls could be accomplished with
little or no warning.

3. While there are no reliable indications of a bloc
intent to deny Allied or West German access to West Ber-
lin, or to seal off West Berlin in the immediate future, the
USSR could take such actions with little or no warning.

4. There have been no significant changes in Soviet
capabilities to respond to possible Western actions in
the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade.

5. The rumor in West Berlin that the US might
give up RIAS has resulted in declining staff morale.
RIAS is an important symbol of the US position in Ber-
lin.

3 June 59     DAILY BRIEF     iii

[PAGE 06]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Soviet-UAR Cooperation in International Fronts Declining

The rift between Moscow and Cairo produced by Nasir's attacks on Communists and the bloc has caused a steady deteriora-
tion in Soviet-UAR cooperation in international front organizations.
The Afro-Asian solidarity movement, which has depended on the
cooperation of the UAR and other Afro-Asian countries with the
Communists, has been particularly affected.

The national solidarity committees on which the international
organization theoretically is based have also encountered difficulties,
because the committees of some neutralist countries such as India
apparently are split between Communist and neutralist elements as
a result of Nasir's charges. A critical period for the movement may
well occur when preparations are begun for a second "Solidarity Con-
ference"--a repeat of the December 1957 meeting held in Cairo--and
for the Afro-Asian Women's Conference. Both are scheduled for
later this year.

There are indications of frictions between Cairo and Moscow
in other international front activities. Cairo has apparently de-
cided not to send a delegation to the Communist-run World Youth
Festival in Vienna this summer.

3 June 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 1

[PAGE 07]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Political Stalemate in Indonesia

The Constituent Assembly's third rejection on 2 June of
President Sukarno's proposal for the readoption of the 1945
constitution has created a political stalemate in Indonesia.
Opposition to the constitution, under which both Sukarno and
the army would gain increased political power at the expense
of party activity, came from the Moslem parties, including the
pivotal Nahdlatul Ulama party, which insisted on the incorpora-
tion of religious guarantees for the Islamic religion. The in-
itiative now returns to President Sukarno and the army.

Sukarno, now in the United States, will be met and briefed
at his next major stop--Tokyo--probably on 6 June by Ruslan
Abdulganj, head of the appointive national council and a Sukarno
confidant. It has been speculated that the President's two-month
world tour was timed to keep him uninvolved in the political ma-
neuvers attending the constitutional debates and free to work out
new arrangements if necessary.

Although further attempts at compromise cannot be ruled out,
army leaders have consistently hinted that they would take action
to enforce the 1945 constitution if necessary,
Nasution on 2 June banned all political ac-
tivity, possibly as a preliminary move to further action. Prime
Minister Djuanda had told the assembly that failure to accept the
constitution might precipitate "undesirable events" similar to
those which "have taken place in neighboring countries"--obviously
a thinly veiled warning of an army take-over.

3 June 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 2

[PAGE 08]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 09]
III. THE WEST

Situation in Nicaragua

President Somoza's public admission that revolutionaries
have landed may encourage additional labor and other uncom-
mitted groups to join the general strike, which has already at-
tracted more support than anticipated and should reach its peak
on 3 June. Despite the imposition of martial law and the arrest
of opposition leaders, the government faces serious domestic de-
fiance for the first time in 25 years.

There are apparently no immediate plans to call for action
by the Organization of American States, since President Echandi
of Costa Rica has already acted to prevent the many Nicaraguan
exiles in his country from further attacks on Nicaragua by land
or air.

The National Guard under General Anastasio Somoza, Jr.,
is considered capable of containing the small rebel groups re-
ported to have landed. It apparently remains loyal, although
several former guard officers have recently taken refuge in
Costa Rica and may have joined the exiles.

3 June 59     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN     Page 6

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director

[PAGE 11]
