Of these, one group of 10,000 and another of 3,000 are recruits who were recently undergoing training to the south and north of the Tonkin delta. The movement of the larger group is reported to have been delayed by heavy rains.

Up to 1,600 first-line troops from a regiment of the 304th Division near the apex of the delta have also been ordered to move toward Dien Bien Phu, according to French information. Other regular units numbering about 4,000, which have been engaged against pro-French guerrillas north and west of Dien Bien Phu, and an undetermined number of regional forces from both Tonkin and Laos, have also allegedly been ordered to reinforce the besieging troops; these units could arrive within several days.

In addition to the reinforcements now en route, the Viet Minh received 3,000 replacements last week which it has already committed. Reports from De Castries' headquarters indicate that the extreme youth and lack of training of these replacements were partially responsible for the weaker enemy efforts of the past few days.

3. Viet Minh believed capable of further major assaults on Dien Bien Phu:

French intelligence officers at Hanoi estimated as of 6 April that the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu had, or soon would have, the capability for "two more nights of major assault." While they feel the Viet Minh may attempt attritional warfare to capture the fortress, they consider an all-out attack more likely.

De Castries reported at 0900 on 6 April that sporadic enemy fire was continuing, but that there was no change in his positions. (See map, p. 5)

The French command in Hanoi had to call off a scheduled drop of reinforcements on the night of 5-6 April because of stormy weather.

Information from captured prisoners suggests that the heavy Viet Minh attack on 5 April was hurriedly staged as a reply to Navarre's announced intention of landing hospital planes on that day. Prisoner interrogation also indicates that Viet Minh units used on 5 April were reduced in strength.
