who surrender their arms by 2200 on the 26th. The curfew, which the government reinstituted on 26 October in order to wage "a general attack against the rebels," was to be extended through 27 October. In addition, telephone contact had again been broken off with Budapest.

The government of Imre Nagy apparently has been unsuccessful in asserting central authority and Nagy's prestige is reported declining rapidly. In a desperate effort to garner popular support, Nagy promised to negotiate with the USSR for the withdrawal of all Soviet troops by 1 January and to form a new popular front government immediately. Budapest Radio had indicated on the morning of the 26th that the new government would be formed in a few hours, but a later broadcast said that it would be established during the evening of the 26th or the morning of the 27th.

Nagy is having difficulty recruiting prominent former minority leaders, including former Smallholders Secretary General Bela Kovacs and Social Democrat Ana Kethely, to participate in a new regime.

Encouraged by the weakness of the government in Budapest, workers throughout the country have begun to press for extensive changes, and a general strike seems to be in effect in several cities. At least two regional governments, seemingly acting independently of the central regime, have been formed in the provinces--the Workers Committee of Greater Miskolc and the Workers and Soldiers Council of Szolnok. These committees, which for the moment still appear dominated by "national Communists," have called a general strike until the government implements all their demands which include the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Hungary, a new liberal government and satisfaction for their economic complaints.

In Budapest, the National Trade Union Council and an unidentified writers' group, apparently acting independently, levied a set of demands which, in effect, complemented the Miskolc workers' demands.

ground, air, and naval units in eastern Europe and the western USSR have been alerted. Altitude restrictions have been imposed on the air route between Moscow and Budapest, probably to facilitate high priority flights between the two capitals.
