[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

25 May 1952

Copy No. 53

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

State Department review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

2. Japan plans gradual pressure to oust Soviet mission (page 3).
3. Japanese plan to relax export controls (page 4).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

2. Japan plans gradual pressure to oust Soviet mission:

The Japanese Government plans to force the departure of the remaining members of the Soviet mission by gradual pressure and attrition without taking any "spectacular" action, according to Ambassador Murphy. Although nothing has been done to restrict the movements of the Soviet personnel, the government is keeping them under close surveillance and granting them no facilities. The Japanese Foreign Office has received no request from the Soviet representative to give him a formal status.

Comment: The Japanese Government is seeking to transmit a note to the USSR through a third party stating that the Soviet mission, formerly attached to the defunct Allied Council for Japan, no longer has legal status. Japan's recent firm attitude toward the USSR suggests that it is determined not to accept a subordinate status in its dealings with the Soviet Union.

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
3. Japanese plan to relax export controls:

The American Embassy in Tokyo has been formally approached by the Japanese Government for the American reaction to a relaxation of export controls on shipments to Communist China. Japan proposes to ship galvanized sheets, dyestuffs, wool yarn, knit goods, and textile machinery in return for iron ore, coke, soybeans and other products.

The approach was based on the expectation of increasing Diet demands that Japanese restrictions not exceed those of Western Europe. Ambassador Murphy recommends that the United States offer no objection.

Comment: For some time Yoshida's government has been under increasing pressure form political and trade groups to reduce controls to the level exercised by Japan's western European competitors.

A relaxation of Japan's controls may encourage similar action elsewhere in the Far East. Galvanized sheets, for example, which the Japanese propose to export to the Chinese Communists, cannot legally be shipped from Hong Kong to China.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
