[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET

23 April 1952

Copy No. 52

DOS REVIEW COMPLETED

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

EASTERN EUROPE

5. Rumania moves further to restrict diplomats' travel (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Current German reactions to Soviet unity campaign (page 5).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 04]
EASTERN EUROPE

5. Rumania moves further to restrict diplomats' travel:

The Rumanian Government now requires foreign diplomats to have Rumanian licenses in order personally to drive diplomatic cars. The American Legation in Bucharest reports that such licenses have hitherto been unobtainable, and suggests that this may foreshadow new harassment of Western officials.

Comment: This move will further restrict travel by members of the diplomatic corps in Rumania by forcing them to rely on the Rumanian Foreign Office to furnish chauffeurs. Such trips as those recently taken by the American Military Attache to observe military installations at Ianca in the east and Craiova in the southwest may now be impossible.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Current German reactions to Soviet unity campaign:

American officials in Bonn believe that both the European Defense Community treaty and the Allied-German contractual agreement will be signed in May, but fear that the ratification and implementation of these treaties may be threatened by future Soviet maneuvers.

The popular distrust of Russian intentions is stronger in South Germany than in the northern areas, where the West's sincerity and determination to achieve unification are widely questioned. Consular officials report that this attitude is strengthened by doubts over the degree of sovereignty West Germany will have under the contractual agreement.

- 5 -

[PAGE 05]
Any reluctance to proceed with the agreement now, however, will not be due to the Russian advances but to demands that no steps be taken which might jeopardize unification.

Comment: Leaders of right-wing coalition parties as well as of the opposition Social Democratic Party found the reply to the 10 March Soviet note satisfactory except for its emphasis on integration and its insufficient attention to unification. The tone of German opinion will finally depend largely on the Allied reply to the Soviet note of 9 April.

- 6 -
