[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
25 April 1961
Copy No. C 91
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN
State Dept. review completed
TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
25 April 1961
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
CONTENTS
3. Congo: Compromise solution on Matadi likely.
(Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 05]
25 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Map Page

[PAGE 06]
Congo: Ambassador Timberlake reports from Leopoldville that a compromise solution concerning the return of UN troops to Matadi now appears likely. Acting UN chief Abbas is meeting with Kasavubu to work out final details. Kasavubu has hitherto objected to the UN's proposal that Nigerian police be permitted to return to Matadi to establish a UN presence there.
The UN Command feels that another focus of military activity in the Congo is likely to be Kasai Province, where Kalonji's army is regarded as a "menace" and where the threat of Baluba depredations continues. An influx of Baluba tribesmen into Kivu Province from northern Katanga also brings a threat of new violence in Kivu.
25 Apr 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
The Situation in the Congo
Acting UN representative Abbas reportedly has flown to meet with Kasavubu at Coquilhatville, where Congolese leaders are meeting to discuss modification of the Congo's political structure along lines agreed upon at Tananarive. A compromise settlement on Matadi would end what has become a sterile dispute for Kasavubu, and build up some credit with the UN which Kasavubu might employ to advantage on such issues as obtaining the withdrawal of UN representative Dayal in the Congo.
Reports that Gizenga has been supplanted by rebel army commander Lundula in Stanleyville are unconfirmed. The absence of any new military activity in the area suggests that the cease-fire announced by General Mobutu on 16 April may be at least partially effective.
The American Embassy in Leopoldville observes that contrary to the views expressed by UN representative Dayal, the Congo Army can no longer be regarded as the principal source of disorders in the Congo.
In Katanga, President Tshombé--who hitherto has largely ignored criticism of his regime as pro-Belgian--has granted to a South African firm, General Mining and Finance Corporation, mineral rights in an area comprising 8,100 square miles south of Elisabethville. The grant is the first to a non-Belgian firm in recent years.
Tshombé is "physically and emotionally tired" as a result of his concern over military operations in northern Katanga and factional maneuverings within his government. He reportedly is under treatment by two witch doctors brought to Katanga from Brazzaville.
representatives of pro-Gizenga youth groups in Leopoldville claim to have received assurances of support from the Indian contingent in Leopoldville for a coup against the Kasavubu government. Although Indian
25 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 09]
Officials in the Congo apparently have maintained contacts with Gizengist elements and may have indicated support for their objectives, any action taken outside the framework of UN operations would conflict sharply with New Delhi's publicly and privately expressed policy regarding the Congo. Nehru would not be likely to sanction the use of Indian troops in a coup attempt which would undercut UN efforts toward a Congo solution and increase the danger of direct intervention by the major powers.
25 Apr 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 5

[PAGE 10]
Next 3 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
The National Security Agency
The Director
The United States Information Agency
The Director
The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 12]
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
