[PAGE 01]
24 November 1957

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

OFFICE OF CURRENT INTELLIGENCE

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
CONTENTS

1. COMMUNIST "PEACE MANIFESTO" (page 3).
2. THE CYPRUS SITUATION (page 4).
3. MENDERES HAVING DIFFICULTY FORMING NEW TURKISH CABINET (page 5).
4. JAPAN SEEKS ASSOCIATION WITH NATO PROGRAMS (page 6).
5. ADENAUER CONCERNED OVER INCREASING COST OF NATO COMMITMENT (page 7).
6. (page 8).
[[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]7. GUATEMALAN CRISIS NEARING A CLIMAX[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]] (page 9).

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 2
[PAGE 04]
1. COMMUNIST "PEACE MANIFESTO"

Comment on:

The main purpose of the "peace manifesto" issued on 22 November by the representatives of the Communist parties of 64 nations apparently was to prepare the ground for future Sino-Soviet bloc measures to offset the impact of the December NATO meeting. While the manifesto's denunciation of American foreign policy was considerably milder than the attacks in the communique of the 12 Sino-Soviet bloc parties published the same day, its central theme was the contrast between the Communist world's desire for peaceful coexistence and the aggressive designs of the NATO powers.

The manifesto expressed the "full confidence" of the Communists that "now it is possible to prevent war...because the world situation today is different and the balance of forces has changed." At the same time, however, it warned that the danger of a "monstrous and all-destroying war has not passed" because the "capitalist monopolies" continue to have a "vested interest in war."

The manifesto declared that the Communists have no "motive or reason for launching wars" and appealed to "all people of good will" to support a six-point peaceful coexistence program endorsing the major themes of Soviet foreign policy.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 3
[PAGE 05]
2. THE CYPRUS SITUATION

Comment on:

On Cyprus, recent acts of violence may indicate the end of the eight-month period of relative peace. In addition to increasingly frequent acts of sabotage and attacks by EOKA on Greek Cypriot "collaborators," there are also indications that tension between Greek and Turkish Cypriots is growing. Recent leaflets distributed by EOKA and the Turkish Cypriot underground organization, VOLKAN, have been highly inflammatory.

The increased activity by EOKA is probably based on a desire to retain strict control over its members and over the Greek Cypriot population, the recent anti-EOKA successes of British security forces, and a belief that little is to be gained from the proposed UN debate on Cyprus. EOKA now has the capability of engaging in an active campaign of violence for a period of at least six months.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 4
[PAGE 06]
3. MENDERES HAVING DIFFICULTY FORMING NEW TURKISH CABINET

Comment on:

Failure to name a new Turkish cabinet nearly a month after the national election indicates that Prime Minister-designate Menderes is meeting substantial, unexpected opposition within his own party both as to government policy and membership of the cabinet. The dissension probably centers around Menderes' strong desire to take a tough approach toward the opposition and toward any future defectors from his own party. Twenty-five reelected Democratic deputies are already reported to be considering resignation from the party. Menderes wants to be able to force such defectors completely out of the National Assembly.

The moderates, who are apparently blocking Menderes' attempts to form a new cabinet, may succeed in obtaining some seats in the cabinet and in gaining a temporary compromise aimed at party harmony. Once the government is formed, however, Menderes may be expected to assume firm control of the regime. Menderes and, to a lesser extent, President Bayar are angered over opposition attacks both during and since the election, and will make every effort to muzzle criticism outside the assembly. Menderes has already proposed that reporting on assembly proceedings be limited to the state-operated radio and the official Anatolia News Agency.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 5
[PAGE 07]
4. JAPAN SEEKS ASSOCIATION WITH NATO PROGRAMS

Comment on:

The Japanese government has informed Ambassador MacArthur that it is prepared to participate in a program of greater free world cooperation and hopes that means can be found to associate Japan with appropriate aspects of programs developed at the forthcoming NATO meeting. Japan has requested that the US-Japan security committee discuss methods by which this cooperation can be achieved.

Vice Foreign Minister Ohno said Tokyo must move cautiously and avoid "precipitous action," because of limitations imposed by the constitution; the special nature of US-Japan security relations, which are still subject to strong criticism; and, more immediately, the Diet elections next year.

The Kishi government, which has become increasingly concerned about the adequacy of its defense establishment, probably is interested primarily in any NATO summit agreement on distribution of modern weapons and exchange of military information. Conservative leaders and defense officials apparently are seriously considering a change from a military policy limited to defense of the home islands to one based on a deterrent force equipped with modern weapons.

Although the government is giving favorable consideration to the procurement of ground-to-air and air-to-air guided missiles, it has provided no indication that it intends to relax its opposition to the use of nuclear weapons by either Japanese or American forces in Japan.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6
[PAGE 08]
5. ADENAUER CONCERNED OVER INCREASING COST OF NATO COMMITMENT

Comment on:

A member of the West German NATO delegation told a US delegate in Paris that Bonn's Annual Review submission was almost killed by Chancellor Adenauer when he heard that tax increases would be necessary to finance long-range plans. Bonn's NATO representative mentioned that the present military budget of $2.64 billion would increase to $3.6 billion in 1959 and to $4.32 billion in 1960. Adenauer agreed to submit the plan only when advisers told him the 1959-60 figures were not firm.

The US NATO mission in Paris commented that beginning in 1958-59, Bonn's estimated defense contribution will be second only to the United States in its burden on the economy, reaching 9 percent of the gross national product in 1960 and making it increasingly difficult to balance the budget. The Bonn government has said that, while it plans to finance these defense expenditures from its own resources, it reserves the right to ask for external aid.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7
[PAGE 09]
24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 8
[PAGE 10]
7. GUATEMALAN CRISIS NEARING A CLIMAX

Comment on:

The Communist-infiltrated Revolutionary party (PR) plans a three-day general strike this week if it is not officially recognized and granted the right to participate in the 19 January elections.

Peaceful PR demonstrations by about 3,000 persons in Guatemala City last week failed to achieve the party's aim; if the strike also fails to bring legal recognition, the party is believed ready and able to resort to serious violence.

Railroad workers, who have the country's largest and best organized union and who are responsive to PR leadership, have decided to strike on 25 November if their wage and other demands are not granted. Though not related directly to the political situation, the strike is likely to be exploited by the PR. A PR-led group within the union is to plan the murder of American officers of the United Fruit Company as part of a sabotage and terror campaign to be launched if the PR is denied legal recognition.

The decision for or against PR legality is likely to bring the tension to a climax. Several groups, ranging from extreme rightists to self-proclaimed moderates, are concurrently plotting to seize the government. Each claims support from some elements of the divided army. Decision of the controversial issue might provide one or more of them with the necessary pretext and the resulting breakdown of public order could be more serious than that which followed the abortive election of 20 October.

24 Nov 57 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 9
