[PAGE 01]
14 March 1961

Copy No. C8-16

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

TOP SECRET

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
14 March 1961

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

CONTENTS

2. Situation in Laos. (Page i)

3. USSR: Khrushchev sets bloc line for resumed UN General Assembly session. (Page ii)

5. Iran: New cabinet appointed. (Page iii)

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

14 March 1961

Laos: Kong Le - Pathet Lao forces apparently continue efforts to exploit their successes along the Vientiane - Luang Prabang highway. Pathet Lao guerrilla forces in the area apparently are being activated to assist in this effort; General

i

[PAGE 05]
Phoumi is reported to have admitted that Muong Kassy was taken by irregular troops.

On the political side, there are reports that the Lao government delegation arriving in Phnom Penh today for additional talks with Souvanna Phouma will also meet with Pathet Lao representatives.

Peiping and Hanoi seem particularly disturbed by the Phnom Penh meeting between Souvanna Phouma and Phoumi. While avoiding any direct criticism of Souvanna, they are rebroadcasting Pathet Lao statements clearly intended to remind Souvanna that his position would be weak were it not for the support of pro-Communist military forces in Laos. Peiping, on 12 March, carried a Pathet Lao item which did not mention Souvanna by name but pointedly implied that he could not control developments in Laos.

*A 13 March Pathet Lao broadcast linked the recent Phoumi-Souvanna communiqué to the 19 February proposal of King Savang for a neutral nations commission and noted that Souvanna had already rejected this proposal. The broadcast declared that the Pathet Lao would "oppose all concessions which are against the interests of the nation."

*USSR-UN: Khrushchev reportedly has instructed the Eastern European satellite governments that the bloc's general line at the resumed session of the General Assembly should be to improve the atmosphere for East-West negotiations. In these instructions, the Soviet premier did not introduce any novel concepts. He indicated that the Soviet scheme for general and complete disarmament would not be modified but that the USSR would be ready to engage in bilateral talks with the US. Khrushchev hinted, however, that if the US refused to take a "constructive" approach, the USSR would renew its demand for a

14 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 06]
special assembly session on disarmament, presumably attended by heads of government. He set forth a negative line on the Congo crisis, indicating that the bloc's main purpose should be to oppose any decisions damaging to the Gizenga regime. (Backup, Page 3)

Iran: Prime Minister Sharif-Emami has appointed non-political technicians to the key ministries of foreign affairs, interior, and finance in his new cabinet. The prime minister's resignation on 11 March and his reappointment was a pro forma maneuver in connection with the installation of a new parliament following the recent election. Nevertheless, the occasion has enabled him to strengthen the cabinet, especially in the appointment of General Amir-Azizi as interior minister.

14 Mar 61    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 07]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 08]
Khrushchev Sets Bloc Line for UN General Assembly

Khrushchev pointed out that since the US election, the Soviet Union had "done everything" to improve relations with the US and thus open the way to a solution of the most important international problems. He cited the release of the RB-47 fliers, withdrawal of the Soviet item on "aggressive" actions of the US Air Force from the General Assembly's agenda, and Moscow's decision not to publish its note protesting an alleged "violation" by an American aircraft of the USSR's northern frontier" after the President had stated that such flights would not be repeated. Although Khrushchev complained about the "contradiction" between US declarations and actions, he said the bloc's general line should be to work for improving the atmosphere for negotiations, but, at the same time, to manifest "firmness of principles" so as to obtain "concrete" solutions.

On disarmament, Khrushchev claimed that the USSR's scheme for general and complete disarmament has already gained the support of a "majority of humanity" and that the US and its allies are becoming isolated on this issue. He indicated that the Soviet position would not be modified, that bloc delegations should work to have the General Assembly endorse the principles of general disarmament, and that they should support the 12-nation resolution, drafted in India last fall, calling for general disarmament. He made it clear, however, that these tactics would not preclude bilateral US-Soviet negotiations, should the US "assume a more flexible position" and take the initiative for such talks. He said that if, on the other hand, the US "withdraws from constructive discussion," this would create a favorable situation for renewing the Soviet proposal for a special assembly session on disarmament, presumably attended by heads of government.

With regard to the Congo crisis, Khrushchev claimed that the USSR had been prepared for serious discussion with the US to work out a common line, but that American actions show that the US intends to support the "colonialists." In this situation, said Khrushchev, the bloc's general line will be to oppose any

14 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
decisions which could damage the interests of the "legal government of the Congo"; i.e., Gizenga's Stanleyville regime.

Although the question of Laos has not been placed on the assembly's agenda, Khrushchev urged that bloc delegates seize every opportunity to express support for the views of Souvanna Phouma and Prince Sihanouk, particularly the proposal for an international conference on Laos. He defined bloc interests as keeping Laos out of any "political and military bloc" and ensuring that it pursues a policy of "genuine neutrality."

14 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]
Next 1 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 11]
New Iranian Cabinet

General Amir-Azizi, minister of interior in Iran's new cabinet, replaces General Alavi-Moqadam, who under the Shah's direction was primarily responsible for
This is perhaps intended to give the impression of punishment for Alavi-Moqadam; at the same time, however, it is rumored that he will be given an ambassadorial post, perhaps in Turkey or Spain, suggesting a reward for carrying through the elections successfully in spite of protests by the nationalist opposition.

Amir-Azizi has established a record for honesty and hard work in his two years as chief of the gendarmerie and has greatly reduced the corruption which has long plagued that force.

The new foreign minister, Hossein Qods-Nakhai, is a career Foreign Ministry official who has been ambassador in London and is among Iran's foremost literary men. He is believed solidly pro-Western, has a reputation for scrupulous honesty, and has been described as Iran's ablest diplomat.

Other new appointees, as well as the holdovers from the previous cabinet, are competent and nonpolitical. Lt. General Timur Bakhtiar apparently still remains as chief of the National Intelligence and Security Organization (SAVAK), although Prime Minister Sharif-Emami had said that Bakhtiar--as well as General Abdullah Hedayat, chief of the Supreme Commander's Staff, and General Haj Ali Kia, the staff's chief of intelligence--would be replaced. It is possible that these changes will yet be made. The Iranian ambassador in Washington, Ardeshir Zahedi, son-in-law of the Shah, reportedly has complained to the Shah about Bakhtiar's "conduct and contacts" during a recent visit in the United States.

The new cabinet appears generally of greater competency than the previous one; the Shah will still make all important decisions. The prime minister and the parliament will continue to limit themselves to approving the Shah's decisions.

14 Mar 61    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 7

[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President

Executive Offices of the White House
The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
The Scientific Adviser to the President
The Director of the Budget
The Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization
The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities

The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration
The Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council
The Director of Intelligence and Research

The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury

The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs)
The Assistant to Secretary of Defense (Special Operations)
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
U.S. Rep., Military Committee and Standing Group, NATO
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Director, The Joint Staff
The Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Department of Justice
The Attorney General
The Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director

The Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman

The National Security Agency
The Director

The United States Information Agency
The Director

The National Indications Center
The Director

[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
