Kashani wishes to become the next prime minister. His ultimate aim is to oust the Shah and become president of an Iranian republic.

Comment: An anti-Mossadeq group in the Majlis, composed of conservatives and followers of Kashani, sought American support in August. Kashani also apparently has the support of several street organizations which, combined with the Tudeh, could have a powerful effect. Kashani's acceptance of Tudeh cooperation is probable, since he has always maintained that he could easily control the Tudeh once he has used it.

7. Comment on Nagib's assumption of Egyptian Premiership:

The forced resignation of Prime Minister Ali Maher and General Nagib's assumption of the premiership, following the arrest of important political figures in Cairo, has moved Egypt close to complete military dictatorship.

The military clique publicly stated that although Nagib now heads the government, he will surround himself with civilians in the new cabinet. It is doubtful, however, that Nagib will be able to secure many competent civilians to accept appointment in a cabinet under direct control of the army clique, whose members are generally inexperienced in political and economic affairs.

The present crisis was foreshadowed by the army's impatience with Ali Maher's delay in adopting a land reform program. Maher's stalling was due in part to pressure from Egypt's landowning group, which maintained that drastic changes would upset the Egyptian economy. Maher presumably also recognized that the reform proposals might raise problems which he could not solve.

Ambassador Caffery reported from Cairo on 5 September that Maher, reading the handwriting on the wall, has assured him that he would soon be in a position to meet the army's demands for action and had asked him to pass on these assurances to Nagib in the hope of gaining a few days' grace. Caffery did this with little hope of success. At that time, he reported, the army was considering a final effort to find a civilian prime minister as an alternative to military rule.

Although some of Nagib's officers recognized Maher's honesty and ability, the deciding factor in requesting Maher's resignation was the apparent fear that the prestige gained in the July coup might be lost through continuing delays.

The arrest of key political figures in Egypt is the direct result of mounting charges by the army that the political parties had failed to make a thorough purge of their ranks. Only last week Secretary-General Serageddin of the Wafd Party, one of those taken into custody, openly defied the army by declaring that the Wafd would await a court order before dismissing more of its members. Serageddin's detention and the arrest of independents and former members of the palace clique indicate that the army has no intention of compromising its objectives in order to gain the support of any political group.
