Chinese Communist National Day Celebrations

Communist China has used its 1 October National Day celebrations to rebut criticism that China is belligerent. A principal theme of the celebrations has been China's adherence to peaceful coexistence, and Peiping is saying that the Sino-Burmese boundary treaty--signed on 1 October by Prime Minister U Nu and Premier Chou En-lai--is proof of its intentions. Possibly for the same reason, Peiping eliminated its usual military parade.

The Chinese have also attempted to gloss over current Sino-Soviet differences by emphasizing "socialist unity" in their 1 October propaganda, but they continue to adhere to hard-line positions in the dispute. At a public lecture on ideology in Moscow on 29 September--two days before the Peiping celebration--the speaker identified the Chinese as "dogmatists" and asserted they should engage "in self-criticism and admission of error." Ambassador Thompson speculates that this public labeling of the Chinese may foreshadow a sharper stage in the quarrel.

The absence from the Peiping celebrations of high-ranking personalities from any bloc country except Albania points up continuing Soviet efforts to isolate Peiping. The celebrations apparently were snubbed by Polish Premier Cyrankiewicz, who was scheduled to complete a visit to Ceylon on 30 September and could easily have arrived in Peiping in time for the festivities. Albanian party leader Hoxha's 30 September speech in Tirana endorsed several Chinese positions in contrast to East German Premier Grotewohl's restatement of his regime's "correct" position in the dispute.

Peiping confined its comments on the domestic scene to complaints that agriculture has suffered the most serious "natural calamities" since the regime came to power, but said that the communes had minimized the damage to crops. Although there is no evidence that industrial plans--which schedule a 29-percent increase in value of industrial production as against a 40-percent increase achieved in 1959--have bogged down, Peiping continued silent on the performance of the economy in 1960.
