British Labor Party's Defense Policy Faces Stiff Fight at Party Conference

Hugh Gaitskell, leader of Britain's Labor party, still faces an uphill fight to defeat an uncompromising nuclear disarmament resolution sponsored by the left-wing transport workers' Frank Cousins at the party's annual conference from 3 to 7 October, despite recent indication that some small trade unions and several local party branches now plan to switch their support to Gaitskell. The left-wing position still appears to command a majority of votes from the trade unions and the constituency delegations. Cousins' statement on 2 October that his resolution means unilateral British disarmament--a description he has until now refused to concede--may gain for him additional support from extreme left-wingers.

Since the Trades Union Congress meeting early last month when delegates endorsed both the official defense statement and the Cousins resolution--the later by a much larger margin--several moderate Labor members of Parliament, previously inclined to maintain a public silence on the issue, have spoken up in favor of the official policy, which rejects an independent British nuclear deterrent but supports an American deterrent under NATO control. However, some of the party leaders have done little to strengthen Gaitskell's position. George Brown, Labor's parliamentary spokesman on defense matters and the chief drafter of the official policy, has spent most of his efforts in an unsuccessful attempt to reach a pre-conference accommodation with Cousins. Harold Wilson, Gaitskell's runner-up as party leader, continues to maintain his equivocal stand on the issue.

Even if Gaitskell is able to eke out a narrow victory at the conference, his hold on the party leadership will continue to be precarious. The degeneration of the Labor party since the general elections last fall has persuaded many moderate Laborites that inept leadership has been a major factor in the party's decline. The strength of this sentiment will be tested next month when Parliament reconvenes and Labor members of Parliament cast their annual votes for the party leaders.
