[PAGE 01]
22 April 1959
[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
22 APRIL 1959

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
Chinese Communists pressing rebels hard in southeastern Tibet; large group of Tibetans hopes to enter India.

2. Communist China may be preparing to produce MIG-19 fighter with Soviet assistance.

II. ASIA-AFRICA
Cairo to receive three more destroyers and mine sweepers from USSR.
Indonesian Army continuing efforts to strengthen political position and to acquire more arms from Western and bloc sources.
Japan - Key gubernatorial and municipal elections on 23 April.

LATE ITEM
Soviet note protesting nuclear arms for West Germany further move to soften Western position in forthcoming negotiations.
[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
22 April 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC
*Tibet: Rebels in southeastern Tibet are being hard pressed by Communist forces using aircraft and artillery. Rebel forces consider most of the southeast area lost. A large group of armed Khamba tribesmen and other Tibetans are reported to be camped near the Indian border. They are short of food and ammunition and are said to be under constant Chinese Communist attack. They hope to obtain permission to proceed into India near the point where the Dalai Lama entered.)

Communist China: Communist China may be preparing to produce the FARMER (MIG-19) twin-jet interceptor with Soviet assistance. Soviet fighter production experts, known to be in China, are affiliated with a department of the Soviet Engineering Directorate which has accounted for some of the sharp increase noted recently in Soviet military deliveries to China. Some of the Soviet production experts have been associated with a FARMER engine factory in the USSR.
(Page 1)

II. ASIA-AFRICA
*USSR-UAR: Cairo agreed on 14 April to accept delivery from the Soviet Union of two destroyers in the second quarter of 1959 and one destroyer in the third quarter. Cairo is also to receive delivery of some Soviet mine sweepers--probably four--at once. These deliveries apparently are to be made under a new Soviet-UAR arms deal recently completed. Details of this agreement are not known. The Soviet Union has already provided the UAR with two destroyers, nine submarines, six mine sweepers, and 37 motor torpedo boats.
[PAGE 05]
Indonesia: The Indonesian Army is continuing its efforts to strengthen its political position and is exploring ways of curtailing the influence of the Indonesian Communist party. The army, meanwhile, continues to approach both Western and Soviet bloc sources for military supplies. (Prime Minister Djuanda is expected to discuss present and future bloc aid programs when he visits Moscow this summer.)
(Page 2)

Japan: The contests between the ruling conservatives and the Socialists for the governorships of Tokyo, Osaka, Hokkaido, and Fukuoka in Japan's local elections on 23 April will provide a measure of relative conservative and Socialist strength. Prime Minister Kishi regards a conservative victory as essential. The results will have an impact on the position of Kishi's Liberal Democratic party in the June upper-house elections.
(Page 4)

III. CONCLUSIONS OF SPECIAL USIB COMMITTEE
ON BERLIN SITUATION

The USIB has taken note of the following conclusions reached by its special committee on the Berlin situation. The committee pointed out that its conclusions were to be used in context with SNIE 100-2-59 (24 February 1959) and with the review of that estimate in SNIE 100-2/1-59 (17 March 1959):

1. There are as yet no clear indications of specific Soviet tactics at Geneva, but there have been several recent indications that the USSR will be prepared to discuss some issues other than a German peace treaty and Berlin, particularly security and disengagement proposals.

2. The fact that the United States went ahead with a second C-130 high-altitude flight in spite of British representations has probably impressed Moscow as to the seriousness of US intentions on questions affecting air

22 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF ii
[PAGE 06]
access rights. Moscow's propaganda reaction was sharper than over the first flight. However, its total handling of the matter still suggests the USSR will seek to avoid serious incidents in the air corridors in the near future while endeavoring to extract the maximum propaganda advantage.

3. The USSR will not turn over access controls to the GDR in the near future. However, the physical transfer of access controls could be accomplished with little or no advance warning.

4. Indications of Soviet responses to possible Western actions in the event of turnover, harassment, or blockade remain consistent with the judgments stated in SNIE 100-2-59.

5. There were no major intelligence indications of Western allied diplomatic intentions, apart from information obtained through official contacts with US representatives.

6. There are no significant changes in the West Berlin situation.

22 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF iii
[PAGE 07]
LATE ITEM

*USSR: Moscow's note of 21 April to Bonn, charging that measures to equip West German forces with nuclear weapons are designed to confront forthcoming East-West negotiations with a fait accompli, is a further Soviet move to discredit the Adenauer government and set the stage for Soviet proposals for a nuclear-free zone in Europe in the talks. The warning that negotiations will be doomed to failure if Bonn persists in its rearmament program is another step in Moscow's effort to establish in advance the rationale and justification for unilateral actions regarding Berlin and a separate peace treaty with East Germany in the event the talks fail. By focusing attention on the controversial issue of arming West Germany with modern weapons, the Soviet leaders are seeking to sharpen differences among the Western allies on the eve of the foreign ministers' conference.

22 Apr 59 DAILY BRIEF iv
[PAGE 08]
I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

Communist China May Be Preparing to Produce MIG-19s

Communist China, with Soviet assistance, is preparing to produce the FARMER (MIG-19) twin-jet interceptor. Soviet personnel from Aircraft Engine Plant 26 in Ufa, which has been producing FARMER engines, now are in China. They are probably at Plant 410 in Mukden, which has been producing engines for the MIG-17. Preparation may have been under way for a considerable time; Plant 410 was developing a "new technology."

A possible production site for airframes is Plant 112 in Mukden, which produces the MIG-17 and is known to be producing a "new article." Another possibility is the Sian area, where there are several little-known plants connected with the aircraft industry and where Soviet technicians familiar with MIG-type aircraft have been identified.

At least three of the Soviet specialists involved have been sent to China by the department of the Soviet Engineering Directorate that has accounted for most of the sharp increase noted recently in Soviet military deliveries to China. This suggests that at least part of these increased shipments are plant equipment for production of FARMERS.

The USSR no longer produces the FARMER, but Czechoslovakia is believed to have started serial production recently. About one and a half to two years would be required from the inception of the program until the Chinese could begin producing the FARMER in significant quantities.

22 Apr 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
[PAGE 09]
II. ASIA-AFRICA

Indonesia

The expected departure of President Sukarno on 23 April for a two-month tour of Europe and Latin America has given rise to new rumors of political changes and maneuvers.

the orthodox Moslem Nahdlatul Ulama intends to withdraw from the cabinet, thereby precipitating its collapse and paving the way for the formation of a new army-dominated cabinet and the banning of the Communist party.

Army Chief of Staff General Nasution has not yet decided to cooperate. Other speculation has been advanced as to possible army moves during Sukarno's absence, most of it, however, strongly implying Sukarno's prior knowledge or even his instructions. Nasution, in fact, has indicated to American officials that he is still working closely with Sukarno and has no plans for an early move against the Communists.

Prime Minister Djuanda plans to visit the Soviet Union in late June or early July at the invitation of Moscow. Although this initially appeared to be a courtesy visit, Djuanda is now reported planning to discuss present and future aid programs with emphasis on arms.

Meanwhile, an Indonesian Army purchasing mission, which has been shopping in Yugoslavia and the West since early March, is now believed in Czechoslovakia. Since the mission probably could not obtain in the West either the liberal credit terms or the quantities of materiel it was instructed to request, the bulk of its purchases are likely to come from Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and Poland.

Ninety more Indonesian Air Force cadets are scheduled to leave soon for Czechoslovakia for two years' pilot training,
Some 70 to 150 air force personnel

22 Apr 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2
[PAGE 10]
are reported already there undergoing pilot and technical training.

An Indonesian mission will leave for Peiping on 21 April to discuss utilization of $20,000,000 of a $40,000,000 credit extended by China last year. Approximately $11,500,000 of the loan has been spent for a textile mill, and the amount now under negotiation has also been earmarked for the textile industry.

22 Apr 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3
[PAGE 11]
Japanese Elections

Japan's top political leaders have injected national issues into the election campaign for important gubernatorial and municipal offices on 23 April. These issues include the Socialist leadership's recent identification of the party generally with the Chinese Communist position on Asian questions and the conservatives' policy of cooperation with the United States. This will be the first such contest between the ruling Liberal-Democratic party and the Socialist party since they were organized in 1955, and the outcome may have a band-wagon effect in the important June upper-house elections.

Primary political interest is centered on the campaigns for the governorships of the Tokyo metropolitan area, the island of Hokkaido, and Osaka and Fukuoka prefectures. The elections will hinge largely on personalities and local issues, and the outcome is likely to be close.

Conservative defeats, especially in Tokyo and to a lesser extent in Osaka or Hokkaido, could have an adverse effect on Prime Minister Kishi's personal position, and probably would encourage party dissidents to renew their attacks on his leadership.

22 Apr 59 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
[PAGE 12]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
[PAGE 13]
TOP SECRET
22 April 1959
Copy No. 53

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
