[PAGE 01]
18 June 1959

Copy No. C 62

CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
BULLETIN

State Dept. review completed

[PAGE 02]
Next 2 Page(s) In Document Exempt

[PAGE 03]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN
18 June 1959

DAILY BRIEF

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC

*USSR: The heaviest concentration of party presidium mem-
bers to appear in Moscow since the party congress last Febru-
ary was on hand for the opening of the All-Union Industry and
Agriculture Exposition on 16 June. The American Embassy re-
ports that all but one of the members who reside in other cities
were accounted for at the ceremony. The top leaders may have
gathered for preliminary discussions on the business of the cen-
tral committee plenum which is scheduled to meet on 24 June to
deal with domestic economic topics. The embassy points out,
however, that the Soviet censor passed a Western correspond-
ent's dispatch to the effect that Khrushchev met on 14 June with
members of the presidium to discuss new instructions for
Gromyko, suggesting that the presidium is discussing devel-
opments at the Geneva conference.

Watch Committee conclusion--Berlin: No significant indi-
cations bearing on the possibility of hostilities.

II. ASIA-AFRICA

Watch Committee conclusion-- Middle East and Asia: Sit-
uations susceptible of direct exploitation by Sino-Soviet action
which would jeopardize US interests exist in Laos and in the
Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Iran. The situation in the
Middle East remains precarious, but a deliberate initiation of
large-scale hostilities is unlikely in the immediate future.

[PAGE 04]
South Korea: According to the leader of the major oppo-
sition party, top leaders of the ruling party agreed with him
at a meeting on 15 June that South Korea's hostile policy toward
Japan must be modified. These leaders probably feel that
Japan's apparent determination to permit the voluntary repa-
triation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea indicates a hard-
ening of Tokyo's attitude toward Seoul, and that continued South
Korean intransigence would only reduce the likelihood of a set-
tlement of Japanese - South Korean differences on terms favor-
able to Seoul. It is doubtful that such views would be commu-
nicated to President Rhee.

III. THE WEST

Dominican Republic: Trujillo's forces have not yet suc-
ceeded in completely rounding up a small group of insurgents
in the mountainous interior, and there are signs of discontent
in the navy. Insurgents who have been captured since the 14
June incursion claim that they were flown from Cuba and that
two boatloads of additional men are en route from Cuba. These
may have already landed somewhere on the northern coast.

*Argentina: President Frondizi on 17 June rejected an army
demand, presented by five ranking generals, for the dismissal
of the Army Secretary, General Solanos Pacheco. Frondizi did,
however, agree to dismiss Assistant Secretary Reimundez and
in so doing may have temporarily relieved the crisis within the

18 June 59    DAILY BRIEF    ii

[PAGE 05]
army. Reimundez has been replaced by General Rosendo Fraga,
formerly a commander in the Cordoba area, where army units
are severely disaffected.

*Costa Rica-Nicaragua: President Echandi was warned on
17 June by the leader of a substantial military force of irregu-
lars in Costa Rica that the irregulars are ready to attack Nica-
ragua and that if Echandi attempts to stop them there will be "plenty
of trouble in Costa Rica." Fragmentary newscasts from San Jose
later in the day suggest that Echandi, despite the warning, was
deploying troops in an effort to prevent any attack on Nicaragua
from Costa Rica. If the revolutionary force in Costa Rica should
try, it could not by itself defeat the 5,000-man Nicaraguan National
Guard. However, the Somoza regime is also faced with the threat
of further rebel incursions from Honduras in the north.

18 June 59    DAILY BRIEF    iii

[PAGE 06]

[PAGE 07]
South Korean Leaders Have Second Thoughts on Policy Toward
Japan

Top leaders of both the ruling Liberal party and the opposi-
tion Democratic party are concerned over the possible disastrous
effects of President Rhee's intransigent policy toward Japan, ac-
cording to Democratic leader Cho Pyong-ok. Cho says that Presi-
dent Rhee's chief political lieutenant, Yi Ki-pung, along with some
other top liberal leaders, believes that a change in policy toward
Japan is necessary; Cho furthermore has informed American Ambas-
sador Dowling that unless the government's Japanese policy is changed
"promptly" the Democratic party will have to withdraw its bipartisan
support.

Such concern probably reflects a realization by responsible
South Korean leaders that Japan's apparent determination to permit
voluntary repatriation of Koreans in Japan to North Korea indicates
a hardening of Tokyo's attitude toward Seoul and that South Korean
intransigence is reducing the likelihood of a settlement of Japanese -
South Korean differences on terms favorable to Seoul. Ambassador
Dowling has interpreted a South Korean request for American good
offices to dissuade Tokyo from carrying out its repatriation plan as
an admission of South Korea's helplessness, despite its rash threats.

There has been no indication, however, that President Rhee is
prepared to modify his demands for a normalization of relations
with Japan. Following a meeting of top political leaders of both
major parties on 15 June--at which it was agreed that President
Rhee should be advised of the urgent need for a change in policy--
Cho Pyong-ok told Ambassador Dowling that he doubted this would
be done since no one dared make such a suggestion to Rhee.

18 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 2

[PAGE 08]
III. THE WEST

Fighting Continues as Dominicans Expect New Landings

Ambassador Farland reported on 16 June that fighting con-
tinues between Dominican forces and a small group of insurgents
in the mountainous interior and that there are signs of discon-
tent in the navy. According to the government, insurgents cap-
tured since the 14 June incursion claim that they were flown
from Cuba and that two boatloads of additional men are en route
from there. A Cuban press report of 16 June said "uprisings"
had taken place in the Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata areas on
the northern coast. Dictator Trujillo's government has expressed
confidence that there will be an early end to the "skirmish." It
has acknowledged some apparent collaboration between the gar-
rison at Constanza--site of the air landing--and the insurgents,
and has made numerous arrests. New landings are expected by
the government.

On 15 June a Dominican official said that his government had
no intention then to request assistance from the Organization of
American States.

The 14 June incursion followed several weeks of strained
relations among Caribbean nations which resulted in Venezuela
suspending diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on
12 June. The Cuban Embassy in Ciudad Trujillo was closed on 5
June, and a complete rupture of diplomatic relations is expected
momentarily,

18 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 3

[PAGE 09]
Costa Rican President's Neutrality in Nicaraguan Affair Leads
To Threat Against His Government

Frank Marshall, Costa Rican revolutionary veteran, warned
President Echandi on 17 June that he has a substantial military
force in the country ready to attack Nicaragua and that if Echandi
attempts to stop it, "there will be plenty of trouble in Costa Rica."
The President immediately called in his cabinet and the leaders
of various political parties. Fragmentary Costa Rican news-
casts have subsequently indicated that, despite the threat, Echandi
may be sending elements of the Civil Guard to prevent an attack
on Nicaragua by Marshall.

Echandi's efforts to maintain neutrality in the Nicaraguan
affair have been highly unpopular in Costa Rica, where public
opinion strongly backs the Nicaraguan opposition. Former Pres-
ident Jose Figueres' partisans, who dominate the legislature,
have openly supported the Nicaraguan rebels and Figueres is
believed to have aided the Nicaraguans who took part in the ill-
fated invasions of 31 May and 1 June. However, Figueres could
not back Marshall's threat without negating the basis of a polit-
ical creed that has gained him wide prestige throughout the hemi-
sphere. Marshall is capable of vio-
lent action, but would have little support for an attempt against
the Costa Rican government.

If Marshall's forces succeeded in invading Nicaragua they
probably could not be themselves defeat the 5,000-man Nicara-
guan National Guard. However, the Somoza regime is faced
with the threat of further incursions from Honduras in the north.

18 June 59    CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN    Page 4

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]
THE PRESIDENT
The Vice President
Executive Offices of the White House
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs
Scientific Adviser to the President
Director of the Budget
Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
The Treasury Department
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Department of State
The Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State
The Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs
The Deputy Under Secretary for Administration
The Counselor
Director, International Cooperation Administration
The Director of Intelligence and Research
The Department of Defense
The Secretary of Defense
The Deputy Secretary of Defense
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs
The Secretary of the Army
The Secretary of the Navy
The Secretary of the Air Force
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
Commandant, United States Marine Corps
The Director, The Joint Staff
Chief of Staff, United States Army
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe
Commander in Chief, Pacific
The Department of the Interior
The Secretary of the Interior
The Department of Commerce
The Secretary of Commerce
Federal Bureau of Investigation
The Director
Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman
National Security Agency
The Director
National Indications Center
The Director
United States Information Agency
The Director
