Iran May Improve Relations With USSR

The Shah feels that there has been some change in Soviet policy toward Iran and that Tehran now should take a more moderate attitude toward the USSR. Prime Minister Sharif-Emami will head a good-will mission to Moscow, probably in April. The Shah has been anxious to end the barrage of hostile Soviet propaganda which, after a four-month lull, has intensified in recent weeks. The propaganda, keyed to corruption in the current Iranian parliamentary elections, probably has found a wide and sympathetic audience in urban areas.

Nationalist groups, long quiet, have made a display of strength in protest against the rigged elections. Progovernment groups, on the other hand, have attracted little popular interest. Antigovernment demonstrations by students drew large crowds at the university in Tehran, and on 5 February the students succeeded in closing the bazaar. Classes have now been suspended at the university. Demonstrations are drawing fewer participants in the face of strong, but so far apparently bloodless, police action.

The government's official line is that the nationalist activity is Communist inspired. The extent of Communist participation is unclear, but the more extreme nationalists are probably cooperating with local Communists. Sharif-Emami has deplored the fact that extremist elements gained the upper hand and that the moderates, whom he was encouraging, refused to take any part in the elections. He hopes to be able to control nationalist activity by normal police methods, but the Shah has ordered the army to take action if the police appear to be wavering. The army, untrained in riot control, might unwittingly precipitate a clash that would give the nationalists martyrs for their cause.

The Shah frequently alternates between periods of confidence and depression. Basically weak and insecure, he has attempted in recent years to imitate his father's strong approach. In these periods of uncertainty he is apt to make a rash move similar to that of two years ago when the Soviet Union was invited to discuss a nonaggression pact.

7 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
