supervises party affairs in the USSR's largest republic. Compared with some other Soviet republics, the RSFSR had a satisfactory agricultural year in 1960 and there has been no indication of executive failures on Aristov's part. His demotion appears to be the outcome of a competition for authority among Khrushchev's lieutenants. His removal from the RSFSR post, in which he has been replaced by a newcomer to the central command, appears likely both to strengthen the grip of Frol Kozlov, as Khrushchev's principal party aide on the RSFSR party organization, and to enhance the position of Dmitry Polyansky, the RSFSR premier.
(Backup, Page 3)

Laos: Government forces are preparing to put into effect plans for the recapture of the Plaine des Jarres. The troops to be committed are adequate for their mission.

The Pathet Lao radio has broadcast a statement attributed to the "legal government of the Laotian kingdom" warning that if the United States and Thailand do not stop their "overt armed interference" in Laos, the "government" would be "obliged to appeal for help from friendly countries." The statement, signed by "acting premier" Khamsouk Keola and others claiming to be acting in behalf of the Souvanna "government" in Xieng Khouang, was dated 2 February, the same day that Chinese Communist Foreign Minister Chen Yi announced in Peiping that his government was prepared to give aid if requested.
(Backup, Page 4)
(Map)

Congo: Britain, France, and Belgium have now expressed reservations concerning Hammarskjold's recent proposals that the Congolese Army be neutralized. The British believe that the military situation in the Congo currently favors Kasavubu and that his position would be undermined if the troops in the Leopoldville area were disarmed. French and Belgian representatives have also stated that the proposal would be detrimental to Kasavubu's legal position, and might result in the early restoration to power of Lumumba.
(Backup, Page 6)

7 Feb 61 DAILY BRIEF ii
