Soviet Press Criticism of President's State Of the Union Address

The critical tone of "Observer" articles in Pravda and Izvestia and of a commentary on the State of the Union message by the Soviet weekly Life Abroad probably is designed to convey the impression that the Soviet leaders believe the US has failed to respond adequately to their initial overtures for improving Soviet-American relations. Bloc spokesmen have taken a similar line in private conversations by stressing that the next move is up to the US. Izvestia comments that although the President's message reflected a "passing" awareness of the crucial stage in international relations, the US must now draw the "appropriate conclusions." Pravda cautions, however, against any judgment of US policies on the basis of the "first steps" and asserts that only "the near future" will tell whether the new administration intends to embark on a new course in US foreign policy.

The propaganda pattern developed by the USSR and the European satellites since the inauguration features relatively factual coverage of statements by US officials, some indications of optimism over future Soviet-American relations, and a generally skeptical over-all tone. This combination reflects the conflicting pressures on the Soviet leaders to create a favorable climate for the advancement of their objectives through negotiations with the West, on the one hand, and to maintain bloc unity on the other, by avoiding an overly favorable estimate of US intentions which might intensify the dispute with the Chinese Communists. Such an approach suggests that Moscow will continue to take a conciliatory position on the official level, in such matters as the release of the RB-47 crew members and the agreement to postpone the resumption of talks on banning nuclear tests. At the same time, the Soviet leaders will probably feel compelled to respond critically to statements by US officials on the bloc's international posture and on specific East-West issues. In contrast to the Izvestia editorial of 4 February, the Soviet note on the same date, agreeing to a postponement of the Geneva talks, omitted the standard Soviet position that the USSR preferred to expedite matters and was agreeing only as a concession to the US. Instead Moscow noted the US desire to reach a successful conclusion to the talks.

The continued caution in commenting on the new US administration

7 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1
