[PAGE 01]
TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

19 November 1952

US OFFICIALS ONLY

Copy No. 57

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST

1. Communist air force in Korea may be preparing for expanded air war (page 3).

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Viet Minh broadcast charges French use germ warfare (page 3).

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Shah pleads for American aid (page 5).
5. Libya requests renegotiation of US base agreement (page 5).

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Norwegian Government perturbed over publicity concerning base policy (page 6).

* * * *

- 2 -

[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. Communist air force in Korea may be preparing for expanded air war:

The Communist air force may be preparing for an expansion of the Korean air war, according to a Far East Air Force assessment.

The weekly total of 17 MIG-15 sorties observed from 9 to 16 November is the lowest in 15 months. Visual reconnaissance of the Yalu River combat airfields also shows that the enemy is no longer basing large numbers of aircraft there.

FEAF concludes that the withdrawal from combat of a maximum number of interceptors and a reduction of the enemy's vulnerability would be logical moves if the Communists were contemplating an attack with the newly-arrived IL-28 jet light bombers. There are, however, no further indications of an impending offensive.

Comment: The presence of up to 45 jet light bombers in northern Manchuria represents a significant gain in the combat potential of Communist air forces in the area. There is, as yet, no indication of the readiness or availability of these aircraft or their crews for commitment in the Korean air war.

On 17 November 64 MIG-15 flights were observed, of which 31 were encountered.

SOUTHEAST ASIA

2. Viet Minh broadcast charges French use germ warfare:

The Viet Minh radio on 12 November charged that French aircraft in October had dropped bombs on Central Vietnam which contained worms to destroy crops.

The American Embassy in Saigon notes a French intelligence report of mid-October to the effect that the Viet Minh

- 3 -

[PAGE 04]
appeared concerned over possible French use of germ warfare and had issued instructions to its agent for close supervision of the Pasteur Institute in Central Vietnam.

Comment: This is the first public allegation that the French have used bacteriological warfare in Indochina.

- 4 -

[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST - AFRICA

4. Shah pleads for American aid:

The Shah told Ambassador Henderson on 15 November that Iran's drift toward the Soviet Union was temporarily checked, but that he "desperately hoped" for American purchases of Iranian oil as well as economic and financial aid from the United States. He insisted that National Front leaders were "practically unanimous" in desiring close, friendly relations with the United States.

Comment: The Shah has now joined other Iranian officials in the current campaign to secure American aid. Despite his disapproval of many of the National Front government's techniques, he has consistently supported Mossadeq's efforts implement oil nationalization.

5. Libya requests renegotiation of US base agreement:

Libya requests renegotiation of the American base agreement in a note delivered to the US Legation in Tripoli on 17 November by Suleiman Jerbi, Director General of the Foreign Office.

Jerbi explained that Prime Minister Muntasser had believed that raising the annual US payment from $1,000,000 to $2,000,000 would ensure ratification of the agreement. Following receipt of draft agreements for British and French bases, however, the Premier was convinced that ratification of any of these on the basis of the present terms was impossible.

The Director General indicated that Libya is sending similar notes to Great Britain and France.

Comment: The request for a renegotiation is evidence that Libya is following the prevailing Arab pattern of increasing the price for cooperation. This attitude may grow

- 5 -

[PAGE 06]
more pronounced if Libya joins the Arab League, which has frequently adopted an anti-Western policy.

WESTERN EUROPE

6. Norwegian Government perturbed over publicity concerning base policy:

Norwegian officials are greatly disturbed at recent press stories concerning Norway's policy on military bases. They apparently fear that such reports, allegedly from SHAPE and NATO sources, may so weaken public confidence in the government that after the elections it will be unable to take any positive steps. Norwegian representatives in Paris have been instructed to discuss the matter with SHAPE and to try to stop any further leaks.

Comment: The Norwegians are particularly sensitive about any publicity with regard to a possible change in their policy on military bases. They have on numerous occasions publicly stated that no foreign troops will be stationed in Norway in peacetime and apparently fear that the USSR will consider any reversal provocative.

- 6 -
