Congo: An agreement to return to the status quo at Elisabethville airport, with Katangan troops and a Swedish UN contingent exercising joint control, apparently has papered over the immediate cause of the 3 April confrontation between UN and Katangan forces. The incident seems to have been set off by the Katangans, who attempted to block the airport runway and were apprehended and disarmed by the Swedes. Tshombé's regime remains apprehensive that the UN will attempt to airlift Indian troops into southern Katanga from Kamina. This distrust has been communicated to the civilian population and the armed forces, and civilian demonstrations against the UN occurred on 4 April.

In a discussion in New York with American and British officials, Hammarskjold indicated that he is hopeful relations between the UN and the Leopoldville regime will improve. He remains adamant, however, that UN military units must be readmitted to the port of Matadi in the near future. He disclosed that in an effort to meet Congolese objections, his representative in Leopoldville was being instructed to suggest that the force in the port might be limited to 100 Nigerian police for the time being. He said he was asking for an early answer and stated that if no favorable reply were received, he would bring the question before the Security Council.

Soviet presidium member Brezhnev told the Swiss ambassador recently that the USSR has little interest or hopes in the Congo but is going to use the issue as a means of obtaining its objectives concerning the UN Secretariat, including the removal of Secretary General Hammarskjold. (Backup, Page 3) (Map)

West Germany: Leaders of Chancellor Adenauer's Christian Democratic Union believe that Adenauer, during his 11-14 April visit to Washington, should be "tougher" and show less approval of US foreign policy than did Brandt during his recent visit. They believe that Brandt's accommodating attitude toward US policies will hurt his popularity in the September national election, and claim that recent public opinion polls show the West German people to be increasingly resentful of US "financial demands." Adenauer, while still regarding good relations with the US as the cornerstone of his policies, reportedly agrees with these views of his supporters, and plans to make it clear that he is able to "stand up to the Americans." (Backup, Page 4)
