Coup Attempt in Albania Last Summer

Rear Admiral Temi Sejko and other high-ranking Albanian military officers probably were the leaders of the coup attempt last summer, according to a number of reports. Sejko, who had been vice commander in chief of the Albanian Navy, had been cashiered from the navy. Several party and government officials in southern districts of Albania where the revolt was based were probably also implicated. Between July and September, the party boss of one district was demoted and two provincial government administrators were removed, allegedly because of involvement in the coup plan. During this same period, between 200 and 500 party members were purged, many of them reportedly for holding pro-Soviet views.

Subsequently, at a party central committee meeting in early September, politburo member Liri Belishova and auditing commission chief Koco Tashko were removed from their posts. Tashko was accused of "anti-state activities" and was ousted from the party. Belishova, who was charged with "errors in the party line," was allowed to retain her party membership. It later became apparent that both were being punished for advocating that the Albanian party align itself completely with the Soviet Union.

Albania's continuing pro-Chinese alignment was underscored by the arrival on 9 February of a Chinese "friendship" delegation. This group is touring Albania, making speeches about the close friendship between Tirana and Peiping, and is receiving wide coverage in the Albanian press.

The pro-Moscow delegations from the Soviet bloc now in Tirana for the Albanian party congress are evidently prepared to speak on those issues over which Tirana is in conflict with Moscow. Each of the bloc delegations contains specialists in ideology, organization, or party discipline, and several delegations include persons who participated in the big conference of 81 Communist parties held in Moscow last November. The level of the bloc delegations is comparable to that of delegations to the last Albanian party

15 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 8
