Security Situation Worsening in Angola

Portuguese concern over conditions in Angola
reported the "high degree of nervous tension" in Angola and expressed his fear that violence might spread in accordance with "directives heard on Moscow radio."
in addition to incidents in Luanda--where some 40 persons have been killed--there have been several disorders in the interior of northern Angola. In one of these a military patrol suffered casualties but killed 41 attacking natives.

The leading organization of anti-Communist Angolan nationalists is the Union of the Angolan People (UPA), whose leader, Roberto Holden, is in exile. He attributes the Luanda incidents to a militant minority led by Portuguese Communists and to the rival pro-Communist organization, the African Revolutionary Front for the Independence of Portuguese Colonies in Africa (FRAIN), based at Conakry. Holden reportedly refused a request several weeks ago to lend UPA support to attempts to free political prisoners in Luanda. Now, he is discouraged that the current violence, with resultant reprisals, destroys any chance for negotiating political reforms with the Portuguese.

Continuing outbursts of antigovernment violence in Luanda suggest that the long calm of the Portuguese African territories may be coming to an end. While neither the Portuguese Government, nor the loyalty of any of its African provinces appears to be in any immediate danger, Portugal appears headed for a period of intense political maneuvering or even unrest.

The overseas territories are almost certain to be exposed to external pressures over the next few years. The problem is likely to be intensified by white settler reactions to domination by Lisbon. These are generally of three kinds: (1) simple hostility to Salazar's leadership on the part of those whose loyalty to Portugal remains steadfast, but who feel the special interests of the "provinces" are not well understood by Lisbon; (2) separatism, which has, according to some

15 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 12
