Situation in Laos

In a conversation with Ambassador Brown in Vientiane, Phoumi stated that a full-scale Council of Ministers' conference under King Savang's chairmanship would be held shortly. The meeting may result in a statement affirming Laotian neutrality and inviting a neutral nations commission to Laos. The conference is also expected to consider steps to broaden the Boun Oum government, now representative chiefly of southern Laos. In a further effort to enlist former Premier Souvanna Phouma's participation in some capacity, the Laotian government announced yesterday that it is considering sending Phoumi to Cambodia to discuss Souvanna Phouma's "possible return" to Vientiane. Phoumi has expressed a willingness to try to approach Souvanna Phouma personally in Phnom Penh. Phoumi told Brown that he would have preferred to postpone international and domestic action toward a political solution until after recapture of the Plaine des Jarres, but he appreciated the urgency of the situation and felt the government's bargaining position had improved since the army "had regained the initiative."

The Chinese Nationalist irregulars who retreated into northwestern Laos from Burma have been ordered to withdraw farther into Namtha Province to avoid provoking the Chinese Communists. About 700-800 minority tribesmen among the irregulars will be organized into an army battalion stationed at Namtha village; the remainder will be grouped into units under army control. They will be used in mopping-up operations west of Muong Sai to support government forces in that town and to cut off Pathet Lao reinforcements from Phong Saly Province who might try to get south of that blocking position.

This plan to utilize the irregulars may be countermanded by higher authorities in Vientiane. General Phoumi has expressed awareness that such use would invite intervention by the Chinese Communists, and he has stated that he is insisting that the irregulars be disarmed if they are to remain in Laos.

Moscow's reply to the British ICC proposal on 21 January was still being drafted.

15 Feb 61 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4
