[PAGE 01]
24 June 1960  
Copy No. C 68  

CENTRAL  
INTELLIGENCE  
BULLETIN  

[PAGE 02]

[PAGE 03]
24 JUNE 1960  

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC  
Peiping representative's speech at Bucharest judiciously worded but makes no concessions to Khrushchev.  

II. ASIA-AFRICA  
Japan--Kishi's impending resignation has brought shift to more conventional political activity.  
Top Indian officials tour Tibetan frontier.  

III. THE WEST  
France--Soustelle launches "French Algeria" group.  

[PAGE 04]
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN  
24 June 1960  

DAILY BRIEF  

I. THE COMMUNIST BLOC  

Communist China - USSR: The major Chinese address at the Rumanian party congress on 22 June was judiciously worded to avoid antagonizing the congress and was devoid of either support for or sharp criticism of Soviet positions on points at issue between Peiping and Moscow. Eastern European delegation heads also addressed the congress on 22 June and, with the exception of Albania, appeared to support strongly Khrushchev's speech of the previous day. Propaganda emanating directly from Peiping continued to be sharply critical of Khrushchev's foreign policies. As far as is known, Sino-Soviet political differences have not so far affected economic and military cooperation between the two powers, but continuation of current polemics could make collaboration in these spheres more difficult to maintain. For this reason, further attempts to resolve these differences may be expected. (Page 1)  

II. ASIA-AFRICA  

Japan: Prime Minister Kishi's impending resignation has shifted political activity to more conventional tactics and has reinforced expectations of early general elections. Although demonstrations have subsided, the leftists retain their capability for violence and large-scale action in the election campaign. Major factors in the leftist success thus far have been failure of the government to declare an emergency and issue appropriate orders and unwillingness of police authorities, in the absence of such orders, to jeopardize their public standing by using the strong measures needed to control the riots and demonstrations. (Page 3)  

[PAGE 05]
India: Several top defense officials are inspecting remote outposts along the Tibetan frontier, probably in a concerted effort to answer domestic criticism of the government's "inaction" and to bolster the morale of border units. Defense Minister Krishna Menon, accompanied by Air Force Chief of Staff Mukherji, has been inspecting posts in Ladakh while Army Chief of Staff Thimayya is touring the Sikkim-Darjeeling area. Nehru plans to visit the Ladakh frontier in late June or early July.  

III. THE WEST  

France: Soustelle has associated some well-known political figures from most major non-Communist parties with his recently launched "French Algeria" group and is directing its primary efforts toward gaining support within the army for his goal of completely integrating Algeria into France. If De Gaulle makes significant concessions in his forthcoming negotiations with the Algerian rebels, Soustelle and a number of his group may join forces with more extremist groups and make an attempt to overthrow the regime. French security officials are aware of at least some of the details of the plotting but do not expect major disturbances at the present time. (Page 4)  

IV. SIGNIFICANT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS AND ESTIMATES  
(Available during the preceding week)  

Probable Trends in the Horn of Africa. NIE 76-60. 21 June 60.  

24 June 60 DAILY BRIEF Page ii  

[PAGE 06]
Peiping Stands Firm in Political Disputes With Moscow  

The major Chinese address at the Rumanian party congress--delivered by politburo member Peng Chen on 22 June--made no concessions to Khrushchev's authoritative restatement of Soviet policies toward the West delivered at the congress the previous day. Peng did, however, attempt to avoid exacerbating the situation in Bucharest by presenting a judiciously worded statement. He blurred the question of the inevitability of war by quoting contradictory statements from the 1957 Moscow Declaration, but he made no mention of peaceful coexistence and limited his endorsement to Khrushchev's attack on the United States at the summit. Peng gave credit for China's economic success to the regime's "leap forward" and commune programs--Chinese domestic developments in disfavor with Moscow.  

Propaganda emanating directly from Peiping continued to voice sharp criticism of Khrushchev's foreign policies. An article in the official party paper, People's Daily, on 21 June--broadcast on 22 June--made many of Peng's points but in much stronger language. Reflecting the Chinese view that the bloc is in a position to deal from strength, the article rejected Khrushchev's policies of "active coexistence" and "friendly cooperation" with the West, calling instead for a "resolute struggle" against imperialism as the only assurance for peace. By implication, the article names Khrushchev a "renegade" for branding the Chinese interpretation of Leninism as "stiff dogmatism" and takes the Soviet leader to task for lauding what the Chinese call "shameful actions of betrayal" as creative Marxism-Leninism.  

As far as is known, Sino-Soviet political differences have not so far affected economic and military cooperation between the two powers, but a continued deterioration in political relations would make close cooperation difficult to maintain. For this reason, further attempts to resolve these differences may be expected.  

On the same day Peng spoke, all the Eastern European satellites except Albania wholeheartedly supported Khrushchev's  

24 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 1  

[PAGE 07]
speech, calling it of "fundamental significance for the entire workers' and Communist movement." The head of the Albanian delegation--the only East European group not led by its party leader--not only failed to mention Khrushchev's speech but generally reaffirmed a view similar to that of the Chinese on some aspects of foreign policy.  

24 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 2  

[PAGE 08]
Japanese Demonstrations Subside, Elections Awaited  

Prime Minister Kishi's impending resignation--the date of which is contingent on the outcome of the struggle within the ruling Liberal-Democratic party (LDP) to select his successor--has temporarily calmed political tensions in Japan and reinforced expectations of early elections to the lower house of the Diet.  

With the new US-Japanese security treaty in force, Kishi's announcement that he intends to resign has deprived the leftists of issues for continuing widespread disturbances. The Socialists persist in claiming that the treaty ratification was illegal. As yet they have given no indication that they will end their boycott of the Diet, and they apparently intend to maintain a united front with other leftist groups in opposing the treaty. The leftists retain their capability for violence and large-scale action.  

Major factors in the leftist success thus far have been the failure of the government to proclaim an emergency which would authorize maximum police measures and the unwillingness of police authorities without specific instructions from the government to exercise powers necessary for controlling the riots and demonstrations. Senior Japanese police officials have complained that they did not receive explicit directions to put down the disturbances, that governmental officials probably would not have accepted responsibility for strong police measures, and that the police themselves would be left to take the blame.  

Despite restraints on their action and the fact that they sustained numerous injuries, policemen have maintained excellent discipline and morale while avoiding leftist attempts to have them create martyrs during the outbreaks. The American Embassy in Tokyo concludes that the Japanese police remain an effective and courageous force, needing only adequate support at the political level to function satisfactorily.  

24 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 3  

[PAGE 09]
Opponents of De Gaulle's Algerian Policy Active  

Former Vice Premier Soustelle's recently launched movement advocating the maintenance of a "French Algeria" now has the support of some well-known political figures from most major non-Communist parties. These include former Resident Minister for Algeria Lacoste (Socialist), former Premier Bidault (Christian Democrat), former Defense Minister and Premier Bourges-Maunoury (Radical), former Defense Minister Morice (dissident Radical), and head of the National Assembly Defense Committee Francois-Valentin (Independent). A similar movement has been started in Algeria under the leadership of a Moslem vice president of the French National Assembly.  

The "French Algeria" groups aim to unite various elements opposed to De Gaulle's Algerian policy and are directing their primary efforts toward gaining support within the army for Soustelle's goal of completely integrating Algeria into France. The US consul general in Algiers views the army as essentially loyal and ready to obey De Gaulle's orders.  

Soustelle and some of his associates may be planning moves to overthrow the regime if De Gaulle makes significant concessions in his forthcoming negotiations with the Algerian rebels. French police are aware of a "serious" plot for combined civilian and military operations in France "to seize the government. There reportedly are some contacts between these plotters and Soustelle's group. Extremists in Algeria have been heard commenting, "Let it start in Paris this time."  

French security officials have begun to relax the special precautions instituted on 20 June when the rebel leadership agreed to negotiate. Pro-integrationist elements now indicate that, since everyone favors ending the war, cease-fire talks in themselves would not be a popular reason for rebellion. They may still plan to act, however, if and when De Gaulle's talks with the rebels result in political agreements which could be attacked as leading to the "loss" of Algeria.  

24 June 60 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN Page 4  

[PAGE 10]
THE PRESIDENT  
The Vice President  
Executive Offices of the White House  
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs  
Scientific Adviser to the President  
Director of the Budget  
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization  
Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration  
Special Assistant for Security Operations Coordination  
Chairman, Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities  
Special Assistant for Foreign Economic Policy  
Executive Secretary, National Security Council  

The Treasury Department  
The Secretary of the Treasury  

The Department of State  
The Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State  
The Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs  
The Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration  
The Counselor  
Director, International Cooperation Administration  
The Director of Intelligence and Research  

The Department of Defense  
The Secretary of Defense  
The Deputy Secretary of Defense  
Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs  
The Secretary of the Army  
The Secretary of the Navy  
The Secretary of the Air Force  
The Chairman, The Joint Chiefs of Staff  
The Director, The Joint Staff  
Chief of Staff, United States Army  
Chief of Naval Operations, United States Navy  
Chief of Staff, United States Air Force  
Commandant, United States Marine Corps  
Assistant to Secretary of Defense for Special Operations  
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff  
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of Army  
Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of Navy  
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force  
Supreme Allied Commander, Europe  
Commander in Chief, Pacific  

The Department of Commerce  
The Secretary of Commerce  

Federal Bureau of Investigation  
The Director  

Atomic Energy Commission  
The Chairman  

National Security Agency  
The Director  

National Indications Center  
The Director  

[PAGE 11]
