[PAGE 01]
27 April 1951
Copy No. [[CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]CJ-.- r 1[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_1]]

CURRENT INTELLIGENCE BULLETIN

Office of Current Intelligence
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
[PAGE 02]
SUMMARY

FAR EAST
1. US Political Adviser in Tokyo comments on local election results (page 3)o
2. General de Lattre says US has designs on Indochina (page 3).

NEAR EAST
4o Embassy Moscow comments on Sadchikov remarks concerning intervention in Iran (page 5).
5. Nehru approves Congress Party opposition to Communist lfpeace appeal" (page 5)o
6. Egypt makes counter-offers to UK defense proposals (page 6).
7. Turkey continues to press for inclusion in Western security arrangements (page 6).

EASTERN EUROPE
9. Yugoslavs may raise question of Satellite pressures in UN (page 8).

* * * *
[PAGE 03]
FAR EAST

1. US Political Adviser in Tokyo comments on local election results:
The US Political Adviser in Tokyo reports
that nearly complete returns in the natio]1.-
wide local elections held on 23 April indi￾cate an impressive Conservative victory, with
Conservative-supported candidates winning 94 percent of the contested
seats. . In his opinion, the Socialist defeat was not so much a blanket
endorsement of the ,conservative parties as a rejection of the Socialist
"peace principles," (neutrality in the East-West struggle, opposition
to US bases in Japan and opposition to a "separate peace" with the
non-Communist nations). He adds that Ambassador Dulles' recent
return to Japan and his press conference of 19 April (which dealt pri￾marily with Pacific security) probably had a dama.ging effect upon the
Socialist campaign.

Comment~ Socialist Party leaders, as well
as a large section of the Japanese press, agree¢ that Dulles' return
and subsequent remarks were an important factor in the Socialist de￾feat. With the long-desired peace treaty imminent, the Japanese people
were unsympathetic to the Socialist position, which they generally recog￾nize as inconsistent with an early termination of the Occupation •
. 2. General de Lattre says US has designs on Indochina~ 
The US Consul in Hanoi reports that at a gather￾
ing of top French military and civil officials
General de Lattre made several derogatory
statements about the US. The General accused
US officials in Indochina of slanting their re￾porting in favor of the Vietnamese, and asserted
that a Vietnamese political party in Tonkin was
supported by the Americans. He accused US
officials, especially those in ECA, of undermining the FreIJ.ch position
and turning the Vietnamese against France. In addition, he stated that
US missionaries ~ere turning the natives against the French. When the
[PAGE 04]
Consul pointed out that to accuse the US of having designs on Indochina
is to accept the Communist propaganda lill1e, the General replied, "Well
then, the Communi.sts are right for onceo " On the following evening,
the Consul discussed De Lattre's remarks with the generaPs aide, Gen￾eral Cogn.y, who sai.d that De Lattre' s behavior was merely the frank￾ness of a man who felt himself among friends, and that it would be un￾fortunate if superficial French= US differences were permitted to play
into the hands of the enemyo

Comment~ General de Lattre has made simi￾lar accusations in the past, particularly with respect to ECA. US of￾ficials have found it extremely difficult to assess the spontaneity and
sincerity of De Lattre vs outbrusts against US policy in Indochina. There
seems to be little doubt that De Lattre~ Uke many other Frenchmen; is
grievously conscious of France1 s decline during the past generation as
a world. power and reacts in an exaggerated. fashlon to any real or fancied
slight to French honoro
[PAGE 05]
NEAR EAST

4. Embassy Moscow comments on Sadchikov remarks concerning intervention in Iran:
Informed by the French about a conversation
between the Soviet Ambassador to Iran and
some Sate Hite officials regarding Soviet intentions should the UK land forces in Iran, the
US Embassy in Moscow believes that in view of the USSR' s customary
complete reticence as to its real intentions, this reassuring statement
by Sadchikov is a deliberate plant to encourage a chain of events favor￾able to Soviet expansionist moves in Iran. Terming the statement a
virtual invitation to the British, the Embassy adds that any landing of
UK forces would increase internal disorder and nationalist agitation.,
possibly culminating in the establishment of a new government willing
to invite the Soviets to come "to its rescu.e" under the 1921 treaty.
(Sadchikov's conversation with the Satellite officials is summarized
in the Current Intelligence Bulletin of 26 April 1951.)

5'!' Nehru approves Congress Party opposition to Communist "peace appeal"~~\ 11 .
On 30 March, the Secretary-General of the
Indian Congress Party addressed a confidential
letter to all Provincial Congress Committees
advising party me-mbers to have nothing to do
with Stockholm Peace Appeal committees or
signature campaigns, since "they are. designed
for certain. political purposes. " The US Em￾bassy in New Delhi is reliably informed that
Prime Minister Nehru attended the AU-India Congress Committee meet￾ing at which the advisability of distributing this letter was discussed and
that he approved of its dissemination.

Comment~ The Congress Party's circular
letter is obviously designed to disuade party members from partici￾pating in the current Communist effort to obtain signatures in support
of an appeal for a Five Power Peace Pact and universal reduction of·
[PAGE 06]
armaments. This is believed to be the first time that the Indian Con￾gress Party has taken official cognizance of international. Communist
intentions and propag~nda techniques and shown its opposition to them.
Prime Minister Nehru's reported approval of the letter, while thought￾provoking, does not necessarily indicate that his previously expressed
views on international Communism and the USSR have changed,

6. Egypt makes counter-offers to UK defense proposals:
The British Ambassador in Cairo has revealed
that the Egyptian Government, in its reply to
the UK defense proposals, stated that practical ...
ly all the British proposals were unacceptable.
The Egyptian reply also reportedly contained counter-proposals, includ￾ing the demand for British evacuation from the Suez area within one
year, which [[CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]were "the same old story[[/CLEAN_REDACTION_2]]." The US Charge in Cairo com￾ments that the fact that Egypt has made counter-proposals leav~the
door open for future talks, and that the UK has now succeeded in: getting
Egypt on record as opposing self=determinaUon for the Sudan.

Comment~ The fad: that the Egyptian Prime
Minister and the Foreign Minister have so far refrained from making
detailed public comments either on the UK defense proposals or on Egypt's reply, as well as the fact that Egyptian parliamentary debate
on this issue has been postponed, indicates that the Egyptian Govern￾ment would still prefer a continuance· of the discussions to their com￾plete breakdown.

7. Turkey continues to press for inclusion in Western security arrange￾ments:
Turkish Foreign Minister Koprulu informed
the US Ambassador in Ankara that current
discussions with the Turkish Ambassadors
from London1 Paris and Rome were beingheld
with a view to crystallizing Turkish foreig~r policy. The Turkish Am￾bassador to the US has been instructed to join them in Ankara. Koprulu
stated that French Foreign Minister Schuman had assured the Turkish
[PAGE 07]
Ambassador in Paris that, while in Washington., he had almost reached
agreement with the US Government on support of a Mediterranean pact
which would include the US, UK, France~ Turkey and Greece. In this
connection, Koprulu indicated to the US Ambassador that Turkey was
not adverse to such an arrangement if it were a subsidiary to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Comment~ Turkish desire
to assure its own security has been heightened by recent international
developments, such as the disorders in Iran and the recall of General
MacArthur. Currently, Turkey seems to be hopeful that, in view of
its firm stand in Korea and1 its growing reputation as a non-Communist
bastion in the Middle East, it may be closer to achieving some type of
satisfactory security arrangement with the West.

EASTERN EUROPE
[PAGE 08]
9. Yugoslavs may raise question of Satellite pressures in UN:
Upon his return from Belgrade·, Yugoslav UN
delegate Behler i.nformed US Ambassador Austin
that increasing tension in the Balkans may force
Yugoslavia ln the next month or two to raise
the question of Satellite pressures on Yugoslavi.a in the UN. As a possible
preliminary step to a fuJl" .:.fledged UN discussion:i Belgrade is consid￾ering presenting a memo to~ the UN citing the causes and nature of the
tension provoked by the Satellites. Beble:r, however, refused to commit
himself to a statement that Yugoslavia con.sider s the situation urgent.
Behler further stated that the Yugoslav Government was unable to guess
the time and place where Satellite forces might strike, if ever. He sug￾gested that the build-up may be aimed at increasing the Soviet political
bargaining position, but admitted that the enormity of the economic ef￾fort indicates that the build-up is for a major purpose.
