SOUTH ASIA

6. Comment on the Soviet statements on Kashmir:
Soviet UN delegate Malik's demand on 17 January that the Indian-Pakistani dispute over Kashmir be settled by a Kashmiri Constituent Assembly will increase local bitterness, promote South Asian suspicion of "Western imperialism" and complicate a case which may have been moving toward a settlement.

Regardless of popular reaction, the Indian Government is publicly committed to continue to seek a solution through the United Nations. Pakistan's deeply-rooted suspicions that India has no real intention either of abiding by a United Nations decision or of achieving a negotiated settlement are reinforced by the Soviet maneuver.

In view of Malik's private suggestion to an Indian official in March 1951 that the indicated solution for Kashmir would be independence, this Soviet maneuver may be calculated to support the recent drive for greater autonomy on the part of the Kashmiris in the present Indian-sponsored government of that state. An independent or semi-independent Kashmir with strong leftist elements in its government would afford the Communists opportunities for infiltration and for expanding their program in South Asia.

NEAR EAST - AFRICA

7. Syria presses for American military aid:
Top Syrian officials have increased their demands for US military aid. The American Minister in Damascus states that the Syrian Chief of State will talk of nothing else until he learns the US position in this matter. The Minister believes that the influential Chief of Staff, Lt. Col. Shishakli, delegated to the head of the government the task of pressing for arms, and that "only military aid will really strengthen the US position" in Damascus.

The Minister states that his efforts to work out a unified Western approach in regard to military aid have proved fruitless to date.

Comment: Syrian military demands for Western arms have probably increased as the result of the continuing clouded political atmosphere in Damascus. While the Syrian Chief of Staff is believed to be friendly to the West, his conference with Soviet diplomatic representatives in the past indicates that he is sufficiently opportunistic to seek arms from any quarter if his own dominant position in the country will thereby be strengthened.

WESTERN EUROPE

8. New French Government faces difficulty in financing present commitments:
Former Premiers Pleven, Bidault, and Reynaud have told Ambassador Bruce in Paris that they believe the budgetary problem arising from present commitments in Indochina and Europe is insoluble and that any French government at this time will therefore be "comparatively short-lived."

Pleven believes that he can best promote the European Defense Force and the idea of European federation by serving in the Assembly without obligations to the coalition government. He expects Parliament to give general approval of the European defense plan before the Lisbon NATO meeting next month, but warns that formal ratification will be more difficult to obtain.
